Title       : The Bulk Aerodynamic Method for Heat Flux Based on Surface Radiation Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1997   
File        : a9417959

Award Number: 9417959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jielun Sun   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jielun Sun & L. Mahrt/Abstract  ATM-9417959           The surface radiative
              temperature is the only available  surface temperature in most large scale
              field programs and is  therefore used to estimate the vertical temperature
              difference in  the bulk aerodynamic relationship.  In many numerical models,
              the  vertical temperature difference is estimated in terms of  radiative 
              surface temperature computed from the surface energy balance.  Both  of these
              applications generally retain existing similarity theory  even though such
              similarity theory is appropriate only for the  temperature at the roughness
              height.  Several recent studies have  shown that the combination of surface
              radiative temperature with  existing similarity theory can lead to large
              errors, counter  gradient fluxes and/or absurdly small values of the roughness 
              height for heat.  This document research proposes to ameliorate  these problems
              by considering modification of existing similarity  theory and relationships
              between the surface radiation temperature  and the aerodynamic surface
              temperature.  These developments must  be preceded by replacing the value of
              the surface radiative  temperature with a function of the microscale
              distribution of the  surface radiative temperature.  As one example,
              appropriate  weighting of the temperature of hot dry ground, partially covered 
              by transpiring vegetation, should eliminate cases of  countergradient heat
              transport.  Several models and measurement  schemes or representing the
              microscale distribution of surface  radiation temperature are proposed.        
              The data analysis will take advantage of existing tower and  aircraft
              observations from a number of field programs.  In  addition, more focused
              measurements of the microscale distribution  of surface radiative temperature
              will be implemented along with  flux measurements from the NCAR ASTER System. 
              The bulk aerodynamic  formulation will be re-evaluated in terms of the improved
               representation of the surface radiation temperature.  Special   attention will
              be given to problems associated with the free  convection case of nearly
              vanishing mean flow and the case of  spatially- averaged fluxes under weak wind
              conditions.
