Title       : Sigma Factor Exchange During Bacillus subtilis Sporulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1997   
File        : a9417735

Award Number: 9417735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Haldenwang Haldenwang@UTHSCSA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC San Antonio
	      7703 Floyd Curl Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782293900    210/567-2333

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9417735  Haldenwang  The occurrence of multiple RNA polymerase specificity
              determinants (sigma factors) within an organism represents a powerful mechanism
              for gene control.  The substitution of one for another of these proteins on
              core RNA polymerase can activate or suppress a large number of genes by a
              single regulatory event.  At least ten unique sigma proteins are present in the
              bacteriumBacillus subtilis  with four of them synthesized only during a simple
              form of differentiation (sporulation) that the bacterium undergoes in response
              to nutritional stress.  The sporulation-specific sigma factors replace the
              vegetative cell sigmas on RNA polymerase and are the chief activators of
              sporulation gene expression.  In this project the investigator will study the
              mechanisms by which sigma factor substitution is regulated to properly time the
              program of spore gene expression.  Specifically the experiments will address
              the processes by which the principal vegetative cell sigma factor (sigmaA) is
              excluded form RNA polymerase and a predominnant sporulation-specific sigma
              factor (sigmaE) is activated to replace it.  Immunological and biochemical
              approaches will be undertaken to ask whether sigmaA's activity is masked by
              modification or sequestration into an inactivating complex.  A detailed genetic
              study using localized mutagenesis and suppressor analysis will be used to
              discover the developmental signals and factors involved in sigmaE activation. 
              This experimental approach will be supplemented by biochemical and
              immunological experiments, where appropriate.  Spore gene control by sigma
              factor substitution represents an extremely tractable system in which to study
              sequential gene expression in a differentiating cell.  The devices thatBacillus
               employs to communicate ongoing morphological development to its
              transcriptional machinery will likely give insights into how these processes
              are controlled in a variety of systems.  %%%  The means by which cell
              differentiation is controlled continues to be a centra l topic in biology and a
              focus of much research.  In this project the investigator seeks to further our
              undersandng of this basic process through studying the devices employed by the
              bacterium Bacillus subtilis  to enable it to respond to environmental stress by
              switching form vegetative growth to sporulation.  ***
