Title       : Robust Adaptive Control Based on Kharitonov Theory and Its Extensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9417004

Award Number: 9417004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aniruddha Datta datta@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. P. Bhattacharyya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              August 2, 19959417004  Datta  The research proposed here addresses fundamental
              problems in  three distinct areas: a)Robust Control with an emphasis on 
              parametric uncertainty  b)Adaptive Control with an emphasis on  robustness and
              performance issues and c)Robust Adaptive Control  with the thrust being the
              development of new quantitative  analysis and design methods exploiting the
              recent explosion of  results obtained using Kharitonov's Theorem and its
              extensions.    First, we intend to develop "best case" results involving the 
              parametric stability margin, Hoo stability margin (norm), gain  and phase
              margins over a parametrized set of transfer functions,  such as an interval
              plant.  These robustness results in the area  of Robust Parametric Stability,
              would then be used for non-  conservatively quantifying the robustness of
              adaptive control  schemes.  The second objective is to develop extremal
              parametric  results involving the H2 and L1 norms which, we believe, will  play
              an important role in studying adaptive system performance.   The third
              objective is to address some important open problems in  each of the areas of
              adaptive control and robust parametric  stability.    The objectives mentioned
              above are motivated from our prior  research which has not only enabled us to
              identify some of the  outstanding unresolved problems in the areas of adaptive
              control  and robust parametric stability, but has also highlighted the  need
              for inter-twined research efforts in these two traditionally  very diverse
              fields.  None of the existing theory in either of  these fields can solve the
              problems related to this proposal in a  practical or satisfactory manner. 
              However, successful resolution  of these problems is imperative from both a
              theoretical and a  practical point of view.  Indeed, practitioners of both
              robust  and adaptive control stand to benefit a lot from the "non- 
              conservative" parametric L1 and Hoo robustness results that we  seek to
              develop.   ***
