Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program: Discovery and Analysis of Extremely
               Low Metallicity Stars in the Galactic Halo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9417547

Award Number: 9417547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16128              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Beers beers@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0511301   Trace Element Content                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,5912,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      9417547  Beers      This award will partially support the travel
              expenses, over a  three year period, for Dr. Timothy Beers and one of his
              graduate  students from the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Michigan 
              State University, to enable them to each made one visit to  conduct cooperative
              research with Dr. John E. Norris of the  Mount Stromlo and Siding Spring
              Observatories and Dr. Sean Ryan  of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Epping,
              Australia.  The  collaborative research will focus on the discovery and
              analysis  of extremely low metallicity in the Galactic Halo.    Large numbers
              of extremely metal-deficient stars provide crucial  information on questions in
              cosmology, the formation and  evolution of the Galaxy, and the production and
              processing of  light elements in stars.  Observations of low-metallicity 
              candidates through the southern hemisphere sky, made possible  through this
              collaboration, will provide a significant increase  in the numbers of stars
              with metal abundances less than 1/1000th  of the solar  value, thereby enabling
              a wide range of  investigations concerning the formation and evolution of our 
              Galaxy, and the Universe.  Specific investigations include a  detailed
              comparison of the metallicity distribution function of  extremely metal-poor
              stars with predictions of Galactic  enrichment models, a study of the
              kinematics of metal-deficient  stars as a function of abundance and distance
              from the Galactic  plane, and high-resolution observations of the relative 
              abundances of the light and heavy elements in stars, which in  turn place
              fundamental constraints on stellar evolution and on  nucleosynthesis processes
              in the early Universe. In addition to  the access this award will provide to
              the Australian astronomers  with mutual interests, the project will result in
              additional  viewing opportunities using Australian facilities to survey the 
              southern hemisphere sky.
