Title       : Bipartite Geminvirus SqLCV Movement Protein Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9417664

Award Number: 9417664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sondra G. Lazarowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9417664  Lazarowitz    The aim of the research is to understand the cellular 
              interactions that occur between a plant virus and its  host that define the
              permissive host range of the virus  and which lead to the development of 
              systemic infection.  The virus examined is the squash leaf curl virus (SqLCV) 
              which, unlike most plant viruses, has a DNA genome.  Two  proteins encoded by
              the viral DNA, BR1 and BL1, are  important for the cell-tocell movement of the
              virus  during infection. BR1 is predominantly found in the  nucleus and BL1 is
              found predominantly at the cell  wall/plasma membrane.  Lazarowitz has proposed
              a model in  which BL1 and BR1 act in concert to direct the short  distance
              cell-to-cell movement of the viral genome, and  BR1 promotes viral long
              distance movement in the phloem.  This model predicts that BL1 increases the
              size exclusion  limit of plasmodesmata in the cell wall to facilitate  viral
              gemone movement to adjacent uninfected phloem  cells.  It further predicts that
              BR1 is a nuclear shuttle  protein that binds viral ssDNA and moves it to the
              cell  periphery. At the cell periphery the complex interacts  with BL1 which
              allows it to move locally to adjacent  uninfected cells and sieve elements
              which provide long  distance transport through the phloem.  The model is 
              tested by 1) using direct assays and tissue-specific  promoters to demonstrate
              that BL1 and BR1 function in  cell-to-cell and systemic movement, host range
              and tissue  specificity, 2) localizing BL1 and BR1 in infected and  transgenic
              plants to specific tissues and subcellular  compartments and determining their
              effects on plasmodemal  size-exclusion limit, 3) characterizing the biochemical
               properties of BL1 and BR1, and their interactions that  lead to transport of
              viral nucleic acids, and  4)  identifying and purifying host proteins
              interacting with  BL1, and cloning and characterizing the genes encoding  these
              proteins.  In the latter situation, it is expected  that the proteins involved
              in viral transport wil l be the  same as those normally involved in
              cell-to-cell  communication and in the regulation of phloem transport.  %%% 
              The aim of the research is to understand the cellular  interactions that occur
              between a plant virus and its  host that define the permissive host range of
              the virus  and which lead to the development of  systemic infection.  The virus
              examined is the squash leaf curl virus (SqLCV)  which, unlike most plant
              viruses, has a DNA genome.  Two  proteins encoded by the viral DNA, BR1 and
              BL1, are  important for the cell-tocell movement of the virus  during
              infection. BR1 is predominantly found in the  nucleus and BL1 is found
              predominantly at the cell  wall/plasma membrane. The studies test the model
              that BR1  acts as a shuttle to bring the DNA to the plasma membrane  from the
              nucleus.  Once at the plasma membrane, the model  predicts that BR1 works in
              concert with BL1 to allow  viral component transport through the connections
              between  plant cells, the plasmodesmata. Microscopy studies will  define the
              tissue and subcellular location of BR1 and BL1  in infected and transgenic
              plants. Microinjection studies  will directly examine the effects of each
              protein on the  cell-to-cell movement of  the BR1-DNA complexes and non- 
              specific molecules of graded size. Studies in tissue  culture model systems
              will define the domains of BR1 and  BL1 required for their correct targeting 
              to the plasma membrane or nucleus and for direct  interaction with each other. 
              The studies are ultimately  directed at identifying the host cell proteins that
               interact with BL1.  The studies show whether different  mechanisms are used
              for virus short or long distance  movment, and if phloemrestricted viruses move
              by a  different mechanism from other viruses.  Understanding  the mechanism
              underlying these phenenomena is required in  order to develop strategies for
              engineering virus-  resistant plants.  ***
