Title       : RUI: Optical and Infrared Observations of Herbig-Haro Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2000  
File        : a9417209

Award Number: 9417209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108518             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Schwartz schwartz@newton.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9417209  Schwartz    A comprehensive program of optical and infrared
              observations of the  shock wave structure of Herbig-Haro objects (stars) will
              be carried  out.  A basic aim of the study is to understand the dynamics of    
                    high-velocity jets from young stellar objects and the manner in which 
              the high velocity material transfers momentum and energy to the ambient 
              molecular medium.  The fundamental hypothesis is that molecular  hydrogen
              emission is produced by low-velocity shocks via entrainment by  high-velocity
              jet material and/or in the extended wings of the bow  shocks in the working
              surface of a jet penetrating into the molecular  medium.  In both cases,
              molecular hydrogen is accelerated to  intermediate velocities between those
              found for optical emission lines  in the high-temperature Herbig-Haro shocks
              and in the more widespread  carbon monoxide (C0) outflows in which there is
              momentum coupling.    A major unresolved issue concerns the relation of the
              optical shocks,  which involve shock velocities greater than about 50 km per
              second, and  the shocks which produce molecular hydrogen emission which would 
              require shock velocities less than about 30 km per second.  In many  cases, the
              optical shocks appear to be coincident spatially with the  molecular shocks,
              yet it is unlikely that both the optical and the  molecular hydrogen emission
              arise from a common postshock gas.  High  spatial resolution images of selected
              Herbig-Haro objects will be  obtained in area of the spectrum of the optical
              emission lines of  Hydrogen alpha and  SII  and in the infrared lines of
              molecular  hydrogen and  FeII . The  FeII /(molecular hydrogen) line intensity 
              ratio can be used to infer the depletion of gas phase heavy elements  onto
              grains, and thus to determine whether the gas being shocked is jet  gas or
              ambient medium gas.  The  SII /(Hydrogen alpha) ratio is a  measure of
              excitation of the gas, and in general the emission from  molecular hydrogen is
              expected to be strongest in or near structures   with the largest  SII
              /(Hydrogen alpha) intensity ratio.  For two  optically obscured Herbig-Haro
              outflows, the 1.64 micron wavelength  line of  FeII  will be used to trace the
              "optical" component of the  shocks.  The acquisition of high resolution
              spectral data in both the  optical and infrared portions of the spectrum will
              be used to examine  the radial velocities and velocity dispersions of the
              postshock gas.  The data should resolve the question of whether the
              low-excitation  optical emission arises from the same postshock gas as the
              emission  from molecular hydrogen.  The spatially-resolved spectra will also 
              permit a discrimination between magnetic precursor and bow shock  models.    In
              the larger context of star formation, the interpretations of the  observations
              to be carried out will lend considerable insight into the  question of the
              origin of bipolar molecular outflows from young stellar  objects.  Recent
              theoretical models suggest that high-velocity jets  provide the driving power
              for the more widespread low-velocity  molecular outflows seen in C0 emission. 
              The study of low-excitation  Herbig-Haro objects and emission from molecular
              hydrogen found at the  boundaries of the high and low-velocity flows can be
              used to estimate   the efficiency with which energy and momentum are
              transferred to the  ambient gas.
