Title       : Sociality and Identity in the East Sepik Province: Transcultural and
               Transregional Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9417980

Award Number: 9417980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91715              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah B. Gewertz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick Errington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This project involves the ethnographic research of two cultural
              anthropologists, one from Amherst and one from Trinity College.  The project
              will take place in Papua New Guinea and is a continuation of a long-term study
              of the Chambri ethnic group in East Sepik province.   This is an area of
              traditional tribal society which has recently urbanized.  The researchers will
              interview people in the traditional rural communities that they have studied
              for the past 25 years, as well as in the urban slum to which some have moved. 
              The focus of the study is changes in ethnic identity, from a `tribal`
              affiliation as `Chambri` to a residence-based identity as `urban-resident` vs.
              `rural-resident`.   As a result of recent global processes of change involving
              increased urbanization and mass culture (clothing and music styles) these
              formerly traditional people are changing to become more individualistic and
              more capitalistically inclined.   Using ethnographic participant-observation
              and structured interviews the researchers will assess the flows of resources
              between urban and rural places, to see whether a remittance economy has
              developed with urban cash and whether the rural communities subsidize the urban
              communities through cheap reproduction.   The changes in knowledge of
              traditional culture will be assessed by interviewing young people, and the
              emergence of a national identity over the traditional tribal one will be
              assessed.   This research is important because it studies in depth a continuing
              process of global change that has changed personal identity along ethnic, class
              and residential lines.   Advances in our understanding of the changes in the
              actual lived situations of traditional, tribal peoples will be valuable for
              decision-makers and planners who must cope with the continuing movement of
              peoples between rural and urban places.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
