Title       : GRGC: Weathering, Plants and the Long-Term Carbon Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9417325

Award Number: 9417325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Berner robert.berner@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9417325  Berner    The weathering of Ca and Mg silicate minerals on the
              continents,  followed by the precipitation of the liberated Ca and Mg in the 
              oceans as carbonates, has exerted a major control on the level of  atmospheric
              CO2 over geologic time.  An important aspect of this  process is the role
              played by plants as they modify the rate of  mineral dissolution during
              weathering.  Did the rise and evolution  of vascular land plants over the
              Phanerozoic affect the rate of  silicate weathering, and in turn   the level of
              atmospheric CO2?   From petrographic studies using the electron microprobe we
              have  discovered that on the island of Hawaii the growth of vascular  plants on
              young basalt flows results in intense etching and removal  of Ca and Mg
              silicates in the vicinity of plant rootlets.  As a  result relative rates of
              initial weathering under higher plants  were found to be much greater than
              under lichens or in the absence  of any plant life.   Similarly at Mt. St.
              Helens we found that a  ten year old volcanic ash deposit shows evidence of
              chemical  alteration immediately adjacent to plant rootlets but no evidence 
              away from the rootlets.  Although this petrographic study has been  useful in a
              qualitative to semi-quantitative sense, there is a need  for a better way to
              quantify the effects of plants on silicate  weathering.  This can be done
              through the study of the chemistry of  solutions draining the rocks.    Our
              preliminary water chemical results of a multiyear ongoing  controlled
              experiment on the effects of young growing trees and  grass on silicate
              weathering, conducted under natural outdoor  conditions at the Hubbard Brook
              Experimental Forest Station in New  Hampshire, indicate a minimum silicate
              weathering rate enhancement  by the trees of a factor of 1.5-3.5.  We propose
              to check this  result by examining the chemistry of waters draining the
              basaltic  rocks of Iceland.  Iceland is ideal for our proposed study in that 
              the rocks are rich in volcanic glass and Ca and Mg silicates ,  contain no
              CaCO3, are young enough that variations in the degree of  vegetational coverage
              is present, anthropogenic acid rain is absent  and spring and stream waters can
              be easily sampled.  (Water  sampling on the island  of Hawaii was impossible
              due to the great  permeability of those young basalt flows  that exhibit
              variations  in plant coverage.)  A reconnaissance visit to Iceland shows that 
              there are several localities where waters can be collected from  vegetated and
              unvegetated areas that are sufficiently nearly to one  another that they share
              the same bedrock lithology, microclimate,  aspect. etc.  This makes it possible
              to conduct an experiment on  the quantitative role of the local plant life on
              silicate  weathering.  Also, there is considerable expertise already  available
              on the chemistry of weathering solutions in Iceland, in  the person of Dr.
              Sigurdur Gislason, and we will be assisted by him  in the field.  Dr.
              Gislason's preliminary chemical data on  Icelandic spring waters suggest that
              the effect of plants on  weathering rate should be substantial.
