Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Science Program: Periphyton Communities in Stream
               Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1995  
File        : a9417225

Award Number: 9417225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rex L. Lowe lowe@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5941,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9417225  Lowe      This award partially supports the travel expenses for Dr.
              Rex L.  Lowe and a graduate student from the Department of Biological  Sciences
              at Bowling Green State University, Ohio, to conduct  cooperative research with
              Barry J. F. Biggs, Ecosystems   Scientist with the National Institute of Water
              and Atmospheric  Research, located in Christchurch, New Zealand, over a two 
              year period.  The research will focus on mechanisms that regulate  spatial and
              temporal differences in the structure of periphyton  communities in stream
              ecosystems.    Disturbance, as used in ecological studies, denotes an event 
              causing disruption in an ecosystem, community, or population  structure and
              changes resources, substrate availability, or the  physical environment.  The
              ability of a community to resist the  effects of a disturbance is referred to
              as resistance and the  ability of a community to recover to some predetermined
              state is   termed resilience.  This study will examine resistance and 
              resilience factors regulating benthic algae communities in  twelve New Zealand
              South Island streams, six on the west coast  (high disturbance) and six on the
              east coast (low disturbance).    The laboratory-based experiments will be
              conducted at the  University of Michigan Biological Station Stream Research 
              Facility which provides numerous replicated artificial stream  channels.  The
              laboratory experiments are designed to examine  variables which appear to have
              a strong regulatory influence in  the natural New Zealand streams.  Most of the
              New Zealand  streams are fully protected (within the New Zealand National 
              Parks and Reserves System), and provide a unique natural outdoor  stream
              environment where one can investigate streams with similar  or contrasting
              physical, chemical and biological traits.    Support for the visit by Mr. Biggs
              to the University of Michigan  facility is provided by the New Zealand Ministry
              of Research,  Science and Technology under the U.S.- New Zealand Cooperative 
              Science Progra m.
