Title       : Infrastructure for Computer Science Research in Puerto Rico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9417362

Award Number: 9417362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $610229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar Moreno   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfredo Cruz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raul Figueroa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravi Varadarajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pablo V. Negron-Marrero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2886,9178,9218,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9417362  Moreno   The Mathematics (and Computer Science) Department of the
              University of Puerto Rico at Rio Piedras has an excellent record of research
              accomplishments in the areas of computational and computer science, while the
              ECE Department at Mayaguez has been producing highly qualified students in the
              areas of computer engineering.  It is expected that the collaboration of these
              two departments through faculty and student encounters will provide a research
              environment to substantially increase the number and quality of students.   
              The major goal of this project is thus develop the research environment needed
              to start a Ph.D. program in Computer Science and to increase minority
              participation in graduate school and research.  To maintain an excellent
              research environment and to accomplish the CISE II-MI program's goal of
              increasing minority participation the following activities are planned.      *
              to create a proposal, during the first two      years, to establish a Ph.D.
              program in       collaboration with the Mathematics and ECE        Departments
              of the Mayaguez Campus;      * establish a plan to retain and increase minority
                  participation; conduct research and establish a     productivity plan for
              researchers;      * establish a plan for faculty development;      * acquire
              new research equipment; and      * establish and strengthen a Computer Science 
                  program.  ***
