Title       : Origin and Evolution of the Kerguelen Plume: Constraints from Studies of the
               Kerguelen Archipelago (Collaborative Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1996  
File        : a9417806

Award Number: 9417806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nobumichi Shimizu nshimizu@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  This award supports a project to understand the geochemical  evolution
              of the Kerguelen plume.  Mantle plumes are a major  vehicle of heat and mass
              transfer from the Earth's interior.  They are also important geochemical
              windows through which  materials and processes of the Earth's interior can be 
              studied.  Among mantle plumes, the Kerguelen plume is  distinctive because it
              has created a long (>120 million  year) magmatic record which included the
              Kerguelen Plateau,  one of the largest oceanic plateaus, the Ninetyeast Rdge, a
               nearly 5000 kilometer linear chain of volcanoes which formed  as the Indian
              Plate moved northward over the plume, and the  Kerguelen Archipelago on the
              Antarctic plate.  This island  complex, active from about 40 million years ago
              to the  present, is largely composed of a thick (about 3 kilometers)  basaltic
              plateau lava sequence.  This project will undertake  detailed geochemical
              studies of the basaltic rocks on the  Kerguelen Archipelago as well as mafic
              and ultramafic  xenoliths occurring in the basaltic lavas.  This is a 
              collaboration between Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  Woods Hole
              Oceanographic institution and the University  Libre de Bruxelles in Belgium. 
              This collaborative researah program is divides into two  projects:  (1) The
              Basalt Project is a study of lavas forming  stratigraphic sequences in the
              plateau lavas which are the  oldest and most voluminous extrusive unit in the 
              archipelago. The temporal variations in lava compositions  and isotopic ratios
              of strontium, neodymium and lead will be  used to determine temporal variations
              in proportions of  mantle source components, characteristics of the melting 
              process, magma supply rates and crustal processing history,  and to evaluate
              various models for the geochemical  characteristics of the plume.  (2) The
              Xenolith Project is a study of lower crustal and  mantle xenoliths.  This
              research will include petrography,  major and trace element abundances and
              isotopic ratios of  minerals.  Geoch emical results, including geothermometry, 
              geobarometry, and geochronology, will be used to understand  provenance of the
              xenoliths and to infer the geodynamic  environments and geochemical processes
              which existed during  the evolution of the plume.    These results of this
              research will better constrain  physical models of the evolution of the
              Kerguelen plume,  specifically, and mantle plumes in general.
