Title       : Variations of the Os Isotopic Composition of Seawater Acrossthe
               Cretaceous-Tertiary Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9417948

Award Number: 9417948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132267             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Ravizza   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9417948  Ravizza     Recent work has shown that the 187Os/186Os of seawater, as
              inferred from analyses of marine sediments, has risen dramatically during the
              course of the Cenozoic Era.  Based on conservative estimates, the inventory of
              Os associated with the Cretaceous-Tertiary (K-T)  boundary horizon exceeds
              several hundred thousand years of riverine Os flux.  The isotopic composition
              of Os contained in K-T boundary clays is distinct from typical continental
              crustal matrial, but is similar to meteoritic and mantle-derived material. 
              Even if only a small fraction of this isotopically distinct K-T Os dissolved in
              seawater, the effect on the Os isotopic composition of the K-T oceans would
              have dramatic, shifting seawater 187Os/186Os ratios abruptly to very low,
              nearly meteoritic, values.  The resulting excursion in the Os isotopic
              composition of seawater, and subsequent recovery to more radiogenic values, is
              of interest for two main reasons.   First, the duration of the excursion
              provides an empirical measure of the recovery rate of the marine Os system
              following a strong external perturbation.  The longer the duration of the
              excursion the more likely it is that the seawater Os isotope record can be used
              to identify other impact events in the geologic record.  Alternatively, a very
              rapid recovery would indicate that the marine Os system has the potential to
              resolve high frequency tectonic pulses which the marine Sr system cannot. 
              Second, the anticipated rapid, monotonic recovery of the seawater 187Os/186Os
              ratio to higher values can potentially be employed as a stratigraphic tool in a
              manner similar to the Neogene seawater Sr isotope record.   Here we present
              preliminary data which show that a minimum in the Os isotopic composition of
              seawater did occur at the K-T boundary, and we propose to examine the shape of
              the seawater Os curve across this boundary in greater detail.  We will focus
              almost exclusively on samples from DSDP and ODP cores, however some marine K-T
              boundary clays from terrestria l sections will also be analyzed.  Our specific
              goals are:  (1) To better constrain the 187Os/186Os ratios of Late
              Maastrichtian seawater, of the K-T impactor, and of seawater immediately
              following the K-T event; (2) To determine whether the initial increase in the
              187Os/186Os ratio of seawater following the K-T minimum was a protracted
              recovery spanning several million years, or was relatively rapid; (3) To assess
              the length scale of Os redistribution about a K-T Os peak; and (4) To couple
              measurements of Os concentration and isotopic compositions with determinations
              of other PGE concentrations in both K-T boundary clays and in early Cenozoic
              sediments.  Three different types of sedimentary sections well be investigated
              in order to achieve these goals:  Metalliferous sediments, rich in
              seawater-derived OS, which accumulated on early Cenozoic oceanic crust; Pelagic
              carbonates from a K-T section which, due to a brief hiatus, contain no Ir
              anomaly; and Pelagic carbonates from a K-T section which, due to a brief
              hiatus, contain no Ir anomaly; and Pelagic carbonates with a complete K-T
              section , including  a well delineated Ir anomaly.  Analyses of sediments from
              the former two type of K-T sediment records will enable us to define the
              seawater Os curve in samples free from the potential influence of diagenetic
              redistribution of the K-T Os peak.  In the latter setting the issue of
              diagenetic redistribution of the K-T Os will be addressed directly by
              comparison to data from the other two settings.
