Title       : Mechanism of an Evolutionary Change in Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9417799

Award Number: 9417799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Jeffery   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jeffrey, William   IBN #9417799         Little is known about how changes in
              development arise during  evolution.  To address this problem, Dr. Jeffrey
              capitalizes on a  unique model system consisting of closely-related species of 
              ascidians with different forms of development.  Ascidians are  simple animals
              with many of the same developmental features as  vertebrates, including a
              notochord (the evolutionary precursor of  the vertebral column), a dorsal
              central nervous system, and a tail.   Most ascidians develop the features
              described above, however, a few  species have lost this property during
              evolution.  One of the two  species studied by this laboratory has
              vertebrate-like features,  whereas the other has lost them.  Remarkably, when
              these two  species are hybridized, the species lacking vertebrate-like 
              features recovers them, suggesting that the function of  developmental
              regulatory genes has been lost in the latter species.    This result opens the
              possibility of identifying genes involved in  regulating development and
              evolution of the vertebrate-like  features.  Previously this laboratory has
              used a subtractive  procedure in which the RNA products of cloned genes from
              one  species were subtracted from those of another species to identify  these
              regulatory genes.  One of the genes the Jeffery group has  identified is called
              manx because it is required for development of  the tail (e.g. Manx cats lack a
              tail).  The manx gene produces a  regulatory protein that is likely to control
              the activity of other  genes. This proposal will be funded in order to obtain
              more  information on how the manx gene controls tail formation in  ascidians
              and to identify the other genes controlled by manx that  play a role in
              development of vertebrate-like features.  Using  these procedures, they will
              identify additional genes involved in  development of the notochord, tail, and
              central nervous system.   The information obtained is expected to help
              understand how the  body plan is generated during the developm ent and
              evolution of  higher animals.****
