Title       : Assembly and Regulation of Myosin II in Endothelial Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1996   
File        : a9417115

Award Number: 9417115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kolega kolega@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F               {                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       4       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      {      
              {                                                                              
                                                                                             
               %   &   '   (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9417115
              Kolega The goal of this project is to understand how myosin II is involved in
              moving and shaping endothelial cells, the cells that form the inner lining of
              blood vessels.  Myosin II is a protein that can act as a motor by moving other
              molecules within the cell.  In order to understand how this products movement
              of the whole cell, the location and movements of myosin II inside of cells will
              be defined.  To do this a fluorescent dye will be attached to myosin II and
              this labeled myosin injected into cells growing in culture dishes.  The
              organization and dynamics of the labeled myosin II will then be followed
              through a fluorescence microscope.  In order to understand how the behavior of
              myosin II is controlled, the myosin II in moving cells will be examined for
              biochemical changes that occur when its location or movement changes.  This
              will be accomplished by making antibodies that bind only to modified forms of
              myosin II.  These antibodies can be used to stain cells to show when and where
              biochemical changes occur. %%% Endothelial cells, like many cells in the body,
              move about during normal d evelopment, wound healing and in many diseases,
              particularly cancer.  Understanding how movement occurs and is controlled at
              the cellular and molecular level is important for developing new strategies for
              treating wounds and disease. ***                               ;               
                                                      Oh     +'  0                           
                         $       H       l                                               D   
                 h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t
              i o n                           (                                              
                  $                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  9417115                             Shirley Parker         
                          Shirley Parker              @      u                            @  
                                              @      u                                       
                                                                          @    F #           
                                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                     
                              2                                                              
                                      ;         e 3       e               P   4              
                  P                                       j       j   j       j       j      
              j       j                                                                      
              x   1                                                                          
                                      :               Z           T       7   x              
                      j                                                                      
                x                j       j                                                   
                                 j               j                                       ~   
                         j       j       j       j                           r               
                                                                                             
                9417115 Kolega The goal of this project is to understand how myosin II is
              involved in moving and shaping endothelial cells, the cells that form the inner
              lining of blood vessels.  Myosin II is a protein that can act as a motor by
              moving other molecules within the cell.  In order to understand how this
              products movement of the whole cell, the location and movements of myosin II
              inside of cells will be defined.  To do this a fluorescent dye will be attached
              to myosin II and this labeled myosin injected into cells growing in culture
              dishes.  The organization and dynamics of the labeled myosin II will then be
              followed through a fluorescence microscope.  In order to understand how the
              behavior of myosin II is controlled, the myosin II in moving cells will be
              examined for biochemical changes that occur when its location or movement
              changes.  This will be accomplished by making antibodies that bind only to
              modified forms of myosin II.  These antibodies can be used to stain cells to
              show when and where biochemical changes occur. %%% Endothelial cells, like many
              cells in the body, move about during normal development, wound healing and in
              many diseases, particularly cancer.  Understanding how movement occurs and is
              controlled at the cellular and molecular level is important for developing new
              strategies for treating wounds and disease. ***
