Title       : Climatic Temperature Record of Cherts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1995   
File        : a9417874

Award Number: 9417874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110124             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Paul Knauth Knauth@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9417874  Knauth     The oxygen and hydrogen composition of ancient cherts will
              be investigated to explore the idea that the earth's climatic temperature
              history is imprinted in isotopic data for these rocks.  A large secular
              variation exists in the isotopic composition of cherts, and this has been
              attributed to either climatic temperature changes, variations in isotopic
              composition of the oceans, or later alteration of the isotopic record. 
              Mounting evidence that the isotopic composition of the oceans cannot account
              for the observed variations warrants a new look at whether the secular
              variations are recording the earth's climatic temperature history.   New
              samples from key time periods and different geologic settings will be analyzed
              to build up the currently limited data base and to test whether later
              alteration is responsible for the observed secular variations.  Samples from
              existing collection of Precambrian cherts made by various groups over the last
              10 years for paleontological and sedimentological investigations will be
              analyzed.  Preliminary data suggest a major warming around the
              Precambrian-Cambrian boundary, and new samples from localities bracketing this
              boundary will be collected and analyzed.  Hydrogen isotope analyses can provide
              additional constraints on interpretations, and these will be used on suitable
              cherts such as those from paleokarst horizons.   The effects of metamorphism
              and the field/petrographic criteria used to select least-altered samples will
              be evaluated by analyzing bedded and modular cherts that have been
              metamorphosed in vary degrees to higher grades than would ever be sampled for
              secular variation studies.  Later alteration by meteoric ground waters will be
              evaluated by isotopic analyses of coexisting carbonates.  Existing data on the
              Miocene Monterey Formation will be augmented to confirm that even chert which
              form during deep burial leave isotopic signatures characteristic of the local
              climate.  The anticipated result of this work is a new data base for che rts
              over geologic time which can be meaningfully evaluated as an indicator of past
              climatic temperatures.
