Title       : South African Resource Analysis Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9417722

Award Number: 9417722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Marcus Getz getz@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1066,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This international workshop will be held in Pietermaritzburg, South Africa, in
              July of 1995, following the World Conference on Resource Modeling, sponsored by
              the Resource Modeling Association (RMA).  Researchers from the US, Zimbabwe,
              Mozambique, South Africa, Canada, Australia, Germany, and the UK will formulate
              scientific proposals for collaborative research in one of two areas,
              `Sustainability in Herbivore-Vegetation Interactions in Semi-Arid Environments`
              or `Freshwater Requirements for Southern African Ecosystems.`  The
              co-organizers of this workshop include:  Dr. Wayne Getz, principal
              investigator, University of California at Berkeley;  Dr. Roland Lamberson,
              collaborator, Humboldt State University;  Dr. Anthony Starfield, collaborator,
              University of Minnesota at St. Paul;  Dr. Norman Owen-Smith, collaborator,
              University of Witswatersrand in South Africa;  and Dr. John Hearne,
              collaborator, University of Natal in South Africa.   This workshop will
              introduce US scientists to South African natural resource problems, and will
              catalyze US-South African collaboration in resource modeling.  As South Africa
              is facing increasing pressure on its natural resources, the workshop provides a
              timely means to facilitate international knowledge of and access to South
              African resources, and to share international expertise.  The NSF funding of
              the international travel costs will stimulate scientific collaboration among
              the Resource Modeling Association members and a diverse group of African and US
              scientists, including US women and minority scientists, South Africans from
              disadvantaged backgrounds, and Mozambican and Zimbabwean researchers.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
