Title       : Transmembrane Signaling By Receptor Protein Kinases In Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1997   
File        : a9417732

Award Number: 9417732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. David DavidJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Walker  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9417732  Walker    Differentiation in plants is profoundly affected by 
              environmental factors.  The long term goal of our research  is to understand
              how extracellular signals interact with the  plant cellular machinery to
              influence growth and  development.  Recent evidence strongly suggests that
              plant  cells have plasma membrane receptors with intrinsic protein  kinase
              activity.  The plant receptor-like protein kinases  (RLK) are structurally
              related to the animal polypeptide  growth factor receptors; however, the plant
              RLKs all appear  to be serine/threonine protein kinases.  Diversity among 
              plant RLKs, reflected in their structural and functional  properties, has
              opened up a broad new area of investigation  into cellular signaling in plants
              with far-reaching  implications for the mechnaisms by which plant cells 
              perceive and respond to extracellular stimuli.  Our specific  aims are to
              characterize the biochemical properties, both in  vitro and in vivo, of one
              receptor-like protein kinase  (RLK5) from Arabidopsis thaliana.  We have shown
              that a  recombinant fusion protein of this transmembrane protein  kinase will
              autophosphorylate several sites and that  autophosphorylation is critical for
              interaction with  cellular targets.  One of these targets, KAPP (kinase 
              associated protein phosphatase) contains three domains: an  amino-terminal
              membrane insertion signal, a kinase  interaction domain and phosphoprotein
              phosphatase domain,  Interaction of KAPP with RLK5 requires RLK5
              phosphorylation.  This mechanism of binding is reminiscent of the interaction 
              of src homology 2 containing proteins with activated growth  factor receptors
              in animals.  The research proposed here  will define the autophosphorylation
              sites in RLK5 and  investigate the functional significance of KAPP binding to 
              RLK5.  Additional components for RLK5 mediated intracellular  signaling will
              also be identified.  It is anticipated that  results from these studies will
              yield fundamental and new  insights into the molecular mech anisms of how
              plants  perceive their environment and how growth and developmental  processes
              are regulated by environmental signals.  %%%  Differentiation in plants is
              profoundly affected by  environmental factors.  The long term goal of our
              research  is to understand how extracellular signals interact with the  plant
              cellular machinery to influence growth and  development.  Recent evidence
              strongly suggests that plant  cells have plasma membrane receptors with
              intrinsic protein  kinase activity.  The plant receptor-like protein kinases 
              (RLK) are structurally related to the animal polypeptide  growth factor
              receptors; however, the plant RLKs all appear  to be serine/threonine protein
              kinases.  Diversity among  plant RLKs, reflected in their structural and
              functional  properties, has opened up a broad new area of investigation  into
              cellular signaling in plants with far-reaching  implications for the mechnaisms
              by which plant cells  perceive and respond to extracellular stimuli.  Our
              specific  aims are to characterize the biochemical properties, both in  vitro
              and in vivo, of one receptor-like protein kinase  (RLK5) from Arabidopsis
              thaliana.  We have shown that a  recombinant fusion protein of this
              transmembrane protein  kinase will autophosphorylate several sites and that 
              autophosphorylation is critical for interaction with  cellular targets.  The
              work will now further investigate the  nature of the autophosphorylation and
              how it is important in  the signaling sequence of events.  It is anticipated
              that  results from these studies will yield fundamental and new  insights into
              the molecular mechanisms of how plants  perceive their environment and how
              growth and developmental  processes are regulated by environmental signals. 
              ***
