Title       : DNA Amplification Fingerprinting and Molecular Diagnosis for Detecting
               Bacterium-like Organisms Causative of Citrus Greening Disease, US-Nepal
               Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1994   
File        : a9311802

Award Number: 9311802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Gresshoff jcrocket@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5989,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9311802  Gresshoff    Description:  This project supports the  participation of
              Dr. Bhaju K. Tamot, of the  Department of Botany, Tirbhuvan University, 
              Kathmandu, Nepal, in a research project at the  laboratory of Dr. Peter H.
              Gresshoff of the  Department of Plant Molecular Genetics at the  University of
              Tennessee, Knoxville.  The  research is to use DNA amplification 
              fingerprinting (DAF), a newly developed DNA-  electrophoretic assay, to detect
              the DNA of the  causative agent of citrus greening disease  (CGD).  The DNA
              will be isolated separately  from leaf, flower bud and stem tissue of  infected
              and healthy citrus in Nepal.  Attempts  will be made to isolate DNA from any
              Bacterium-  Like Organism (BLO), and to generate DAF  patterns.  The difference
              in DNA amplification  products, one or more polymorphic bands,  generated from
              DNA of infected and non-infected  tissues with specific primer will be used as 
              markers for detecting CGD.    Scope:  This research brings a young scientist 
              from Nepal, a recent Ph.D., who has had some  experience in DAF technology and
              its  application in plant breeding, with a senior  U.S. scientist who has
              published extensively in  the field.  The field work by Dr. Tamot in  Nepal,
              combined with the analytical work at the  University of Tennessee in
              cooperation with Dr.  Gresshoff should produce two benefits, an  expanded
              research data and information about  the validity of DAF as an early detector
              of the  citrus disease, and a better training for the  Nepalese scientist that
              should enable him to  apply the technique to other biological  objectives in
              his country.  This represents a  strong cooperative project with a developing 
              country as well as  support for a recent  foreign Postdoctorate.   ***
