Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Hyperbolic and Dispersive Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9311438

Award Number: 9311438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198128             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Rodolfo Rosales rrr@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311438 Rosales  ` `              Research in Nonlinear Waves for Dispersive and
              Hyperbolic Systems of Equations is proposed. The following projects will be
              conducted: (1) "Focusing and Reflection of Weak Shocks and the von Neumann
              Paradox":  These problems and related ones arising in the theory of Weakly
              Nonlinear Geometrical Optics ( WNGO ) will be examined (2) "Resonant Periodic
              Waves in Hyperbolic Systems" and (3) "Resonant Oscillations in Closed Tubes":
              Using WNGO, some interesting and surprising solutions for the equations of Gas
              Dynamics, and other hyperbolic systems, will be obtained and studied (4) "Long
              Weakly nonlinear Surface Waves in a Ferro-Fluid": Simplified equations for
              surface waves in a Ferro--Fluid will be derived (using Long Wave Asymptotics)
              and studied (5) "Wave Modulation Breakdown in Nonlinear Dispersive Systems":
              The behavior waves exhibit,  after current theories to model nonlinear
              dispersive wave propagation breakdown and cease to apply, will be studied (6)
              "Square Wave Detonations":  Using a simplified model, the reasons and the
              mechanisms that cause  the  "Catastrophic Instabilities" in the Square Wave
              Theory for Detonation Waves will be studied.          This proposal deals with
              research in Nonlinear Waves.  Waves are important in many fields, such as
              Acoustics, Optics, Gas Dynamics, Combustion Theory, Ocean Dynamics, Solid
              Mechanics, etc.  Many advances have been made in Non-linear Wave Theo ry in the
              last few decades, but many puzzles remain. An example of the Wave Theory
              problems in this proposal is the "von Neumann Paradox" of Weak Shock Reflection
              and Focusing.  This problem has been the object of much study since John von
              Neumann pointed it out, but remains open. The P.I. and a graduate student
              advanced significantly in prior research and are very close to a complete
              resolution.           A resolution of the Paradox will have considerable
              scientific significance and will shed light into many important practical
              problems. Example: issues in noise generation or control; such as "sonic boom"
              reflection, generation and amplification of sound by reflection or transmission
              from shear, shocks or rapidly moving surfaces. Another example occurs in the
              treatment of kidney stones (Lithotripsy) by use of focused weak shocks. It
              seems clear that a firm grasp of the details of Weak Shock Focusing should be
              very important in reducing the amount of "collateral" damage --living tissue
              destruction-- produced by this technique. ***                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
