Title       : Dissertation Research: The Functional Significance of Denitrifier Population
               Diversity to Nitrous Oxide Productionin Terrestrial Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9311380

Award Number: 9311380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Philip Robertson robertson@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
              9311380  Robertson       This proposal will examine the effect of environmental 
              factors and diversity of denitrifying bacteria on the spatial and  temporal
              variability of denitrification in agricultural and  grassland ecosystems. 
              Specific questions to be addressed include  1) to what extent, and under what
              circumstances, is denitrifier  community composition different among ecosystems
              with different  nitrous oxide production potentials?, 2) do denitrifiers from 
              different ecosystems produce nitrous oxide at different rates?, and  3) does
              spatial and temporal variability in nitrous oxide  production reflect
              differences in dominant denitrifier populations  as well as differences in
              environmental controls?  These questions  will be addressed by sampling soil
              from ecosystems that differ in  chemical conditions that affect nitrous oxide
              flux rates,  incubating to characterize nitrous oxide flux rates, and 
              denitrifier isolation to characterize community structure.  %%%      
              Denitrifiers are bacteria that, during anaerobic respiration,  convert nitrogen
              from a form available to plants to gaseous nitrous  oxide not available to
              plants.  Thus, denitrifiers have a direct  impact on soil fertility and plant
              production.  Denitrification  also is important because the nitrous oxide is an
              important  greenhouse gas  and a catalyst of statospheric ozone decay.  
              Environmental factors affecting denitrification processes have been  examined,
              but their relative importances and the significance of  particular denitrifier
              species composition is not known.  This  study will all evaluation of the
              relative contributions of  environmental controls and denitrifier diversity to
              nitrous oxide  flux rates.  ***
