Title       : Competing Conceptions of Primate Welfare and Their Implications for Professional
               Autonomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9311601

Award Number: 9311601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44232              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Haynes aghuval@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311601  Haynes  Current federal legislation regulating the treatment of animals
              in  research incorporates a requirement that the physical environment  in
              research facilities be "adequate to promote the psychological  well-being of
              nonhuman primates."  The purpose of this study is to  identify and examine the
              different and competing conceptions of  welfare that various professional and
              lay groups bring to the  discussion of this requirement.  The goal is to
              clarify the issues  about which the discussants disagree.  This can help to
              provide a  framework for conflict resolution, especially in considering the 
              role of expert knowledge in regulating the humane use of laboratory  animals. 
              With assistance from a primatology graduate student, the  investigator will
              collect and analyse relevant information  indicating how different groups
              conceive of psychological well  being and of the enrichment plans intended to
              promote it.  Besides  examining written materials, the investigator will attend
              a wide  range of conferences and meetings and visit a variety of agencies  and
              organizations, including selected regional primate centers, in  order to gather
              information and interview representatives of  different professional and lay
              groups on the topic.  The analysis  of materials and conversations will allow
              the investigator to  develop a prelininary report to summarize findings and to
              consider  whether a more formal survey would be useful.  Telephone interviews 
              will be conducted during the last several months of the project, to  pretest
              questions for a potential survey, to provide a basis for  revising and
              evaluating the preliminary report, and to develop  dissemination plans. 
              Results from project will be disseminated in  the form of a book and articles,
              as presentations to interested  groups, and in symposia.  This project, by
              generating insight into  the ways professional and lay people think about the
              psychological  well being of primates, will provide assistance in improving 
              communication and resolvin g policy disputes.  ***
