Title       : Levels of Scientific Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1993    
File        : a9311982

Award Number: 9311982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Humphreys   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311982  Humphreys  The "received view" of how scientific theories in different
              domains  are related to each other has been, for a number of years, a 
              hierarchical model.  At the base is physics, or elementary particle  physics to
              be more precise.  Particle physics is taken as the most  fundamental of all
              sciences.  Then come, in order, chemistry  molecular biology, general biology,
              psychology, and the social  sciences.  Much work in the philosophy of science
              has been devoted  to the relationship between adjacent levels within this
              science.   Dr. Humphreys, in this project, is attempting to answer concerns 
              about the inter-level relationship of properties.   An example of  major
              concern for philosophy and psychology has been the relation  between
              psychological or computational properties and their  underlying
              neurobiological/physical properties.  Issues concerning  the mind/body problem
              and the status of cognitive science depend  directly on how this general
              question is answered.    Dr. Humphreys is specifically addressing a new way to
              characterize  the distinction between "emergent" and "nonemergent" properties. 
               How, for example, can the mind "emerge" from the properties of the  neurons
              that make up the brain?  How does thought and memory come  out of the chemical
              and electrical interactions that occur in this  physical organ?  The crucial
              point in looking at these relations is  that the causal properties that the
              psychologist deals with  (thoughts, emotions, memories) do not exist at the
              neurobiology  level and only "emerge" at the level of psychology.  The main
              focus  of this research is the proper way to construe these emergent 
              properties, with the distinction between internal and external  relations as
              the guide to a correct treatment.  Dr. Humphreys is  using these investigations
              to extend existing accounts of  scientific explanation to include emergent
              properties.  ***
