Title       : Metallaborane Chemistry, Synthesis of New Main Group Transition Element Cluster
               Types
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1995   
File        : a9311885

Award Number: 9311885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Fehlner thomas.p.fehlner.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic
              Chemistry Program, Dr. Thomas P. Fehlner will investigate   the synthesis of
              new main group-transition element cluster types. New   routes to metal-rich
              metallaboranes will be developed by utilizing the   high reactivity of metal
              carbonyl boranes. In order to obtain an   empirical definition of the relative
              stability of cluster structural   forms, a low temperature oxidative coupling
              reaction of cluster dianions   will be used to form metastable clusters. In
              order to obtain paramagnetic   species which are thought to be intermediates in
              the formation   metallaborane clusters, the reactions of paramagnetic
              organometallic   precursors with boranes will be investigated. The clusters
              will be used   as ligands to produce classical coordination complexes which may
              have   unusual electronic properties and may have nonlinear optical behavior.  
               This project involves the development of new synthetic methods for   cluster
              molecules which contain a transition metal and boron. To   systematize the
              structural relationships between cluster geometries, a   low temperature route
              to metastable clusters will be developed. Metal   cluster compounds will be
              prepared which contain unpaired electrons.   These species will be utilized to
              form yet larger clusters. This work has   application both to the understanding
              the bonding and reactivity of large   clusters and to the design of nonlinear
              optical devices.
