Title       : Engineering Faculty Internship: Manufacturing Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1994   
File        : a9311763

Award Number: 9311763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jenifer A. T. Taylor ftaylorj@alfred.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alfred U Col of Ceramics
	      2 Pine Street
	      Alfred, NY  148021296    607/871-2716

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9290,
Abstract    :
                   The project involves two periods of industrial residence in               
              two different companies working on projects of current concern.                
              One company makes ferrites and would like help defining the raw                
              material and processing variables that have the greatest impact on             
              product quality.  The second company is scaling up a process for               
              making a high temperature superconductor from development to                   
              prototype pilot plant level.  They anticipate problems associated              
              with changing scale and would like help defining the processing                
              parameters that are most likely to affect the reproducibility of               
              product properties.  The primary activity at both companies will               
              be working on the relationship between processing and product                  
              properties.  Such investigations require extensive analysis of                 
              particle size, shape and distribution, characteristics after                   
              forming before thermal treatment, phase and microstructure                     
              development, final composition and morphology, and product                     
              properties.                                                                    
                   The intensive interaction with industry will allow an                     
              upgrading of the educational curriculum that subsequent teaching               
              about ceramics can be related to actual experiences in the real                
              world.  While allowing the investigator to identify promising                  
              research topics in industry.  In addition, the familiarity with                
              these companies and their product lines will make it possible to               
              pursue research appropriate to establishment of long-term                      
              relationships.
