Title       : Biosynthesis of 7-Mercaptoheptanylthreonine-phosphate and the Methyl Reducing
               Factor in Mehtanogenic Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9311538

Award Number: 9311538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. White rhwhite@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              White  9311538  In this project, the biosynthetic pathway(s) for the
              methanogenic  coenzymes 7-mercaptoheptanylthreonine-phosphate (HS-HTP) and
              methyl  reducing cofactor (MRF) will be established.  The first phase of  work
              will be to establish the presence of HS-HTP and MRF in  different species of
              methanogenic archaebacteria and to determine  any possible precursor/product
              relationship between these  coenzymes.  The presence and interconversion of the
              molecules will  be determined by fluorescence measurement of their
              monobromobimane  derivatives using procedures recently developed by the author.
               The  incorporation of individual subunit and groups of subunit molecules  into
              HS-HTP and MRF will be determined.  Both in vivo and in vitro  experiments,
              using stable isotopically-labeled molecules and mass  spectrometry to measure
              incorporation, will be performed to help  define the biosynthetic pathways. 
              %%%  The biochemistry of the metabolic reduction of carbon dioxide to  methane
              by the methanogenic archaebacteria represents an exciting  area of
              microbiological metabolism.  One important aspect of this  metabolism is the
              discovery of seven new coenzymes.  Many of the   coenzymes in the methane
              pathway have chemical structures  completely different from other well known
              coenzymes and vitamins.   Because of this each structure represents a new
              biological compound  with unusual functions to be discovered.  In this award,
              the  biosynthesis, structure, and to a limited extent, the distribution  of two
              cofactors, 7-mercaptoheptanylthreonine-phosphate and methyl  reducing cofactor,
              will be explored.  Specific questions to be  addressed are; how are each of
              these cofactors biosynthesized and  assembled, and are they biosynthetically
              interrelated?  Answers to  these questions may complete another chapter in our
              understanding  of the biosynthesis of the methanogenic coenzymes, and also shed
               more light on the microbial biochemistry of the formation of  methane, an
              important energy source.  ***
