Title       : Mentoring and Scientific Values
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1996  
File        : a9311328

Award Number: 9311328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70605              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Sprague   (Principal Investigator current)
              Glyn C. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311328  Sprague  The literature on mentoring relationships largely concentrates
              on  management and the development of leaders for business.  This is  rather
              surprising since higher education, particularly graduate  study, bases itself
              on the mentor model.  Available evidence  indicates that mentors have
              considerable influence over the  developing careers of students.  There is some
              anecdotal and  descriptive information but almost no quantitative data on the 
              influence of professors-mentors on the development of scientific  values and
              ethics in students.  There is no literature about the  impacts of gender, race
              and nationality in these relationships.   This project proposes to begin to
              gather information and develop  methods to investigate these matters from the
              standpoint of values  and ethics in science.  This first phase involves a pilot
              study and  interviews of a sample of faculty-student pairs to obtain 
              information on what both mentors and students consider important in  the
              mentoring relationship with respect to values.  Both formal  mentors, those
              designated by the university, and informal mentors,  designated by the student,
              will be interviewed in each of seven  departments:  biology, chemistry,
              computer science, earth sciences,  economics, physics, and psychology.  Results
              from this study will  provide more qualitative information about the
              characteristics of  mentor relationships.  The data base will make it possible
              to  develop a comprehensive list of areas of values influenced by  mentors, and
              begin to construct a psychometrically sound  questionnaire which could be
              administered to a larger sample.  ***
