Title       : Cinematic Nature: Hollywood Technology, Popular Culture, and the Science of
               Animal Behavior, 1920-1960
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9311571

Award Number: 9311571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89571              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregg A. Mitman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311571  Mitman  In the 19th century, the gun was an indispensable part of
              natural  history.  By the early 20th century, the careers of many young 
              naturalists were shaped by the camera instead.  Film rapidly and  readily
              became a methodological tool among scientific disciplines  that had relied
              primarily on field practices of observation and  description, and transported
              natural history disciplines, such as  animal behavior, into highly mediated
              spaces of 20th century  experimental life sciences.  Film served as an
              important bridge  between natural history and experimental biology.  On the one
              hand,  it could accommodate the realism so central to the practices of the 
              museum diorama and the study of nature in the wild.  On the other  hand, it
              enabled the biologist to use the more interventionist  techniques of the
              laboratory:  now movements and behaviors were  recorded on a medium that could
              be slowed down, analyzed, spliced  and edited.  However, unlike other
              technologies that were created  and developed specifically for scientists in
              labs, film had its  primary function, namely, its utility as an art and
              entertainment  form, defined outside the cultural domain of science. 
              Scientists  in using film could not escape its entertainment role.  Hollywood 
              had overridingly defined the terms by which the media could be  utilized, seen,
              and understood, and no one who partook in this  technology could evade its
              influence.  Research films on wildlife  behavior often incorporated elements of
              drama and popular  spectacle, thus highlighting the permeability of boundaries
              between  scientific and popular culture.    Dr. Mitman is continuing his
              exploration of the study and  representation of animals as scientific and
              popular spectacle  through a focus on natural history and animal behavior
              films.  The  study begins with the 1920s travelogue tradition.  An important 
              function of the natural history film for the spectator in cities is  the
              recreation of the animal's natural habitat.  However, the  importance  of film
              for the research scientist served different  ends.  Within the science of
              animal behavior, nature on screen  provided an important methodological means
              for the dissection and  analysis of nature in the field.  From the travelogue
              tradition,  this project then moves into the area of experimental practice to 
              examine how film helped orient and shape the filed of animal  behavior studies.
               The project ends with an analysis of how animals  as scientific spectacle
              became appropriated and transformed by  1950s American public culture, as
              evidence by the success of  tourist attractions like Marineland and the
              popularity of  television series and films such as "Adventure," "Zoo Parade,"
              and  Disney's "True-Life Adventures,"  seen by millions of families in  the
              comforts of their homes.  Throughout, the project challenges a  diffusionist
              model of science popularization and points  historically to the ways in which
              the visual aesthetic of film has  profoundly shaped public understanding and
              expectations of animals  in their natural environments.  ***
