Title       : Multifunctional Polymerization Kinetics and Network Structure Thereof
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9311563

Award Number: 9311563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas A. Peppas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Peppas - 9311563    Highly crosslinked polymers have potential uses
              as materials for information storage systems, aspherical lenses and optical
              fiber coatings.  The requirements for the manufacture of these materials
              include a rapid polymerization rate, low volume shrinkage on polymerization,
              high dimensional and thermal stability of the polymer, and minimal structural
              inhomogeneities within the polymer network.  Polydimethacrylates are currently
              used in many applications; often produced from dimethacrylate monomers.  These
              reactions are slow, they may take 30-40 minutes to reach liniting conversions. 
              Acrylate monomers react seven to ten times faster and are therefore better
              polymerization systems to study.    The mathematical modeling of
              multifunctional polymerization/crosslinking reactions will be investigated in
              this research project.  A theoretical model for the prediction of initiator
              efficiency thoughout the course of the polymerization will be developed. 
              Fundamental descriptions for the propagation and termination rate constants
              will also be developed.  These expressions will be incorporated into the
              typical initiation-propagation-termination mechanism and model simulations will
              be carried out.  Kinetic gellation simulations will be carried out to determine
              the final network structure at the specified reaction conditions. 
              Polymerization/crosslinking of polyethylene glycol diacrylate networks will be
              studied by exposure to UV light.  Volume shrinkage on polymerization, swelling
              characteristics, molecular  weight between crosslinks, glass transition
              temperature and thermal stability of the resulting  networks will be determined
              and used to analyze the crosslinked struture.  By varying the length of the
              etylene glycol unit between the two C=C bonds, changes in the kinetics of these
              polymerizations will be studied.  The conversion-time profiles will be obtained
              at different light intensities using a calorimetric and a spectroscopic
              technique.    limitingthroughoutstructureethylene9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9Abstract -
              Peppas - 9311563    Highly crosslinked polymers have potential uses as
              materials for information storage systems, asp    L   T   ^   g   o            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        Z   \   L                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             !         !              D                                      
                                               !     !      o         L     (    Times New
              Roman    Symbol  & Arial                                  |     V   ^          
                                                L               T       '       ^       6    
                g               J     "             h     A  %F  %                        /  
                   Maria K. Burka Maria K. Burka                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
