Title       : Dissertation Research: Acoustic Communication in a Subsocial Invertebrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9311109

Award Number: 9311109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5611               (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen J. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311109  Moore    Unambiguous communication is a feature of populations that
              have structured social systems.   Nonetheless, variation among individuals in
              their communication signals may be important in  the establishment and
              maintenance of stable social organizations.  However, the genetic basis  and
              consequences of variation in acoustic communication are poorly understood.  
              Ms.  Deborah C. Clark's doctoral-dissertation research will attempt to clarify
              the role of acoustic  communication in competition between males of a subsocial
              invertebrate, Gromphadorhina  portentosa.  This cockroach species is notable
              for its agonistic interactions among males,  involving diverse and complex
              behavior including the use of agonistic hisses.  Using  behavioral, acoustic,
              and genetic techniques, Ms. Clark will quantify the variation among 
              individuals in frequency, amplitude, duration, and temporal pattern of hisses
              occurring  during interactions between males.  Ms. Clark will estimate genetic
              variances and  covariances for characteristics of agonistic hisses, and will
              conduct experiments to investigate  the function of variation in hisses.   
              This research is unique in investigating social competition and acoustic
              communication in a  subsocial invertebrate.  These studies will address
              important issues relevant to the evolution  and use of acoustic signals in
              communication.
