Title       : Dissertation Research: Host-Parasitoid Interactions and Habitat Subdivision: The
               Distribution and Population Dynamics of a Geometric Moth on Dryas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9311208

Award Number: 9311208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica A. Geber mag9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311208  Geber       This study examines the roles of habitat fragmentation and 
              host-parasitiod interactions in influencing the distribution and  population
              dynamics of a geometrid moth living in a naturally  patchy habitat.  It examine
              the habitat structure, synchrony of  local populations, dispersal between
              populations, and impact of  host-parastoid interactions.  The work combines
              field experiments  and observations with the development of a discrete time
              simulation  model on a spatially explicit landscape to examine and intergrate 
              the influences of habitat subdivision and host-parasitoid  interactions. 
              Understanding the population dynamics and distribution of species  occupying
              subdivided habitats is critical to both the fields of  population biology and
              conservation biology.  The dynamics of  colonization, extinction and dispersal
              interacts with predator-prey  dynamics to determine population processes for
              species living in  patchily distributed habitats.  Theoretical work exists in
              both the  areas of habitat fragmentation and predator-prey interactions.   yet,
              little empirical work stands behind these bodies of theory,  and very little
              theoretical and almost no empirical work has  attempted to intergrate the two
              fields.  %%%  Metapopulation dynamic's are being increasingly used for models
              if  population structure in both theoretical & conservation contexts,  yet
              there are few examples showing time metapopulation structure.   This study
              offers the potential of establishing an example of a  metapopulation.  ***
