Title       : Imperfect Competition, Sticky Prices, and Firm Specific Menu Costs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9311632

Award Number: 9311632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12069              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This planning grant research will extend a study done in the                   
              investigator's University of Chicago 1989 dissertation.  That                  
              dissertation examined the impact of differing market structures on             
              the price adjustment behavior of commercial banks.  The major                  
              findings of that dissertation were: (1) a major proportion of the              
              differences in pricing rigidity (or behavior) was not explained by             
              differences in market structure, and (2) intramarket variation in              
              the price rigidity patterns of individual firms was very                       
              significant.  This latter finding motivated a search for a theory              
              to explain intramarket, or firm specific, price adjustment                     
              behavior, and led to a consideration of the "New Keynesian"                    
              economics literature on imperfect competition and costly price                 
              adjustment.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Most of this existing literature has focussed exclusively on                   
              "market" characteristics to explain differences in price rigidity              
              patterns.  This project will focus on "firm" characteristics as the            
              relevant variable in analyzing the price adjustment behavior of                
              firms.  This extension from market to firm specific analysis is                
              very important in understanding and identifying the causes of                  
              sticky prices.  As such, it is also crucial for developing a                   
              complete analysis of the economy-wide misallocation of resources               
              imposed by wage and price rigidities.                                          
                                                                                             
              Specifically, the award will be used to: (1) review the price                  
              rigidity literature, (2) develop testable hypotheses about firm                
              specific costs of price adjustment, and (3) begin developing                   
              tractable empirical models to test these hypotheses.  These models             
              will focus on commercial banks and their role as financial                     
              intermediaries.  However, the results will have implications for               
              other industries, and the economy as a whole.
