Title       : Foundation of Gauge Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9311567

Award Number: 9311567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: J.B. Kennedy, Jr.   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311567  Kennedy  Dr. Kennedy is examining the conceptual foundations of the new
               theories in physics which describe quarks, the so-called `gauge  theories.' 
              Gauge theory is a dizzyingly exotic theory of the  underbelly of our physical
              world.  Quarks are laden with properties  like `charm' and `flavor,' but are so
              absolutely imprisoned within  protons and neutrons that direct observation
              seems foreclosed.   Gauge theorists seriously debate the prospect that these
              quarks  reside in a world which consists not of the mere three spatial 
              dimensions plus time, but of seven or even eleven dimensions.   These
              fantastical proposals seem all the more strange for being  derived from a
              venerable, but odd principle inherited from  classical mechanics.  Eugene
              Wigner has styled the principle of  `gauge invariance,' as the equivalent of
              introducing the `location  of a ghost' into the theory's equations but then
              requiring that all  predictions remain undisturbed.  This odd procedure is the
              core of  the theory.      To date, philosophers of physics have failed to
              evaluate and apply  gauge theoretic advances in the fierce debates now being
              waged.   Dr. Kennedy, under this grant, is pioneering the philosophical  study
              of gauge theories.  In the course of his research, he plans  to interview
              leading theorists in gauge theory.  His research is  concentrated in the
              geometrization of gauge theories and the  bearing of gauge theory on
              non-locality debates.  He hopes to  resolve whether the model of the physical
              world that gauge theory  presents does in fact resolve some central and
              long-standing  questions about action at a distance.  He is undertaking this 
              research with Jeremy Butterfield and Micheal Redhead at Cambridge  University. 
               ***
