Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Markov Chains and Self-Organizing Data Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9311367

Award Number: 9311367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Fill jimfill@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Self-organizing data structures, which dynamically maintain               
              a file of records in easily retrievable order while using up                   
              little memory space, have been investigated by probabilists and                
              computer scientists for more than 25 years.  Such self-organizing              
              systems have been applied to problems in very large-scale                      
              integration (VLSI) circuit simulation, data compression, and                   
              communications networks.  The goal of the proposed research                    
              project is to apply techniques for analyzing Markov chains, some               
              only recently developed, to the study of self-organizing lists                 
              and other data structures. The work will focus on furthering the               
              analysis of certain modifications of the standard schemes for                  
              list rearrangement.  Some of these modifications, such as the                  
              Markovian access model for "locality of reference," are designed               
              to model more closely the behavior of the rules on data                        
              encountered in applications.  In other cases, such as stochastic               
              algorithms, the rule itself is modified in an effort to improve                
              performance.                                                                   
                   A structure for maintaining a file of records is called                   
              self-organizing if the rule for replacing a retrieved item                     
              depends only on the location from which the item was retrieved.                
              The idea is that the file will organize itself, with frequently                
              retrieved items tending to gravitate toward the front of the                   
              file.  Self-organizing structures are commonly used for storing                
              data in a computer.  Probabilists and computer scientists have                 
              investigated certain performance characteristics of self-                      
              organizing data structures for many years.  This research will                 
              continue such investigations.
