Title       : Nonequilibrium Climate Change: The Role of Inter-Component Feedbacks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9311962

Award Number: 9311962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herman Zimmerman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249098             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Edward Birchfield edward@earth.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Hollander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9400759  Wang, Bin  University of Hawaii  Title: Dynamics of the
              Tropical Intraseasonal Oscillation    The goal of this proposed research is to
              futher develop physical  understanding of the complex behavior of tropical
              intraseasonal  disturbances (TIS).  The results gained from the study are
              expected  to be useful for future predictions of MJO and related climate 
              variations.       Three interrelated research projects will be undertaken.     
               1. Interaction of TIDS and mean tropical circulations       A three-layer
              tropical atmospheric model describing both the  moist equatorial waves and
              time-mean flows will be used to  investigate the effects of a three-dimensional
              mean flow on wave  development and propagation, and the change of mean flow
              caused by  momentum and heat transports (or E-P flux) associated with wave 
              activities.       2. Interaction of MJO and tropical ocean       To understand
              the nature of atmosphere-ocean interaction on  intraseasonal time scales, the
              PI will (a) perform numerical  experiments with an intermediate tropical ocean
              model to access the  possible influences of an ensemble of intraseasonal
              forcing on the  ENSO cycle, (b) conduct an empirical study of the relation
              between  intraseasonal variation of SST and MJO to access the degree of the 
              coupling between SST and MJO, and c) analyze coupled instability  possibly
              arising from the thermodynamic coupling of the atmosphere  and ocean relevant
              to warm ocean regions.       3. Multi-scale structure of MJO and
              higher-frequency  disturbances       The PI will investigate the multi-scale
              temporal and spatial  structure of the MJO and its relation to cloud clusters,
              tropical  cyclones, and extratropical forcing, using wavelet analysis and 
              other effective means.       A strategy of combining theoretical, numerical,
              and empirical  analyses is adopted.  Empirical analysis is used for revealing
              new  facts and formulating hypotheses, while theoretical and numerical 
              modeling are used to explain the phenomenon and te st the  hypotheses.      
              This research is important because it seeks to understand  variability on
              intraseasonal time scales.
