Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematic Monograph, Cladistic Analysis and Biogeography
               of the Neotropical Salacia, Species Group Ellipticae (Hippocrateaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1993 
File        : a9311097

Award Number: 9311097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alwyn H. Gentry  (Principal Investigator current)
              P. Mick Richardson richards@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311097  Gentry and Talbot       Among the fascinating growth forms of tropical
              plants, lianas  or woody vines are common in forests and ecologically
              important.   They are also poorly studied taxonomically, in part because of 
              difficulties in procuring flowering and fruiting material from high  in the
              forest canopy.  Graduate student Talbot under the  supervision of Dr. Gentry is
              studying the species of the New World  genus Salacia of the family
              Hippocrateaceae, mostly lianas and  small trees, with a great diversity of
              floral form in regions of  northern South America.  Herbarium study of
              preserved specimens  will be supplemented by extensive field work in Brazil,
              Peru, and  Ecuador to acquire new materials and to make observations on 
              pollination and seed dispersal.  New morphological characters will  be acquired
              through use of scanning electron microscopy of pollen  and of leaf surfaces,
              adding to traditional anatomical and  morphological features.  %%%       The
              diversity of species in the tropics is still little  appreciated or documented,
              and in particular for lianas or woody  vines, where flowers and fruits are
              difficult to collect from the  high forest canopy.  This research will focus on
              plants of the  genus Salacia and will improve our understanding of species 
              recognition, phylogenetic relationships among the species, and  patterns of
              geographical spread and endemism.  ***
