Title       : Synthesis and Studies of Magnetic Layered Host-Guest Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9311597

Award Number: 9311597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel G. Nocera   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9162,9186,AMPP,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9311597  Nocera    This proposal is motivated by the challenge of rationally
              designing  magnetic substances.  This research will exploit the structural 
              control available in layered materials to study the interplay  between
              molecular interactions and magnetic coupling.  The  intracrystalline
              environments of phosphate layered hosts will  provide the scaffolding to
              position organic inorganic intercalants  in well-defined relationships to the
              layers and to each other.  Magnetic intercalates of layered phosphate and
              phosphonate hosts  will be synthesized by redox and ion-exchange intercalation 
              methods.  Insertion of specially designed isostructural organic and  inorganic
              sets of para- or diamagnetic guests will permit the probe  of intralayer,
              layer-guest, guest-guest, and higher order magnetic  interactions.  In the case
              of paramagnetic intercalants, the roles  of the open-shell orbitals' shape and
              alignment relative to the  layers can be assessed in connection with quest
              orientation within  the galleries.  Finally, an exploratory path is outlined to
               assemble magnetic host layers about paramagnetic quests.  As this  proposal
              addresses structural issues of magnetic coupling, new  strategies for the
              rational design of materials with magnetically  tailored properties will
              emerge.  Additionally, the structure-  magnetism correlations assembled in this
              layered magnetic materials  synthesis program will provide impetus for the
              development of new  predictive structural theories of magnetism.  Although the
              primary  focus of the proposed work is synthetic, development of mechanistic 
              models will be pursued as needed within an established  collaboration with the
              condensed matter physics group at the  University.  ***
