Title       : A Longitudinal Study of the Antecedents of Distress and Divorce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1993      
File        : a9311846

Award Number: 9311846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted L. Huston   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              Most of what is now known about the causes of marital distress                 
              and divorce is based on either demographic data or on the                      
              recollections of formerly married spouses. Demographic data                    
              provide little insight into what it is about spousal qualities                 
              and the stresses that couples confront that leads to unhappiness               
              and divorce. Recollections can be distorted as a consequence of                
              the experiences associated with the divorce process. This                      
              research will use longitudinal data covering the first twelve                  
              years of the marital experience to overcome these handicaps.                   
                                                                                             
              This research seeks to determine the connection between the                    
              social and psychological characteristics partners bring to                     
              marriage, the early years of their marriage, and the cohesion and              
              stability of their union over twelve years. Data gathered between              
              1981 and 1983 will be supplemented with new data on parenting and              
              on economic hardship to predict more than twelve years after                   
              couples were wed: (a) the stability of their marriage (married                 
              vs. divorced); (b) the length of time (in months) their marriage               
              lasted; and (c) their level of marital satisfaction (for those                 
              still married). Changes in levels of compatibility also will be                
              examined in regard to preferences in leisure activities and                    
              household work.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The investigation extends a large-scale social psychology study                
              on courtship and the early years of marriage into a long-term                  
              prospective study of the causes of dissatisfaction and divorce.                
              It represents the first effort to trace over time the evolution                
              of relationships that develop distress or end in divorce. The                  
              study should be valuable for marriage counselors working with                  
              couples either contemplating marriage or already married and                   
              should provide a firmer and deeper theoretical and substantive                 
              understanding of marital relations, in particular, and human                   
              relationships, more generally.
