Title       : History of the Mass Extinction Debates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9311216

Award Number: 9311216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59035              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Glen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311216  Glen  Dr. Glen is completing his decade-long study of the history of
              the  current mass extinction debates.  These debates were opened in 1980  by
              the advent of the Alvarez-Berkeley group hypothesis that the  second greatest
              extinction in Earth's history which occurred 65  million years ago was caused
              by the impact of a meteorite.  This  hypothesis triggered a number of corollary
              and alternative ideas,  including that of periodic mass extinctions which
              prompted the  further surmise that meteoritic impacting was also periodic.  
              Within months, periodicity was addressed by three alternative  astronomical
              hypotheses that sought to regularly shower the earth  with comets.  Other
              hypotheses arose that speak to various aspects  of the biosphere, atmosphere
              and lithosphere bearing on mass  extinctions.  By 1984, the explosive-volcanism
              hypothesis emerged  to fuel the debates as the strongest alternative to the
              impact  hypothesis.  Over the past 13 years, the growing upheaval has  spawned
              more than 2500 professional publications representing  almost a dozen different
              disciplines and opened windows on  multiple, interconnected theoretical
              conflicts in science.  Closure  has not been reached on any of the many debated
              issues.    Dr. Glen's study is underpinned by a perhaps singularly 
              comprehensive, stage-specific data base with a full range of  primary
              historical materials including large oral and ethnographic  components
              collected as the debates progressed.  His study touches  on how perceptions
              form and changge in science as arguments evolve,  including the phenomenon of
              conversion to an opposing hypothesis;  the role of theory choice in the
              assessment of evidence; the  influence of disciplinary specialty in theory
              choice, and how  theory choice and discipline influence the selection, use, and
               origin of standards of appraisal.    ***
