Title       : Dissertation Research: Ethnoecology of Sabal uresana (Arecaceae) in Sonora,
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1993      
File        : a9311035

Award Number: 9311035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Pinkava icdjp@asuvm.inre.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duncan T. Patten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311035  Pinkava    Biological and cultural diversity have become commonly
              recognized terms over the past decade.  Given the growing concern about loss of
              both, and coupled with the lack of basic knowledge for many species and
              traditional cultures, approaches which link the two may provide valuable
              insight into ecological and cultural processes.  Traditional resource
              management is the use and management of natural resources for subsistence and
              commercial use by indigenous and local (rural) people not trained in Western
              scientific knowledge.  If proven effective, traditional resource management,
              combined with modern ecological methods, may offer the best approach to the
              future management of wild plant resources made scarce by changing cultures and
              economics.    Ethnoecology is a relatively new field of study which is a
              potentially powerful tool for studying basic ecological processes and for more
              rapidly assessing them for conservation purposes.  Because many of the species
              involved are poorly known scientifically, methods must be developed which can
              be used to quickly assess basic ecological information (distribution,
              population traits, growths, etc.) and response to human manipulation.  To be
              successful, ecological and anthropological techniques, both basic and applied,
              descriptive and experimental, must be employed.  It is the synthesis of
              methodologies from the two fields that is novel.    This study assesses
              traditional resource management of an endemic palm in Sonora, Mexico. 
              Worldwide, palms are one of the most important plant families for humans,
              especially in the tropics.   Sabal uresana is the most valuable a nd widespread
              of six palms native in northwest Mexico, an important non-timber resource
              (leaves used for weaving and thatching), is thought to be over-exploited, and
              has been listed as "rare" in Mexico.  %%%  Basic results will include: a
              description of the population dynamics of an endemic desert palm, the response
              of juvenile palms to the harvest of emerging leaves, and an ethnographic study
              of the use and management of an important wild-collected plant species.  Most
              importantly, this study will produce an ethnoecological synthesis that will
              have immediate application to the conservation of wild-collected plants and for
              rural development, and will address basic questions about the development of
              traditional resource management.  ***   n o p q r s t u v w x y z { | } ~      
                                                                                             
                                                            9311035  Pinkava    Biological
              and cultural diversity have become commonly recognized terms over the past
              decade.  Given the gro                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               F                             Z             Z                 
                             (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                         
                     "             h     t  et  e              O              panel summary
              doctoral dissertation   Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
