Title       : Biogeochemical Cycling Of Barium In The Arabian Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9311500

Award Number: 9311500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly K. Falkner kfalkner@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311500  FALKNER            The largest and most precise data base for any trace
              element  in the oceans is that of barium whose concentrations were measured  on
              the global scale as part of the GEOSECS program in the 1970's.   From that
              effort, it was confirmed that Ba undergoes nutrient-like  cycling in the oceans
              and that it behaves more like the  constituents of the hard parts of organisms
              (i.e. Si and  alkalinity) than those of their tissues (i.e. P and N). Work on 
              particulate matter has shown that the principal phase responsible   for the
              transport of Ba is the mineral barite (BaSO4), which is  somehow precipitated
              in micro environments provided by decaying  organisms and tends to accumulate
              in the sediments underlying zones  of high productivity.  This simple
              understanding of Ba cycling has  paved the way for its development as a probe
              for a variety of  important oceanic processes. For example, paleo-Ba
              distributions,  as recorded in the calcite lattices of foraminifera tests. are 
              being reconstructed as a constraint on changes in oceanic  circulation through
              glacial/interglacial transitions.  Barium to Ca  ratios in annually banding
              corals at select locations have been  proposed to monitor changes in upwelling
              conditions associated with  El Nino events.  Sedimentary Ba is thought to serve
              as an index of  paleo-productivity in overlying surface waters and on a more 
              immediate time-scale, suspended particulate barite in the water  column has
              been suggested to provide a measure of the net rate of  carbon export from the
              euphotic zone.  While considerable strides  in the development of Ba as an
              investigative tool have been made,  realization of its full potential requires
              a more  thorough  understanding of its behavior in the modern ocean.         
              This study will contribute dissolved Ba analyses to resolve  outstanding issues
              regarding Ba cycling in the oceans.  In  addition, the data generated will be
              used in Indian and Antarctic  Ocean modeling studies being conducted in
              collaboration with  French  and Belgian colleagues.
