Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Fleming - Viot Processes with Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9311984

Award Number: 9311984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stewart N. Ethier ethier@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fleming--Viot (FV) processes are probability-measure-valued  diffusion processes
              that model the evolution of the distribution  of types in a population.  This
              proposal concerns three topics  related to the infinitely-many-alleles model
              with selection.  The  first topic involves the simplest FV process with
              selection, and  the aim is to obtain an explicit formula for the transition 
              function (albeit less explicit than in the neutral case).  The  second topic
              concerns a model introduced by Tachida (referred to  by him as a nearly neutral
              mutation model), which can be  formulated as an FV process with an unbounded
              selection intensity  function.  The aim is establish uniqueness and study the
              ergodic  properties of the model, with the hope of explaining some of 
              Tachida's simulation findings.  The third topic involves the  concept of
              allelic genealogy introduced by Takahata and Nei.  One  can formulate an FV
              process that keeps track of such genealogies  in the infinitely-many-alleles
              setting.  There are several open  problems in the neutral case, but the
              challenge is to analyze the  selective models in a more rigorous way.  This
              proposal is concerned with certain stochastic (i.e., random)  processes in
              population genetics.  Each individual in a  population is assumed to be of some
              genetic "type."  The  processes model the evolution of the frequencies of the
              various  types in the population, taking into account such genetic factors  as
              random mating, mutation, and natural selection.  Letting the  set of possible
              types be arbitrary (in particular, infinite)  allows one to model the
              ``infinitely many alleles'' assumption.   It also allows one to incorporate
              historical or genealogical  information into the description of an individual's
              type.  Three  problems, concerning three specific models (each from the 
              biological literature), are proposed.  The problems are concerned  with
              providing a better mathematical understanding of the models  and possibly
              explaining certain phenomena discovered empirically   by biologists.  Each
              model involves selection, which complicates  it considerably, but makes it of
              greater interest than simply the  neutral case would be.  The difficulty with
              selection is that one  cannot obtain closed systems of linear equations for the
               quantities of interest.  Nevertheless, several ideas are proposed  that should
              help to overcome this.
