Title       : Collaborative Research on Reputation and Bargaining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9311089

Award Number: 9311089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87297              (Estimated)
Investigator: Faruk Gul   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311089  Gul    The activities of trade and exchange are fundamental to
              economics,  yet, until very recently, there was little research on perhaps the 
              most pure form of trading, i.e., bilateral bargaining.  A research 
              breakthrough, about a decade ago, led to a flood of papers on this  topic, all
              of which emphasized in myriad variations, the role of  the relative slight
              impatience of bargainers to come to agreement,  and the precise protocol of the
              bargaining process.  This theory  has been widely and usefully applied in a
              variety of fields,  including industrial organization, international trade and
              finance,  political economy, macroeconomics, and so on.    This project
              readdresses this basic question from a new perspective  and replaces the slight
              impatience between offers of the old theory  with slight uncertainty about the
              strategic posture of one's  opponent.  That is, with small probability the
              other player may be  one of many "irrational" types.  The message very crudely
              put is  this: Bargaining isn't so much about slight impatience and the  exact
              protocol of offers and counteroffers; rather, it is driven by  such factors as
              bluffing and posturing of various sorts.  In this  spirit, the model developed
              stresses reputational effects which  both causal empiricism and personal
              introspection suggest are  important in bargaining.    So far this approach
              seems very promising, and some simple cases  have been completely analyzed. 
              This project will extend these  preliminary results to more general settings. 
              As noted, the  earlier bargaining models have been fruitfully applied in many 
              areas; a reputation-based bargaining paradigm will be potentially  as useful.  
               ***
