Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding International Environmental
               Regimes: The Origins, Creation and Expansion of the Ozone Regime
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9311618

Award Number: 9311618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7613               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. McKeown tim_mckeown@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
              McKeown  9311618    This doctoral dissertation research support improves our 
              understanding of international regimes and international  environmental
              relations by examining the creation and expansion of  the "Ozone Regime" - the
              series of international agreements  designed to protect stratospheric ozone. 
              Although widely  recognized as an historic case of environmental cooperation,
              there  has been little in-depth analysis of the ozone regime.    The first part
              of the study examines the development of  "international regime" as an
              analytical concept, assesses its  strengths and weaknesses, and delineates how
              the dominant theories  of regime creation and change would attempt to explain
              the ozone  regime.  The second part of the research uses a  comprehensive,
              process-tracing case study of the origins, creation,  and expansion of the
              ozone regime to examine the accuracy of these  expectations.  Then, the
              investigators examine the importance of  three factors that are largely ignored
              by existing regime theory  but which preliminary research indicates may be of
              primary  importance in explaining the ozone regime:  1)international  economic
              competition;  2)the influence of pre-exisiting  international institutions;
              and, 3)the "structure" of the  negotiations themselves.  The research concludes
              by arguing for  synthesizing the consideration of these types of factors with
              the  strengths of exisiting theory to obtain a fuller understanding of 
              international regimes and international environmental relations.    The study
              is significant in three important ways:  First, it  provides the first
              comprehensive, theoretically informed case study  of the ozone regime.  Second,
              it critiques exisiting regime theory  by comparing its expectations to this
              important case.  Third, it  expands our understanding of international regimes
              by identifying,  analyzing and generating hypotheses concerning important but 
              previously ignored causal factors.  ***
