Title       : Collaborative Research: Redox Boundaries in Shallow Groundwater: Effects of Flow
               Paths, Sediment Chemistry and Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9311413

Award Number: 9311413
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Bohlke jkbohlke@wrdmail.er.usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey
	      Mail Stop 970
	      Reston, VA  22092    /   -

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Much of the information on the geochemical evolution of groundwater            
              has been conducted in relatively deep aquifer systems.  Many of the            
              biogeochemical reactions that influence nutrient cycling,                      
              concentrations of greenhouse gases, and degradation of                         
              contaminants, however, are redox reactions that occur in near-                 
              surface groundwaters.                                                          
              Redox boundaries can be either diffuse and extremely sharp under               
              various situations.  The nature of these redox boundaries are                  
              influenced by sediment chemistry, the kinetics of the redox                    
              reaction (including mediation of the reactions by bacteria),                   
              groundwater flow paths and mixing of groundwater, or combinations              
              of these factors.  In most studies of nitrate concentrations or                
              other solutes involved in redox reactions, the possible physical               
              and chemical systems have not been examined simultaneously or in               
              sufficient detail to identify major influences on groundwater                  
              oxidation-reduction reactions.  We propose to use extensive field              
              monitoring to physical and chemical characteristics of the aquifers            
              and water at sites with different physical characteristics and                 
              sediment chemistry.  Nested piezometers and tensiometers will be               
              used to monitor groundwater flow paths, multi-level samplers will              
              be used to determine water chemistry.  Groundwater ages will be                
              determined by measuring concentrations of chlorofluorocarbons                  
              (CFC's) dissolved in the water.  Measurements of nitrogen and other            
              biologically fractionated isotopes will be made to determine                   
              whether reductions in solute concentrations are due to biologically            
              mediated processes or due to dilution via groundwater mixing.
