Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Bororo Subsistence Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1993    
File        : a9311734

Award Number: 9311734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5430               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311734  Drennan    Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Ms. Cristiana
              Barreto  will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. As part of a  larger
              archaeological project she will conduct excavation in the  plateau region of
              Central Brazil. From an ethnographic perspective  this region is well known and
              characterized by large groups of  hundreds of individuals who practice a mixed
              foraging and simple  agricultural way of life. They live in large villages, and
              have  complex forms of social organization. On the other hand they are 
              egalitarian and lack leaders with inherited offices. They also live  in a
              relatively unproductive environment and this combination of  traits is both
              unusual and unexpected. Many anthropologists have  speculated on the origin of
              this social system yet no concrete data  is available.     Ms. Barreto will
              attempt to trace its development archaeologically  and determine its cause.
              Work to date suggests that prior to 500 BC  small groups followed a strictly
              hunting and gathering way of life  and lived primarily in caves and rock
              shelters. The period between  500 BC and 800 AD marks a transition to village
              life and by 800 AD  large villages appear in the archaeological record. Ms.
              Barreto  will excavate one of each type of site. In particular she will 
              attempt to recover data which relates to subsistence activities and  to look
              for objects which indicate contact with other regions.    Some archaeologists
              believe that the ethnographically observed  pattern developed through outside
              stimuli. Others believe that  agricultural practices changed, that crops such
              as maize were  introduced and that these allowed for higher population
              densities.  A final hypothesis suggests that neither of the above occurred but 
              rather that large villages provide a means both to deal with  environmental
              unpredictability and to ensure adequate defence  against other human groups.
              Ms. Barreto's work should provide data  to distinguish among these hypotheses. 
                This research is important for  several reasons. It will increase  our
              understanding of how human societies, at a simple technological  level, adapt
              to a harsh tropical environment. It will provide data  of interest to many
              anthropologists and contribute to the training  of a promising young scientist.
               ***
