Title       : Dynamics of Subcolonies in the Adelie Penguin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1993     
File        : a9311804

Award Number: 9311804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32693              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary D. Miller gdmiller@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Adelie penguin colonies have an internal structure consisting of a             
              variety of distinct subcolonies. These subcolonies increase or                 
              decrease in size relatively independent from variations in the                 
              colony as a whole. The purpose of this project is to investigate               
              the dynamics of subcolony size at several large breeding colonies              
              of Adelie penguins in the Ross Sea, and evaluate the factors that              
              cause such variation. It is important to understand what causes                
              these sometimes-contradictory patterns in order to understand the              
              dynamics of penguin populations as a whole. Observations at the                
              northern colony at Cape Bird indicate that ice conditions and                  
              disturbance by visitors are significant factors that affect                    
              subcolony size. These factors will be addressed specifically. In               
              addition, methods of digital image analysis will be used to ease               
              the process of counting penguins from aerial photos. This research             
              will raise the sophistication of  our understanding of penguin                 
              population dynamics and also introduce more automated methods for              
              evaluating populations. Both these goals are of considerable                   
              importance to current major interests in Antarctic biology.
