Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Control of Solute Permeability Across
               Membranes Made of Di/Triblock Copolyelectrolytes.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9311941

Award Number: 9311941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16194              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sasidhar Varanasi svarana@uoft02.utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5983,
Abstract    :
                9311941  Varanasi    This award will support a fifteen month grant under the
              NSF-CGP  (Center for Global Partnership) Science Fellowship Program for 
              Professor Sasidhar Varanasi, Department of Chemical Engineering,  University of
              Toledo, Ohio.  Professor Varanasi will undertake a  three month cooperative
              research project with Dr. Norihiko  Minoura, Department of Organic Materials,
              National Institute of  Materials and Chemical Research (NIMC) in Tsukuba,
              Japan.  The  research will focus on the control of solute permeability across 
              membranes made of di/triblock copolyelectrolytes.  This will be  accomplished
              by fabricating membranes, the permeability of which  to large Brownian solutes
              can be tuned in a predictable manner,  via changing the pH and/or ionic
              strength of the solutions  bathing the membrane.  This ability, in turn, should
              allow one to  make the membrane highly selective in separating two solutes the 
              sizes of which differ only to a small extent.  Two kinds of  membranes will be
              perfected to achieve the goal.  First, will be  polyelectrolytes absorbed in
              the pores of non-selective  microporous membranes.  The second would be ABA
              type triblock  copolypeptides cast into a film using a solvent.  The
              performance  characteristics of membranes made by microphase separation will 
              be compared to those made via grafting copolymers into  microporous membranes
              to determine which of the methods leads to  reliable and robust membranes with
              "tunable" permeation  properties.          Results of the research have
              potential for practical applications  in a variety of important fields such as
              self-regulated release  of pharmaceutics and the synthesis of several
              biochemicals.  The  National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research is a
              first-  rate facility that has made considerable progress in polymeric 
              materials research.  Dr. Minoura is a well-known expert in  membrane science in
              general and in synthetic polyelectrolyte  membranes in particular.  This
              specialization coupled with  Professor Va ranasi's expertise in the area should
              provide an  excellent collaboration that most likely would continue on an 
              informal basis in the future.
