Title       : Illegal Chinese Immigrants in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9311114

Award Number: 9311114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ko-lin Chin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311114  CHIN  This project will examine the social and economic networks that 
              underlie illegal Chinese immigration to the United States.  The  research will
              describe the migratory processes (from initiation in  China to entering the
              United States), and the problems faced by  illegal immigrants after their
              arrival.  The social and economic  networks make the immigration possible and
              also support the illegal  aliens in this country.  Some of this support is by
              otherwise legal  groups and families, and some is by illegal groups and
              enterprises.   The research will describe the ways in which illegal immigrants 
              cope with their illegal status, including their economic and  criminal
              activities, and identify those factors in the legal,  social and economic
              environment that facilitate or inhibit their  success.  The study will analyze
              these data in the historical  context of previous waves of immigration by other
              ethnic groups  over the past 100 years or more.  This research will make an 
              important empirical contribution to scientific knowledge about  immigration
              processes as well as to policy analysis focused on  current illegal
              immigration.    In order to examine the legal, social and economic aspects of 
              illegal immigration among the Chinese, the investigators will  conduct in-depth
              interviews with 200-300 illegal Chinese immigrants  who are now living in New
              York City and its vicinity.  In addition,  social workers, business leaders and
              community leaders in Chinatown  will be interviewed.  These interviews will
              make it possible for  the investigators to trace the various immigration
              networks within  the Chinese community and document the ways in which these
              networks  also provide the economic and social bases for illegal immigration.  
              The study will also explore comparisons between current (legal and  illegal)
              Chinese immigration and earlier waves of immigration by  other ethnic groups
              through an examination of the historical  literature on immigration to the
              United States.  ***
