Title       : Dissertation Research: Aurignacian Lithic Economy in the Vezere Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1993    
File        : a9311880

Award Number: 9311880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11757              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall K. White   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311880  White    Under the direction of Dr. Randall White, Mr. Brooke Blades
              will  collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will study three 
              archaeological collections which are housed in French institutions  and are
              attributable to the Aurignacian culture of Vezere Valley in  Southwest France.
              These materials are all from carefully controlled  excavations at well dated
              sites and span the major interval when  these early modern humans inhabited
              Europe and the Near East. Mr.  Blades will conduct several studies. First he
              will examine the  technologies by which these tools were produced and shaped to
               produce their final form. In particular he is interested in the  intensity of
              utilization of raw material and the efficiency with  which it was used.
              Secondly, based on visual analysis he will  attempt to match the raw material -
              mostly flint - to the source of  origin and in this way reconstruct patterns
              and extent of  prehistoric movement. Finally, in collaboration with researchers
              at  the University of Missouri, he will obtain trace element data on  one
              subseries to characterize source areas and chemically match  excavated
              artifacts to them.    The goal of Mr. Blades work is to understand the
              subsistence  strategies practiced by Aurignacian peoples. During the millennia 
              when the Aurignaican occupied Western Europe, glaciers advanced and  retreated
              and climate changed dramatically. These shifts have been  reconstructed through
              the paleoenvironmental record and Dr. Blades  wishes to understand how
              Aurignacian subsistence and ranging  patterns varied accordingly.     This
              research is important for several reasons. The Aurignacians  are the earliest
              anatomically modern people in Europe and this work  will shed new light on
              their cultural competence and strategies. It  therefore sets a baseline against
              which later accomplishments can  be judged. The work also increases our
              understanding of human-  environment interactions and will show how people with
              relatively  simple technologies adapted to  a rapidly and markedly changing 
              environment. Finally the project will contribute to the training of  a
              promising young scientist.  ***
