Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Fourier Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9311692

Award Number: 9311692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Fefferman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fefferman  9311692        This project will focus on several ongoing research
              themes  in harmonic analysis and partial differential equations.  In 
              particular work will continue on the extension of the theory of  singular
              integrals on product spaces.  Here the objective is to  analyze the properties
              of operators which commute with various  groups of dilations of Euclidean
              space.  So far, a complete  theory is available only for the classical
              dilations and product  dilations.  The theory evolving is quite different from
              the  Calderon-Zygmund theory. Work will also continue on problems from 
              elliptic equations with non-smooth coefficients.  In particular,  the
              solvability of the Dirichlet problem with Lp coefficients  will be treated.  An
              important goal in this research is to  determine the extent that one can
              perturb coefficients of the  equation and still guarantee that the solutions
              still remain in  the same Lebesgue space.  In the same spirit, elliptic
              operators  in nondivergence form with coefficients which are only assumed to 
              be measurable will be studied.  The approach used will be that of 
              approximating solutions by solutions to equations with smooth  coefficients and
              determine whether or not the process leads to  unique limits regardless of the
              smoothing of the original  operator.  ***            Partial differential
              operators form a basis for studying  the generic forms of partial differential
              equations. The analysis  of these operators through deep abstract methods leads
              to  surprisingly complete information about related classes of  equations. 
              Present research concentrates on operators in which  smoothness assumptions are
              limited to the bare essentials.  In  this way, results reflect a more realistic
              picture of the  physical world which the differential equations seek to 
              represent.
