Title       : When Juries Disobey the Law: Jury Nullification in Civil and Criminal Trials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1994      
File        : a9311922

Award Number: 9311922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57536              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irwin A. Horowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311922  HOROWITZ  Juries have the implicit power to acquit defendants despite
              evidnce  and judicial instructions to the contrary.  This power, embedded in 
              the phenomenon called jury nullification, has historically  permitted
              sympathetic juries to acquit those who are legally guilty  but morally upright.
               This research proposal presents a theory that  predicts when juries obey the
              law (that is, follow their prescribed  role as finders of the facts) and when
              they sometimes disobey the  law (i.e., do not apply the law as instructed). 
              The research also  examines the concepts of nullification in civil trials, a
              neglected  area of concern.  The theory distinguishes between nullification, 
              which we define as a principled decision to disobey the law, and  other forms
              of jury noncompliance with the judge's instructions.   This research will allow
              for a clearer understanding of when and  why juries disobey the law.  Jury
              nullification is an increasingly  important topic but it has been enmeshed in
              speculation and  unsubstantiated assumptions about how juries operate.  The 
              nullification controversy, and the place of the jury in the legal  system, will
              be well served by a serious empirical investigation of  the jury's
              nullification tendencies.    To test the predictions made by our theory of jury
              nullification,  we have designed three experiments using individuals drawn from
               juror rolls who will view various videotaped trials in a realistic  setting
              (the moot courtroom of a law school).  These jurors will  deliberate to a
              verdict.  The deliberations will be taped and both  outcomes and group decision
              processes analyzed.  The experiments  examine the nullification process in both
              criminal and civil  trials.  The results of these experiments will provide
              empirical  information about why and how juries decide to obey or disobey the 
              dictates of the court.  ***
