Title       : Colloidal Dispersions in Non-Aqueous Media - A Fundamental Study of Adsorption
               and Stabilization Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9311940

Award Number: 9311940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ponisseril Somasundaran ps24@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311940  Somasundaran    The stability of colloidal dispersions in non-aqueous
              media is  a phenomenon of vital importance in a number of technologies  such as
              ceramic and tape processing, inks and paints  manufacture, oil recovery from
              tar sands and electrophoretic  displays systems.  However, major questions on
              the mechanisms of  adsorption of stabilizers on colloidal particles and their 
              stabilization remain largely unanswered.  The complex solid- 
              solvent-dispersant interactions that play a critical role in  adsorption and
              subsequent stabilization are not well understood.   Also, there is a lack of
              both fundamental information on the  role of water and other polar impurities
              which have been  identified to affect the suspension behavior markedly and on 
              methods to counter the detrimental effects on these impurities.   It becomes
              important to develop such information in order to  further advance so many
              technologies that use processes  involving non-aqueous media.    Project
              addresses a multi-pronged approach combining the  phenomenological description
              of suspension stability (settling  rate, viscosity), the measurement of
              physico-chemical properties   (adsorption, zeta potential, heats of adsorption)
              and the use of  spectroscopic techniques (ESR, NMR, Fluorescence spectroscopy) 
              to probe micro-structures in solution and at the interface.  It  focuses on
              some of the critical issues of adsorption and  colloidal stability in non polar
              media.  Specifically, the  project investigates the role of the solid surface
              and the  solvent on the adsorption of surfactants on particles from non- 
              aqueous media.      Also the role of surface charge and hydration in
              stabilizing  dispersions, the effect of water and other polar impurities on 
              charge development and conformation of the adsorbed molecules  investigated.   
                Stabilization effects of macromolecules and surfactant mixtures  will be
              included in the study since they hold maximum practical  potential.  These
              studies coupled with the proposed novel  spe ctroscopic investigation will
              enable the PI's to elucidate  the fundamental mechanisms of adsorption and
              stabilization and  also to provide guidelines for choosing the appropriate 
              dispersant/solvent combinations and processing schemes to obtain  optimum
              properties for a given non-aqueous  dispersion.  ***    9311940  Somasundaran  
               The stability of colloidal dispersions in non-aqueous media is a phenomenon of
              vital  importance in a number of technologies such as ceramic and tape
              processing, inks  and paints manufacture, oil recovery from tar sands and
              electrophoretic displays  systems.  However, major questions on the mechanisms
              of adsorption of stabilizers  on colloidal particles and their stabilization
              remain largely unanswered.  The complex  solid-solvent-dispersant interactions
              that play a critical role in adsorption and  subsequent stabilization are not
              well understood.  Also, there is a lack of both  fundamental information on the
              role of water and other polar impurities which have  been identified to affect
              the suspension behavior markedly and on methods to  counter the detrimental
              effects on these impurities.  It becomes important to develop  such information
              in order to further advance so many technologies that use  processes involving
              non-aqueous media.    Project addresses a multi-pronged approach combining the
              phenomenological  description of suspension stability (settling rate,
              viscosity), the measurement of  physico-chemical properties  (adsorption, zeta
              potential, heats of adsorption) and the  use of spectroscopic techniques (ESR,
              NMR, Fluorescence spectroscopy) to probe  micro-structures in solution and at
              the interface.  It focuses on some of the critical  issues of adsorption and
              colloidal stability in non polar media.  Specifically, the project 
              investigates the role of the solid surface and the solvent on the adsorption of
               surfactants on particles from non-aqueous media.      Also the role of surface
              charge and hydration in stabilizing dispersions, the effect of  water and 
              other polar impurities on charge development and conformation of the  adsorbed
              molecules investigated.      Stabilization effects of macromolecules and
              surfactant mixtures will be included in the  study since they hold maximum
              practical potential.  These studies coupled with the  proposed novel
              spectroscopic investigation will enable the PI's to elucidate the  fundamental
              mechanisms of adsorption and stabilization and also to provide  guidelines for
              choosing the appropriate dispersant/solvent combinations and  processing
              schemes to obtain optimum properties for a given non-aqueous   dispersion.  ***
