Title       : Behavioral Mechanisms that Determine Pattern of Herbivory and Foraging
               Efficiency on Spatially Heterogeneous Plant Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1993      
File        : a9311463

Award Number: 9311463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio A. Laca   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311463  Laca    Deciding where to search for food is fundamental for animals.  
              Because herbivores are selective while foraging, their  interaction with the
              plant community is spatially variable.   Foragers encounter vegetation with
              characteristics different from  the average for the whole community.  Removal
              of plant tissue and  other herbivore impacts are concentrated on some areas and
              light  on others.  The importance of vegetational heterogeneity depends 
              strictly upon the behavioral mechanisms animals exhibit in  response to
              heterogeneity.  Dr. Laca will test three behavioral  mechanisms that may be
              used by a large grazer to forage  efficiently in heterogeneous environments: 
              restriction of search  to areas where food has been recently encountered,
              learning of  food locations, and regulation of time spent feeding on food 
              patches.  The importance and rate of learning will be tested in  controlled
              food arenas.  Foraging efficiency is hypothesized to  be greater in
              heterogeneous environments because, by using  specialized and learned searching
              strategies, animals experience  a foraging environment better than average. 
              Large-scale patterns  of grazing behavior on natural plant communities will be
              related  to small-scale behavioral mechanisms.  Additionally, a literature 
              review will be conducted and a conceptual model of foraging  behavior on
              heterogeneous landscapes will be developed.    If animal performance is
              affected significantly by heterogeneity,  measures of spatial variability
              should allow better evaluation of  the nutritional value of habitats.  If
              heterogeneity is shown to  improve livestock performance, some pasture and
              rangeland  management practices may have to be reviewed, de-emphasizing 
              homogeneity as a goal.
