Title       : Variables Impacting Supply of Minority, Female, and Majority Male Scientists and
               Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9311351

Award Number: 9311351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Leslie   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Oaxaca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0511603   Societal Aspects                        
              92        Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Leslie  9311531    Underrepresentation of minorities and women in science and 
              engineering fields is a matter of major national interest and  social concern. 
              The purpose of the study is to identify and  quantify, through econometric
              analysis, variables explaining majors  to graduation, and entrance into
              graduate S/E programs and S/E  careers.  The primary focus will be on females
              and minorities, but  majority males will be examined as well.  Previous
              research has  efforts for minorities and women have been sparse and limited in 
              scope.  A full array of variables will be examined including market  factors.  
               Data for the study will be extracted primarily from the National  Longitudinal
              Study of the High School Class of 1972 (NLS72), High  School and Beyond (HS&B),
              and the longitudinal studies of the UCLA  Cooperative Institutional Research
              Program (CIRP), which will  provide data for the S/E undergraduate choice and
              persistence  analyses and persistence analyses and some data for the S/E 
              graduate program and career choice analyses.  Other data bases for  use in S/E
              graduate program and career choice analyses may include  NSF's, The Experienced
              Sample of Scientists and Engineers, the  Survey of Recent Scientists and
              Engineers, the Survey of Doctorate  Recipients, and the Scholastic Aptitude and
              Graduate Record Files.    Analytical techniques include, for selection of major
              or  occupational choice, determining the probabilities of various  choices for
              distinct groups, e.g., females or males, and then  determining the choices
              other groups would make based on specified  probabilities.  The gender
              differences in the distribution among  choices reflect gender differences in
              the explanatory variables.   Multinomial logit or, alternately, a conditional
              logit model is  used to analyze choice of college S/E major.  Multinomial
              probit is  also used if independence assumptions are not satisfied.  For 
              analyzing persistence, Markov or multinomial logit choice model, is  used. 
              Early job history is modeled  as a simple logit choice model,  while choice of
              S/E graduate program will be analyzed using a basic  choice framework or
              multinomial choice framework.  Choice of given  model or analytical technique
              will be dependent on satisfying the  assumptions of the model or technique.
