Title       : U.S.-FSU: Developing Mathematics Information Centers in the Former Soviet Union
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9311558

Award Number: 9311558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Friedlander   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal, "Developing Mathematics Information Centers                     
              in the Former Soviet Union ?FSU!," to be performed by the                      
              American Mathematical Society ?AMS! (Dr. Susan                                 
              Friedlander, Principal Investigator ?PI!), will expand its                     
              existing efforts to assist the development of mathematics                      
              infrastructure by directly aiding mathematics libraries in the                 
              FSU and establishing mathematics information centers in                        
              areas of highly concentrated mathematical activity.  The AMS                   
              Advisory Committee, which has been coordinating current                        
              AMS initiatives in this area, funded by donations from AMS                     
              members and a matching Sloan Foundation grant, would                           
              provide oversight for this program.  The Advisory Committee                    
              obtains advice from consultants it has organized in Russia and                 
              Ukraine, from expatriate FSU scholars resident in the U.S.,                    
              and from the various Divisions of the Society.  In addition,                   
              the PI and co-PI's are very knowledgeable about current                        
              needs of the mathematics community in the FSU, as well as                      
              existing and planned efforts to aid science in the FSU.  This                  
              award provides support to demonstrate the effectiveness of                     
              establishing mathematics information centers and aiding 22                     
              libraries throughout the FSU by distributing current                           
              mathematical journals and books.                                               
                                                                                             
              The goal of this AMS program is to promote scientific                          
              interchange between U.S. scientists and their counterparts in                  
              the FSU, and to establish and foster a capability for                          
              mathematicians within the fSU to network and communicate,                      
              and to form and expand alliances within a professional society                 
              framework for their common benefit.   ***
