Title       : Calorimetric Study of Smectic Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1995       
File        : a9311853

Award Number: 9311853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl W. Garland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9311853  Garland    In this project, new calorimeters are developed for
              quantitative  measurements of the latent heat and pre-transitional heat
              capacity.   The new calorimeter can operate over a wide frequency range (10.2 
              HZ to 10.3 HZ) because there is evidence that slow dynamics occurs  near some
              of the transitions, and because the heat capacity can be  a complex function of
              frequency.  With these enhanced calorimetric  capabilities, it will be possible
              to resolve the critical behavior  at SmC-Sml (tilted smectic-tilted hexatic)
              transitions by studying  binary mixtures, where the nature of the transition
              should change  from first order to critical to supercritical.  The proposed 
              research has the following specific goals:  1) quantitative  measurement of
              latent heats and pre-transitional Cp wings for  first-order transitions; 2)
              determination of critical behavior for  the static heat capacity at
              second-order and multicritical points;  3) characterization of the continuous
              non-critical evolution or  order in bulk liquid crystals and liquid crystals in
              a porous  medium (aerogel); and 4) investigation of the slow dynamics near 
              liquid crystal transitions which give rise to a complex frequency-  dependent
              heat capacity.  %%%  Liquid crystal, exhibit a variety of long range ordering
              that is  intermediate between that of crystalline solids and simple liquids.  
              Understanding the phase transition behavior in these materials is  of
              importance in view of the growing development of liquid crystal  display and
              device technologies.  Several challenging problems  remain.  Almost nothing is
              known about the slow time response near  some liquid crystal phase transitions,
              and this will be studied  with a newly developed dynamic calorimeter.  The
              effects of  chirality (right- or left-handedness in asymmetric molecules) are 
              poorly understood and will be expolored in studies of bond--  orientational
              ordering and the newly discovered twisted-grain-  boundary phases.  The
              behavior of liquid crystals in random por ous  media like aerogels is a new
              field that is closely related to  applications involving liquid crystals in
              restrictive geometries.   A wide range of exploratory studies concerned with
              surface effects,  finite size confinement effects, and random field effects
              will be  undertaken.  ***
