Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Inference in Paleoclimatology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1994      
File        : a9311071

Award Number: 9311071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mike West mw@isds.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1577,GLCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311071  West       This project concerns statistical issues arising in data 
              processing, analysis and inference based on geological records of 
              environmental change.  The current proposal results from  discussion between
              the two investigators about the statistical  issues and problems for models and
              methods of analysis,  especially time series analysis, geared to the realistic 
              assessment of patterns of time variation in sedimentary records  relevant to
              climate change.  This project will initiate a  collaborative research and
              reciprocal training program to address  these issues.  The focus will be on the
              processes of uncertainty  propagation and formal statistical inference about
              climatic  changes based on raw records from deep lake sediments.  Similar 
              issues exist and deserve attention in the assessment of data from  deep sea
              sediments, ice cores, and tree rings.  Technically, the  project concerns
              statistical calibration of raw data records, and  time series analysis to
              assess patterns of variation in the  geological records over time.         The
              initial objective will be to develop an appreciation of  the statistical issues
              as they permeate the various stages of the  experimental processes in analyzing
              isotope and other proxy  climatic variables from deep-lake sediment cores. 
              Cross-  disciplinary training for each investigator will  e a central and 
              continuing feature of the collaboration.  This will be directed  at bridging
              the gulf between, on one hand, current standards of  practice in statistical 
              analysis of paleoclimate data (e.g.  Pisias and Moore 1981; Hagelberg, Pisias
              and Elgar 1991)  and, on  the other hand accessible and appropriate modern
              statistical   methods and models.  A reciprocal training and  development 
              schedule will provide the opportunity for each of the two  investigators to
              become sufficiently proficient in the  fundamentals of  the other's field of
              expertise so as to initiate  and enable a research program focussed on rigorous
              statistical  analysis of paleoclima te data generated from deep lake sediment 
              cores.  Statistician Mike West will become familiar with the  methods used to
              select sediments core sites for paleoclimatic  analysis, the various methods of
              geochemical analysis of sediment  cores (and notably the limitations of age
              assignment to sediments  as a result of various natural processes such as
              erosion and  redeposition, bioturbation, diagenesis and laboratory 
              contamination), calibration of carbon dating assessments, and  current methods
              of time series analysis used in paleoclimatology.   Geologist Tom Johnson will
              become familiar with the capabilities  and pitfalls of statistical methods,
              especially methods of time  series analysis that are currently used in this
              area, and gain  appreciation of the consequences for  uncertainty assessment in
               geochronology.  The investigators anticipate eventual development  of Bayesian
              methods in statistical calibration at the various  stages of the experimental
              process, and resulting time series  analysis in assessing cyclical variability
              in calibrated records.   Both investigators will also become familiar with the
              statistical  issues and methods of calibration of 14C dates (together with 
              associated uncertainty assessments) to calendar dates, and with  the recent
              development of advanced statistical methods in the   field.       This project
              will eventually lead to focussed research  efforts in developing Bayesian
              statistical models and methods  appropriate for all stages of the experimental
              process in  sediment based paleoclimatology, and that will ultimately apply  in
              other geological and archaeological arenas.  Most  optimistically, it is hoped
              that this collaboration will seed the  development of an internationally
              recognised centre for the  statistical analysis of paleoclimate proxy records
              at Duke  University.  ***
