Title       : SGER: Inventory of the Biota in Amazonian Rainforest in Northern Peru: A Pilot
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1993     
File        : a9311799

Award Number: 9311799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16645              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Duellman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              This pilot project, co-funded by Occidental Petroleum and the                  
              University of Kansas, will inventory terrestrial vertebrates,                  
              insects and woody vegetation and measure abiotic/physical data in              
              the Amazon rainforest of northern Peru.  The inventory will serve              
              as the basis for a biological master plan for the Peruvian                     
              government to survey, monitor and reclaim areas being developed by             
              Occidental and other concerns for petroleum extraction.  The pilot             
              project will survey plotted quadrats at two sites.  Voucher                    
              specimens will be divided between KU and the Museo de Historia                 
              Natural in Lima.  Permits will be issued by the Peruvian Government            
              under the auspices of the Associacion de Ecologia y Conservacion               
              (ECCO) in Lima.  CITES threatened and endangered species will not              
              be collected.  The NSF funds will support the vertebrate component             
              of the survey, with OXY supporting the woody vegetation, insect and            
              physical parameters component.  KU has already funded the                      
              development of this project and will support travel by KU                      
              personnel.  The quadrats will be permanently marked for future                 
              work, which OXY promises to support. This collaboration promises               
              to become a long-term partnership between KU and OXY in                        
              conservation and restoration projects in Peru.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              This pilot project is a uniquely opportunistic and fruitful                    
              collaboration between US industry, US basic academic science,                  
              Peruvian government agencies and NSF to establish the responsible              
              monitoring, conservation and reclamation of biodiversity on lands              
              impacted by extractive industries.  The study, funded with                     
              Occidental Petroleum and the University of Kansas, will inventory              
              terrestrial plants and animals and measure relevant climatic,                  
              physical and chemical data on lands in the Amazon rainforest of                
              northern Peru being developed by Occidental and other concerns for             
              petroleum extraction .  The inventory will serve as the basis for              
              a biological master plan for the Peruvian government to survey,                
              monitor and reclaim such areas throughout the country.
