Title       : Dominance/Status, Gender, and Nonverbal Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9311544

Award Number: 9311544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97849              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Hall HALL1@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311544  Hall    Several theorists have suggested that subtle aspects of
              nonverbal communication help to foster dominance relations among individuals,
              both as role displays and as means of interpersonal control.  These writers
              propose that subordinate or low status people (such as women) are especially
              sensitive to nonverbal communication, and that behaviors such as interpersonal
              touch and smiling both create and maintain a dominance/status hierarchy between
              sexes.  However, others have noted that although nonverbal gender differences
              are well documented, there is only a slim empirical foundation thus far for
              dominance/status as the explanation.  The present research will help to
              establish how dominance/status, measured in several ways, relates to nonverbal
              communication and to nonverbal gender differences.    Four studies will be
              conducted.  The first study, conducted in a laboratory, will relate ability to
              decode nonverbal cues to trait measures of status/dominance and will measure
              nonverbal behavior is a structured interaction in which dominance/status roles
              are assigned experimentally.  In Studies 2 and 3, attendees at psychology and
              philosophy professional meetings, respectively, will be observed for instances
              of interpersonal touch, and their genders and names/affiliations will be noted.
               Touch will be related to objective indicators of status/prestige.  In Study 4,
              employees in the company headquarters of a convenience foodstore chain will be
              videotaped while interacting in a controlled situation, and their respective
              status's in the organization, genders, and nonverbal behaviors will be
              recorded.    The value o f the work will be (a) in providing a wide set of
              definitions of dominance/status, (b) in relating dominance/status to a wide
              range of nonverbal skills and behaviors, (c) in conducting studies in both
              laboratory and field settings, (d) in addressing  key gaps in  current
              knowledge and theory, variables to nonverbal communication, and (e) in testing
              whether these relations are capable of statistically accounting for sex
              differences in the nonverbal communication skills and behaviors observed.  The
              significance of the research goes beyond the study of gender.  For example,
              subtle nonverbal cues indicating dominance and subordination may help to
              express and maintain racism, through self-fulfilling interpersonal
              expectations.  And, in work environments, hierarchical roles may be hard to
              break down due to employees' continued but unconscious use of dominance and
              subordination cues.  ons of the ways that different things relate to each other
              at specific places and the ways that places are connected with each other.    
              The study of     i                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           i 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         !         !         !         !     
                      D                                                             i        
              i     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                             s   "
                          h     7  e7  e          h             >    Hall Abstract    Denise
              A. Spain Denise A. Spain                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
