Title       : Flow-Induced Orientation in Liquid Crystalline Polymers and its Influence on the
               manufacture of Precision-Molded Parts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9311795

Award Number: 9311795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale S. Pearson  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn H. Fredrickson ghf@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              L. Gary Leal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9165,
Abstract    :
              This is a CRISP (Combined Research - Industrial Sabbatical                     
              Program) proposal for a joint project between the UCSB and AT&T                
              Bell Laboratories.  The main objective is to control the                       
              molecular structure and orientation of liquid crystalline                      
              polymers (LCPs) during injection molding in order to obtain                    
              precise manufactured parts and increased electrical                            
              conductivity.  The research approach combines molecular theory                 
              modeling to predict the behavior of LCP melts, experimental                    
              studies of their rheological and optical microstructural                       
              properties, and various precision molding processes.  The                      
              selected model thermotropic LCP is well suited for rheological                 
              and structural studies, and will open a more fundamental                       
              approach to characterize the LCPs as compared to previous                      
              studies.  The project will use resources at the UCSB and  AT&T                 
              Bell Laboratories.  According to the CRISP requirements, the PI                
              will submit a report to NSF after the completion of the                        
              industrial visit of Prof. Pearson in order to evaluate a                       
              possible redirection of research.                                              
                                                                                             
              Applications include high accuracy interconnection parts used                  
              in the fiber optics and electronics industry, with an immediate                
              use in the construction of the AT&T nationwide data network.                   
              The selected LCP is the base for development of an "enabling"                  
              technology in high precision molding, with optoelectronic                      
              devices as a first application area.
