Title       : Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Open-Shell van der Waals Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9320094

Award Number: 9320094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Heaven heaven@euch4e.chem.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Prof. M. Heaven of the Chemistry Department of Emory University   will study
              the weak bonding interactions and predissociation dynamics of   open shell van
              der Waals molecules.  Specifically, the van der Waals   complexes formed by the
              hydroxyl, cyanogen and methyne radicals with rare   gas atoms will be
              investigated.   The excited electronic states will be   characterized by  high
              resolution fluorescence excitation spectroscopy,   fluorescence depletion
              spectroscopy, and quantum beat measurements.  The   electronic ground states
              will be probed by stimulated emission pumping   techniques.  For the lighter
              systems, ab initio calculations of the   potential energy surfaces will be
              performed to complement the   experimental results.  Electronic and vibrational
              predissociation will be   investigated through wavelength resolved fluorescence
              and pulsed laser   pump-probe measurements.    The study of weakly bound van
              der Waals complexes is one of the frontier   areas of contemporary physical
              chemistry.  While numerous van der Waals   complexes formed by stable (closed
              shell)  molecules have been   investigated, the study of such complexes in
              which one of the component   members is a radical (molecular fragment) is still
              in its early stages.     Owing to the presence of significant electron spin
              couplings of the   radical with its closed shell partner, theoretical models
              developed for   the bonding interactions in closed shell van der Waals
              complexes are not   applicable to open shell systems.  This research provides
              an important   data base for open shell van der Waals complexes for the
              development of   theoretical models of these systems.  The results of this
              research are of   direct relevance to work on collisional processes involving
              open shell   diatomics which is currently pursued in several laboratories.
