Title       : Phospholipid Acylation in Cotyledons of Cotton Seedlings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9320047

Award Number: 9320047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent D. Chapman chapman@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1227,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Chapman  9320047  Phospholipids are an integral component of all biological 
              membranes.  The phospholipid composition of intracellular membranes  is highly
              variable.  Differences in phospholipid composition  determine the specific
              properties of the membrane; its physical  properties and its function. 
              Retailoring of phospholipids, such as  deacylation or acylation of phospholipid
              chains in existing  membranes, may be an important mechanism that the cell has
              for  rapidly adjusting membrane function in response to changing  environmental
              conditions, such as temperature, salt concentration,  water activity, etc. 
              Although there has been growing interest in  the role of membrane lipid
              metabolism as a way to protect against  environmental stress, retailoring
              mechanisms of existing membrane  phospholipids has received less attention. 
              The aim of this  research program is to examine the role of biochemical
              pathway(s)  that support the incorporation of acyl moieties into existing plant
               membrane phospholipids.  This is accomplished by a pathway  different from the
              ordinary plant biosynthetic pathway for de novo  phospholipid synthesis.  The
              specific aim of this research program  is to delineate the biochemical
              pathway(s) leading to this unusual  acyl-group incorporation into preformed
              cottonseed membrane  phospholipids and to identify the enzyme(s) involved in
              the  process.  %%%  This is a basic research project to determine how plant
              cells can  efficiently regulate the chemical composition of their membranes to 
              resist destructive changes in their environment, such as  temperature, salt
              concentrations, water activity, etc.  Although  the effects of environmental
              stress on lipid biosynthesis in  membrane formation have been a subject of
              research for some time to  explain the development of plant resistance, changes
              in  phospholipid chemistry in existing membranes has not.  Experiments  will be
              conducted to determine how plants can change the structure  of membrane
              phospholipids and identify the enzymes  involved.  This  research should
              significantly increase our understanding and  ability to control resistance to
              environmental stress in plants.  ***
