Title       : Chemistry of High-Energy Content Reagents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1994      
File        : a9320375

Award Number: 9320375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Froelich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The photochemical, photophysical, and spectroscopic properties of ion   pairs
              formed from cationic dyes and anionic borates will be studied. The   first
              question to be considered will be  whether or not the boranyl   radicals formed
              by one electron oxidation of borates are bound species.   This will be
              addressed by application of time-resolved spectroscopic   methods on picosecond
              and femtosecond time-scales. Since the lifetime of   boranyl radicals is too
              short to permit measurement of the oxidation   potential by electrochemical
              means, a kinetic method based on the   Rehm-Weller equation will be applied to
              estimate their potentials. A   series of borates will be prepared to
              investigate the effect of steric   crowding in the borate upon the oxidation
              potential. Penetrated ion pairs   will be prepared that have different
              encounter distances, orientation,   and free energy changes for photoinitiated
              electron transfer reactions.   With these various penetrated ion pairs, factors
              that control forward and   back electron transfer will be analyzed.     This
              grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work   of
              Professor Gary B. Schuster at the University of Illinois. Ion pairs   will be
              formed from positively charged dyes and negatively charged   borates. The
              borates contain a total of four other carbon containing   groups ( alkyl or
              aryl groups) bonded to the boron atom. These ion pairs   will be irradiated
              with light which is absorb by the dye. An electron   will be transfer from the
              dye to the borate, which will in turn cause an   alkyl group to dissociate from
              boron in the form of a free radical (a   carbon species with one unpaired
              electron). The efficiency of this   reaction, which depends in part on the
              back-transfer of an electron to   give the starting ion pair, will be studied
              as a function of the   structure of the ion pair. These ion pairs have
              practical importance,   since they can initiate polymerization upon irradiation
              with visible and   infrared light. The wide co mmercial application of polymers
              makes these   ion pairs of commercial interest.
