Title       : Closed-Form Angle Estimation with Circular Arrays/Apertures for Mobile/Cellular
               Communications and Surveillance Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9320890

Award Number: 9320890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Zoltowski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The digital communications industry is currently investing a  plethora of
              resources towards the development and experimental  verification of prototype
              antenna arrays to be deployed on mobile  communication vehicles, including the
              commercial automobile of the  future, as a means of discriminating amongst
              signals co-located in  frequency based on their respective spatial locations. 
              Given the  small aperture on a mobile communications unit, the uniform 
              circular array (UCA) geometry is ideal due to its rotational  invariance with
              respect to azimuth.  This research is based on a  recent breakthrough by the
              principal investigator: the development  of a simple, closed form algorithm for
              use in conjunction with a  UCA that provides automatically paired source
              azimuth and elevation  angle estimates.  In contrast, the algorithms for 2D
              arrival-angle  estimation to date have required expensive spectral searches, 
              iterative solutions to multidimensional optimization problems, or  ad-hoc
              schemes for pairing direction cosine estimates with respect  to each of a
              number of different array axes.  Note that UCA-ESPRIT  is fundamentally
              different from ESPRIT in that it is not based on  a displacement invariance
              array structure but rather is based on  phase mode excitation and hinges on a
              recursive relationship  between Bessel functions.    A theoretical performance
              analysis of UCA-ESPRIT is being  conducted.  This will prove extremely useful
              for predicting its  performance in a mobile communications environment.  Novel 
              strategies for incorporating mutual coupling effects are being  developed as
              well.  The real world performance of UCA-ESPRIT will  be assessed with
              experimental data from a prototype circular  antenna array currently being
              built at the Polytechnic University  of Madrid for mobile sea communications
              with the INMARSAT satellite  system.  Adaptations of UCA-ESPRIT for filled
              circular arrays are  also being developed.
