Title       : Quantile Regression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9320555

Award Number: 9320555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177143             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Koenker Rkoenker@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9320555  Koenker    Quantile regression is gradually developing into a
              comprehensive  approach to the statistical analysis of linear and non-linear 
              response models.  By supplementing the exclusive focus of least-  squares-based
              methods on the estimation of conditional mean  functions, with a general
              technique for estimating conditional  quantile functions, it has greatly
              expanded the flexibility of  both parametric and non-parametric statistical
              methods.  Research  is proposed on methods of inference for quantile
              regression,  nonparametric quantile regression and smoothing, and economic 
              applications.  The new applications of quantile regression  include
              non-parametric demand analysis and related welfare  economics, several
              applications to time-series analysis,  extensions to errors-in-variables and
              more general multivariate  settings, and applications to survival analysis and
              duration  models.    There is already a well-developed theory of asymptotic
              inference  for quantile regression.  However, when inference on discrete 
              quantiles is desired, as is increasingly common in econometric  applications,
              one is faced with a rather bewildering array of  methods based on direct
              estimation of the asymptotic covariance  matrix, an approach which involves
              estimation of the reciprocal  of the error density at the quantile of interest,
              or some form of  the bootstrap.  Versions of both approaches are available in 
              existing econometric packages.  Recently, however, three  alternative
              approaches to inference have emerged.  All of the new  approaches share the
              advantage that they circumvent the necessity  to directly estimate error
              density.  This project will compare   systematically the available methods for
              constructing confidence  intervals and for linear hypothesis testing.
