Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research On Metal Promoted Reactions of Boron Hyrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9320834

Award Number: 9320834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27638              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry G. Sneddon lsneddon@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320834  Sneddon    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Larry G. Sneddon, 
              Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, to pursue  with Professor
              Sang Ook Kang, Department of Chemistry, Korea  University, for 36 months, a
              program of cooperative research on  metal promoted reactions of boron hydrides.
               The focus of this  cooperative research is the development of new, high yield 
              synthetic routes for the construction of important polyhedral  boron compounds.
               This research will emphasize the development of  transition metal reagents and
              catalysts, similar to those  employed in organic and organometallic chemistry,
              to activate  polyhedral boron compounds for reaction.    Because of their
              unique chemical and physical properties,  polyhedral boron compounds are of
              great academic and industrial  interest.  These compounds have a number of
              important properties  that give rise to potential applications as burn rate
              modifiers,  neutron-capture cancer agents, high temperature polymers, and 
              ceramic precursors.  Further research in this area has been  seriously hampered
              by the lack of general synthetic procedures.   Much of the synthetic part of
              the project will be performed in  Korea, where Professor Kang has recently
              discovered several new  reagents which have potential applications to promote
              new types  of boron hydride reactions.  Success of the project will depend 
              greatly on the sophisticated characterization techniques  available in the PI's
              laboratory.  The collaborators are highly  respected researchers in the field
              of the proposal.  This project  is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
              Cooperative  Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation 
              between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the  exchange of
              scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques  and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean  participation in the
              project is supported by the Korea Science  and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). 
              This project adds an   international cooperative dimension to the PI's research
              under  NSF Grant No. CHE-9001063.  ***
