Title       : The Evolution of Complex Societies in Bunyoro-Kitara, Uganda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9320392

Award Number: 9320392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Robertshaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320392  Robertshaw    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Peter
              Robertshaw  and his colleagues will conduct archaeological research in the 
              region of Bunyoro-Kitara which is located in Uganda. Prior work  has revealed
              the presence of large earthworks which bespeak to  the past presence of large
              scale highly organized societies. More  recent work by Dr. Robertshaw has also
              located numerous  archaeological sites which are not associated with such 
              structures. Over the course of three field seasons the team plans  to excavate
              a series of these sites. During the first season the  potential for excavation
              of known earthworks will be assessed,  further archaeological surveys will be
              conducted and a program of  thermoluminescence dating of pottery will be
              initiated. During  the second season, work will focus on the intensive
              excavation of  several sites. It is anticipated that this will result in the 
              location of both elite and commoner areas and the recovery of  substantial
              samples of artifacts, and vegetal and faunal remains  which will provide a
              basis for the reconstruction of social  organization and economy. In the final
              season, an additional site  will be excavated, survey will continue and
              recovered materials  will be analyzed.    Archaeologists wish to understand how
              complex social units such  as states arise. Evidence indicates that this
              process took place  independently in many parts of the world and through
              comparison  of individual cases it should be possible to discern the 
              underlying causes responsible. Although relatively little work  has been done
              in this area, Africa has much to contribute.  European explorers, when they
              entered this region, found well  developed states and many have been
              ethnographically described.  Because groups in the region have extensive oral
              traditions, this  source of data provides valuable additional insight. However
              very  little archaeological work has been done and the prehistory of  these
              observed entities is poorly understood. Dr. Robertshaw's   research should help
              to correct this situation.    This research is important for several reasons.
              It will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It should increase
              our  understanding of how state formation takes place and will  encourage
              international collaboration between U.S. and African  scientists.  ***
