Title       : Collaborative Research on Competition Between Public and Private Schools and
               Education Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1995       
File        : a9320988

Award Number: 9320988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis N. Epple epple@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1041,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320988  Epple  The purpose of this research is to develop and analyze a model
              of  school choice at the primary and secondary level that  incorporates
              competition between private and public schools.  The  model will be used to
              estimate the effects of various public  policy alternatives such as vouchers
              and neighborhood versus open  enrollment public schools.  Students are
              characterized by an  ability level and household income.  A student's
              educational   achievement is dependent on one's own ability and on the 
              abilities of his classmates.  The model characterizes the sorting  of students
              by income and ability across schools in the public  and private school sectors,
              taking into account financial aid  policies of private schools.  A
              computational model paralleling  the theoretical model is developed and used to
              explore properties  of the model and investigate policy predictions.  This
              research  is important because it will shed light on the consequences of an 
              educational system which incorporates a greater degree of school  choice at the
              primary and secondary levels.  ***  9320980  Romano  The purpose of this
              research is to develop and analyze a model of  school choice at the primary and
              secondary level that  incorporates competition between private and public
              schools.  The  model will be used to estimate the effects of various public 
              policy alternatives such as vouchers and neighborhood versus open  enrollment
              public schools.  Students are characterized by an  ability level and household
              income.  A student's educational   achievement is dependent on one's own
              ability and on the  abilities of his classmates.  The model characterizes the
              sorting  of students by income and ability across schools in the public  and
              private school sectors, taking into account financial aid  policies of private
              schools.  A computational model paralleling  the theoretical model is developed
              and used to explore properties  of the model and investigate policy
              predictions.  This research  is important because it will s hed light on the
              consequences of an  educational system which incorporates a greater degree of
              school  choice at the primary and secondary levels.  ***
