Title       : Effects of Greenland Ice on the Earth's Gravity, Crustal Deformation, and Tilt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9320568

Award Number: 9320568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93223              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew S. Trupin trupin@lucy.vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a theoretical and modeling effort to determine the  effects
              of the Greenland ice sheet on the rotation and gravity field of  Earth.  To
              accomplish the goals, the secular and interannual changes in  the geopotential,
              the position in the Earth's rotation axis and certain  other parameters, such
              as center-of-mass motion and length of day will  be calculated from mass
              balance changes in ice.  The largest  gravitational effects of ice thickness
              change shown in simple models are  up to many times higher than the observed
              effects. This suggests that  the viscous response of the mantle to long term
              changes in ice loading  may be cancelling some of the elastic response. 
              Current changes in  gravity and crustal motion depend critically on the time
              lagged response  of the Earth's mantle to previous loading histories, lasting
              as long as  tens of thousands of years.  Spatial and temporal changes in mass 
              balance from late Pleistocene deglaciation and the subsequent  interglacial
              period will be combined with current mass balance estimates  to assemble time
              histories for ice thickness throughout the ice sheet.  From these histories,
              the elastic results for gravity, rotation and  deformation can be corrected by
              the use of glacial rebound models, such  as the visco-elastic spherical Earth
              model. The viscous correction to  the elastic loading for several cases of late
              Pleistocene deglaciation  and more recent thickness change will be calculated
              for various upper  and lower mantle viscosity profiles.  A 20 kilometer by 20
              kilometer  grid will provide means of projecting the viscous rebound rates for
              the  point mass model into the non-pointlike structure of the Greenland ice 
              sheet.    In addition to gravity, the components of crustal deformation and
              tilt  are important in geodetic measurements from space.  This project will 
              also assess the impact that future observational improvements will have  on
              understanding the mass balance of Greenland.  The observational  improvements
              are anticipated fr om global positioning system (GPS)  studies and studies
              involving satellites that use laser ranging.    The use of existing gridded
              meteorological, accumulation, ablation, and  ice thickness data, along with ice
              flow models to predict future ice  thickness changes in Greenland is expected
              to greatly reduce the  difficulty in calculating gravity coefficients and
              crustal motion for  both the elastic and viscous cases. The effects of the
              possible changes  in the position of the upper boundary of appreciable summer
              snow melt  that roughly follows the periphery of the ice sheet  called the
              Benson  line  can be used to predict vertical motion near the ice sheet
              boundary  and the results may be checked against sea level records, where they 
              exist. Greenland strain and velocity data may be used to estimate  retention
              time of new accumulation and the rates of discharge at the  perimeter of the
              ice sheet.  The sensitivity of ice model contributions  to the total mass loss
              (or gain) to the oceans and to changes in other  ice systems will also be
              investigated.    Anticipated results include high resolution surface models of
              gravity,   deformation, and tilt for the Greenland Ice Sheet, based on
              refinements  of existing models of ice thickness change, and corrected for the 
              viscous response of the mantle.  Since these results are expected to  fall
              within the detectable range of GPS receivers and possibly absolute  gravity
              meters, they may be tested against space and ground based  geodetic
              observations.  This research will lead to a better  understanding of the
              dynamic relationship between ice sheets and Earth's  crust.
