Title       : Maria Goeppert Mayer: A Scientific Biography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1994     
File        : a9320203

Award Number: 9320203
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen E. Johnson kjohnson@stlawu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Lawrence University
	      
	      Canton, NY  13617    315/379-5011

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320203  Johnson  Being a successful scientist is extraordinarily difficult: 
              one  must have the intelligence to master extremely difficult material,  the
              creativity to come up with solutions to problems which vex the  best minds in
              your discipline, the stamina to pursue leads in long  hours of research in
              laboratories or in field work, the ambition to  beat out one's competitors, and
              the wisdom (called "luck" by those  who fail to understand how science works)
              to seize opportunities  which fortuitously come ones way.  These traits are
              required for  any scientist.  Women scientists, however, need additional 
              qualities to be successful.  They face social, cultural and gender  biases that
              militate against their success.  This problem is not  just the problem of women
              entering a predominately male field,  though male colleagues have placed
              barriers in the path of women  scientists.  Social traditions and demands
              provide additional  barriers:  married women traditionally have extra burdens
              at home  that their male counterparts do not carry;  women who are mothers 
              have primary child-rearing responsibilities; and society frowns on  women with
              the traits (eg. ambition) necessary to be a success in  science.     
              Unfortunately, studies of women in science too frequently  concentrate on the
              social aspects of the problems women face  without integrating the scientific
              difficulties or these studies  concentrate on the technical scientific problems
              without adequately  understanding the social components.  Dr. Johnson is the
              rare  individual who understands both the social and the scientific  aspects of
              these issues.    Dr. Johnson is studying Maria Goeppert Mayer, Nobel laureate
              in  nuclear physics in 1963.  Mayer made extensive contributions not  just in
              nuclear physics, but also atomic, chemical and molecular  physics.  She was
              married to the chemist Joseph E. Mayer, and their  influence on each other's
              science was substantial.  Dr. Johnson is  addressing Maria Goeppert Mayer's
              scientific contributions,  her  experience as a woman in 20th century physics,
              and the role her  marriage played in her career.    ***
