Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spontaneous Generation Controversies: Scientific
               Politics, Evolution, and Molecular Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9320251

Award Number: 9320251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5880               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald L. Geison gerry@Princeton.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9320251  Geison  Spontaneous generation--the theory that living cells can 
              "spontaneously" develop from inert matter--has had a long,  controversial
              history.  The "correct" view since the 19th century  is that spontaneous
              generation does not occur.  Yet, unless there  was some point in the history of
              the universe in which spontaneous  generation of life occurred, then
              evolutionists are confronted with  two options:  divine intervention or the
              existence of "vital"  matter.  While neither of these options are inconsistent
              with  evolution, they implicitly undermine evolutionary theory and, at  least
              in the first option, play into the hands of creationists.  If  a god had to
              intervene at least once to create life, what prevents  that god from
              intervening again to direct the development of  species?  So how is it that
              biologists have worked so energetically  to disprove spontaneous generation? 
              This is the issue that James  Strick, under the direction of Dr. Gerald Geison,
              is examining in  his doctoral dissertation.    Mr. Strick has found that the
              spontaneous generation controversies  in Britain offer a unique window into
              many areas of biological  theory developing in the 19th century.  These areas
              include  biological explanations of inheritance, development, evolution, 
              generation and cell theory.  The debates over spontaneous  generation reveal
              how thoroughly entwined into a single problem  complex all these areas were, to
              a greater extent than has been  appreciated previously.  In addition, ideas in
              biology and physics  about the nature of molecules and their role as simplest
              elements  of life underwent rapid change during this period, exemplified by 
              the debate over the significance of Brownian motion and Brown's  "active
              molecules."  This was an integral strand of the problem  complex which has been
              almost totally ignored.  Any attempt to  explain why spontaneous generation
              lost favor so decisively after  1880 must explore all of these clusters of
              ideas which were pillars  of support for sponta neous generation theories. 
              Shifts in  institutional power between the medical community and programs in 
              experimental biology also played a major part in the demise of  spontaneous
              generation theories.  The maneuvering for control of  prestige and power in
              British science by the Darwinian "X-club"  during this period involved
              rhetorical strategies to make  evolutionary theory more respectable by actively
              disengaging it  from the traditionally linked doctrine of spontaneous
              generation.   In order to undertake this study, Mr. Strick is examining
              archives  in the United States, Great Britain and France--the centers of 
              scientific work on this issue.  ***
