Title       : Dissertation Research: The Lough Swilly Archaeological Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9320499

Award Number: 9320499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9240               (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9198,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9320499  Price    Under the direction of Dr. Douglas Price, Mr. Michael Kimball 
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Working with a  team of
              volunteers, he will conduct systematic survey of the  Lough Swilly region of
              County Donegal, Ireland. Researchers will  walk over large areas of exposed
              ground and note stone tool  scatters and other archaeological occurrences. On
              the basis of  artifact types, many of these can then be dated to time period. 
              The data will be plotted and analyzed by Geographic Information  System. In
              this way it will be possible to reconstruct settlement  patterns in different
              time periods and relate these to geographic  features. The work will reveal the
              shifting interaction between  landscape and human society and relate changes to
              subsistence  technique.    Mr. Kimball will focus on the period of the
              Mesolithic-Neolithic  transition. The former, which follows immediately on the
              end of  the last glaciation marks the end of a hunting and gathering way  of
              life in Northern Europe. In the succeeding Neolithic period,  populations
              adopted a lifestyle based on domesticated plants and  animals. Archaeologists
              wish to understand how this change took  place and how it affected human use of
              the landscape. It is  unclear whether population replacement occurred or
              whether  Mesolithic inhabitants gradually incorporated agriculture and 
              pastoralism into a hunting and gathering way of life. Mr.  Kimball's work will
              help to answer this question.    This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed
              new light  on human change and adaptability and how humans interact with the 
              natural environment. It will also assist in the training of a  promising young
              scientist.
