Title       : The Professional Autonomy of Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1994      
File        : a9320166

Award Number: 9320166
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25384              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Davis davism@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320166  Davis  Engineers sometimes claim that their status as employees denies 
              them the autonomy necessary to be true professionals.  The  purpose of this
              research is to provide a framework for answering  the question whether and when
              engineers have enough autonomy in  the workplace to act as professionals.  To
              provide this  framework, the research will bring recent philosophical analysis 
              of moral autonomy to bear on the question of professional  autonomy, will draw
              relevant material from earlier work on the  autonomy of engineers in the
              workplace to examine the conditions  for professional autonomy there, and will
              sketch programs of  empirical research that might build on these results to
              answer  questions about the actual professional autonomy of engineers.   The
              research aims to develop a position on professions and  autonomy that can pass
              three tests:  It must be consistent with  working in a large organization; it
              must be empirically testable:  and it must be useful in evaluating whether
              different kinds of  work organization will impede or enhance professional
              autonomy.   This research contributes to three fields, the sociology of 
              engineering, the philosophy of professions, and engineering  ethics.  A better
              developed conception of professional autonomy  may help with other practical
              questions in the ethics of  engineering and science.  Current conceptions of
              moral autonomy  applied to the workplace do not help us to understand either
              the  moral implications of professional constraints or the general  consistency
              of corporate organization and professional  responsibility.  Because the
              proposed project would help us to  understand engineers in context, it should
              contribute as well to  overall understanding of what engineers do.  Results
              will be  disseminated through presentations and articles.    ***
