Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1994  
File        : a9320419

Award Number: 9320419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tse-yun Feng                            
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oussama Khatib ok@robotics.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320419  Khatib     The general thrust of this effort is to develop mobile
              manipulation systems with ever-increasing degrees of autonomy.  The equipment,
              two  mobile robots with manipulators, will be used for the research projects 
              outlined below:     Robotic Material Handling Assistants: Autonomous transport
              of material through complex domains is a task that might be considered beyond
              the current capability of robotic systems.  Construction areas are a prime
              example of such an environment.  However, a set of cooperating robotic
              "assistants" with human guidance could accomplish just such a task, increasing
              productivity and decreasing the risk of injury.  The goal in this project is to
              develop such a set of mobile robotic assistants.  Initially, these robots would
              be guided in their actions by a human "master."  As the project progresses,
              ever-increasing levels of autonomy would be exhibited, increasing the dexterity
              of the system.     Visual Sensing for Mobile Robots: The project is aimed to
              develop real-time visual sensing capabilities for mobile robots.  This goal
              offers a considerable challenge, but it is a crucial step that must be taken to
              bring mobile robots into real-world unstructured task environments.  This work
              starts by implementing and evaluating a variety of vision algorithms using two
              experimental setups: a stereo platform and motion analysis stage.  The results
              of the research will be both a systematic comparison, and possibly combination,
              of existing algorithms, as well as a benchmark of calibrated image data to be
              used at Stanford and by others in the field.     Cooperation among Autonomous
              Mobile Age nts: Several aspects of cooperation will be investigated, including
              communication modality, cooperation strategy, type of information or service
              exchanged, and degree of responsibility exchanged.  The focus will be on agents
              that have advanced cognitive and physical capabilities and considerable
              autonomy. Their interactions will be discretionary and opportunistic,
              reflecting an explicit (but usually incomplete) understanding of their own
              capabilities, goals, and plans, along with those of their cooperative partners.
                  Research on Autonomous Agents: In this project, the goal is to provide
              robotic systems with a high degree of run-time "conditionality" which are
              capable of adapting to complex and changing environments.  ***            `    
              $  AUTOEXEC33            Xt    V   LM                     VW @$    CONFIG  BAK 
                        V        CONFIG  OLD           nW        WIN31                  X    
                 9320419  Khatib     The general thrust of this effort is to develop mobile
              manipulation systems with ever-increasing degrees of                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   y   {   2   4                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      $      
                           $         $         $              G                             M
                          M                                      Times    Symbol  " Helvetica
                 Chicago    Times New Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New  R ZapfDingbats   
              Palatino    Greek    GenMath    MathMeteor    MT Extra       &   &         &   
                     "                   b  eFj                          8    Khatib/Stanford
                 Mark Purvis Mark Purvis                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
