Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9320154

Award Number: 9320154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tuz C. Ting                             
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72337              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Shelley shelley@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Muraki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Peskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Stephen Childress  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ken R. Kay  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320154  Shelley     A color graphics workstation, with accessories and
              software, will be acquired to advance research projects, all involving
              large-scale multi-dimensional scientific computation, in computational fluid
              dynamics, physics, nonlinear optics, and biology.     One research project will
              use computer visualization and animation to comprehend large-scale simulations
              of complex fluid flows, develop good numerical methods for such problems, and
              to disseminate these results to the scientific community.  These problems
              include computation and modeling of topology transitions and singularity
              formation in fluid flows (vortex reconnection and bubble formation), and
              computation of multi-phase flows with surface tensions.     Another research
              project will apply computer graphics to research on computer simulation of the
              heart.  It will be used to construct and improve the heart model, to debug the
              code, to visualize the resulting computer experiments, to compare the
              simulational results with experimental observations, and to communicate the
              results to others.  Comprehending the heart model involves simultaneous
              visualization of a deformable structure and the fluid it contains, all
              requiring the rapid manipulation of massive amounts of data.     A third
              project will make numerical studies of magnetic structures in two-dimensional
              unsteady flow fields.  At large magnetic Reynolds numbers, small-scale
              structures associated with fast dynamo action in stretching flows will be
              identified, and comparisons made with theoretical dynamo models.  Color-coding
              of field strength and studying the field evolution using videotaped se quences
              at about 60 frames/cycle, should allow direct determination of the mechanism of
              field amplification.     Finally, research will be done on computational
              investigations addressing current issues of spatial complexity in 3-d nonlinear
              optical systems.  One computational study is of mathematical models for the
              nonlinear evolution of self-focused laser beams in systems which do not display
              transverse collapse.  In some cases, the beam profiles develop multiple
              filaments, corroborating experimental observations of these finely-interwoven
              optical structures will be considerably enhanced by fully three-dimensional
              computer visualizations.  ***            ECEXE           @ j   i   SSMARQUESCR 
                       @ j    B  SSMYST  SCR           @ j    L  SSSTARS SCR           @ j   
              D  TADA    WAV           @ j &  l  TARTAN  BMP           @ j 4 v   TERMINALEXE 
                       @ j E  B  TERMINALHLP           @ j       9320154  Shelley     A color
              graphics workstation, with accessories and software, will be acquired to
              advance research projects,    |                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                ^   `   o   q   \   ^   w   |                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                $         $  
                    $              G                                   |                     
                           |          Times    Symbol  " Helvetica    Chicago    Times New
              Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New  R ZapfDingbats    Palatino    Greek    GenMath  
               MathMeteor    MT Extra                                 "                     
              e   e                        4    Shelley/NYU    Mark Purvis Mark Purvis       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
