Title       : SGER: Development and Testing of a "Generic" K+ Channel Antibody
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1995   
File        : a9320336

Award Number: 9320336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geza Hrazdina                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald A. Berkowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9320336  Berkowitz, Gerald A.    Progress toward the molecular characterization
              of K+-channels is hindered by lack of a probe which can selectively identify
              these proteins in membrane preparations, and in translation products of cDNA's.
               A research program was initiated and aimed at developing such a probe by
              generating antibodies to a short peptide corresponding to the deduced amino
              acid sequence in the pore of the protein which acts as a selectivity filter,
              and is highly conserved in known K+ channels.  The objective of the work is to
              evaluate  the usefulness of the antibody by examining it's affinity for a broad
              range of K+ channels, and it's selectivity for this class of proteins.  The
              work will involve immunoblot analysis of the antibody's reactivity with known
              K+ channels in native membranes (chloroplast inner envelope) and in
              heterologous systems expressing products of K+ channel cDNA's (KAT1 K+ channel
              cDNA in yeast, drkl cDNA in kidney cell lines, and Shab, Shaw, Shal and KAT1
              cDNAs in E. coli).  %%%  The laboratory made use of an unusual technique to
              raise a specific antibody to a specific part of the K+ channel protein that is
              common to all known K+ channels.  The goal of the project is to show proof that
              this antibody is "generic", that means that it recognizes all K+ channels,
              irrespective of  the system it is used in.  Since it is presently generally
              assumed that the method used in the antibody production will not work, and
              therefore no specific probes can be generated, such a proof is necessary.  This
              is a "high risk, high reward" pioneering study that is well suited to the Small
              Grants for Exploratory R esearch program.  ***                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     }                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                !         !         !              F         
                                                                                 (    Times
              New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                                 "             h   
                "  $"                          5        Dr. Geza Hrazdina Dr. Geza Hrazdina  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
