Title       : Mechanisms of Learning and Performance in Conditioning Paradigms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1994 
File        : a9320430

Award Number: 9320430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19719              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn Aronson   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Gibbon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Res Found For Mental Hyg
	      1051 Riverside Drive
	      New York, NY  10032    212/543-5801

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                              This research will examine the factors which translate what  one
              knows into what one does.  When humans or animals learn  something there are
              times when that learning is turned into  action and times when it is not. 
              However, when learning is  not acted upon it does not mean that the knowledge 
              originally has been lost.  This research uses a simple  animal model of this
              type of learning situation to examine  the status of learning as the
              performance based on that  learning changes.  Pigeons are trained to associate
              a light  with the delivery of food.  The learning of this association  is
              evidenced by the pigeons' pecking at the light.  It is  known that if the
              relationship between the light and the  food delivery is changed, the pigeons
              may stop pecking at  the light.  But it is also known that this cessation of 
              responding does not mean that the pigeons "forgot" that the  light and the food
              are associated.  Under some conditions  the pigeons will start pecking the
              light once again.  This  means that the pecking evoked by the light is not a
              good  indicator of the status of the pigeons' knowledge about the  light. 
              Therefore, the research to be conducted uses two  methods of Pavlovian
              conditioning, blocking tests and second  order conditioning tests, to assess
              the status of  associations (like that between the light and food) 
              independently of responding.  The use of these procedures  will help the PI to
              understand the conditions under which  associations are acted upon and the
              conditions under which  knowledge about a particular association can be
              changed.  Simple associations are the building blocks of learning.  Therefore,
              to gain a fuller understanding of behavior,  whether animal or human, one needs
              a clearer understanding  of the determinants of basic learning and performance 
              processes.  The research to be conducted under this grant  aims to broaden the
              understanding of behavior by examining  the relationship between what one knows
              and what one does.
