Title       : Strategic Planning's Role in Establishing University Policies and Plans for
               Teaching, Research and Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1995   
File        : a9320680

Award Number: 9320680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard L. Lederman                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76578              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alton L. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              92        Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9320680  Taylor    STRATEGIC PLANNING'S ROLE IN ESTABLISHING UNIVERSITY POLICIES
              AND              PLANS FOR TEACHING, RESEARCH AND SERVICE    Universities are
              under pressure to contain costs as a result of  declining revenue growth and
              competing priorities.  Also,  universities are being criticized by the public
              for neglecting  undergraduate students in favor of research activities. With
              cost  containment and reallocation counterpoised against calls for  research
              investment, and with old assumptions being questioned,  higher education
              officials are searching for techniques to  maintain the quality of their
              programs while stabilizing or  downsizing their institutions and controlling
              costs.    This study seeks to extend earlier research by determining the  role
              institutional planning plays with respect to fundamental  mission issues
              affecting graduate, research universities.  The  study will examine a set of
              issues and planning processes at the  institution, college and department
              levels at ten Carnegie  Classification Research I universities, five public and
              five  private.    Data collection will include institutional planning
              documents,  research policies, organizational charts, annual reports from 
              engineering and science departments, and related documents.  Selected
              institutional officials will be interviewed concerning  planning approaches and
              institutional mission. A survey will be  repeated (Larson, 1987) to detect any
              changes in planning  organization, policies, plans and attitudes that
              facilitate or  detract from engaging in strategic planning. A content analysis 
              approach will be used to analyze the data collected from the  interviews and
              institutional documents. A test of statistical  differences will be applied on
              all survey items for any  significant changes between the Larson survey and the
              survey in  this study.
