Title       : Structure-Rheology-Domain Texture Relationships in Thermotropic
               Liquid-Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9320351

Award Number: 9320351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles A. Garris                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chang D. Han cdhan@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9320351  University of Akron  P.I.:  Chang D. Han      It is
              proposed to investigate structure-rheology-domain texture relationships in
              thermotropic liquid-crystalline polymers (TLCPs).  For the investigation, a
              homologous series of aromatic homopolyester, poly (phenylsulfonyl)-p-phenylene
              bis(4-oxybenzoate)  with methylene units (CH2)n as flexible spacers (PSHQ),
              will be synthesized via solution polymerization.  On the basis of the
              preliminary study performed by the principal investigator who used
              decamethylene (CH2)10 as flexible spacers, PSHQ can be used as a model compound
              to study structure-rheology-domain texture relationships in TLCP because, owing
              to its relatively low clearing temperature, PSHQ allows one to control the
              initial condition (i.e., initial domain texture) by first heating to an
              isotropic state and then cooling slowly down to an anisotropic state.  In the
              synthesis of PSHQ the number of methylene units (i.e., n=7-16) will be varied,
              in order to investigate the effect of flexible spacer, especially the so-called
              'odd-even' effect, on the resulting rheological behavior and domain texture in
              the specimen.  The major thrust of the proposed research project is to enhance
              our understanding as to how the domain texture of TLCP, which depends on both
              thermal and shear histories, influences its rheological behavior, which in turn
              is affected by the orientational order of the polymer.  Therefore we propose to
              conduct, with emphasis on the 'odd-even' effect, the following investigations:
              (1) A rheo-optical study will be conducted to understand the relationship
              between the rheological behavior and the flow-induced textures of PSHQ; (2) The
              domain size and its distribution in PSHQ specimen will be determined, via image
              analysis, under well-controlled annealing conditions; (3) The orientational
              order parameter of PSHQ specimens will be determined, via solid-state nuclear
              magnetic resonance spectroscopy, as a function of temperature; (4) The
              persistence length of PSHQ will be  determined using dynamic light scattering;
              (5) An expression for the excluded volume (intermolecular) potential will be
              developed for PSHQ; and (6) The rheological behavior of PSHQ will be predicted
              by numerically solving the Doi Kinetic equation, by using the expression for
              the excluded volume potentia, which is to be developed in the proposed study.
