Title       : Direct Reconstruction of Surface Atomic Structures: Holography and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9320275

Award Number: 9320275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dilano K. Saldin dksaldin@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9320275  Saldin  Although electron diffraction techniques have been successful
              at  revealing many of the complex and unusual atomic structures which  exist at
              solid surfaces, they are hampered by their most common  methodology to date,
              which is to compare simulated diffraction  patterns for a large number of model
              structures with experiment.   Unfortunately, this limits their ability to
              determine complex  unknown structures because of the very large number of
              structural  parameters which need to be varied.  The computer time scaling of 
              such trial and error techniques is known to scale exponentially  with the
              number of optimized parameters (an NP-complete problem).    Recently,
              holographic techniques, as developed for optics, have  been shown to hold
              promise in overcoming some of these difficulties  for determining surface
              structure by electron diffraction.  This  research will use the only method
              that explicitly addresses the  nonlinear object wave terms whose non-negligible
              nature is the main  barrier to accurate structure determination by purely
              holographic  algorithms.  This method employs the unique idea of using a linear
               programming based algorithm to iteratively optimize the solution to  the
              nonlinear problem.  The theoretical work will be applied to  experimental data
              of low energy electron diffraction, Auger and  photoelectron diffraction from
              both clean and adsorbate-covered  surfaces.  %%%  This analytical and
              computational research will focus on a new way  of interpreting experiments
              that determine the atomic structures of  surfaces.  The method is analogous to
              that of holography as used in  optics.  In this case the experimental probes
              are electrons instead  of light.  Successful completion of this project will
              yield a rapid  and accurate method to determine surface structures.  This 
              determination is important for basic research, but is particularly  important
              in applications ranging from catalysis to corrosion.  ***
