Title       : The History of Cartography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9320895

Award Number: 9320895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Woodward dawoodwa@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320895  WOODWARD       Throughout human history, maps have been a means for the
               collection, storage, analysis, and dissemination of geographic  information. 
              Maps and the underlying cartographic concepts and  techniques used in their
              production have been important factors  in the development of human thought
              about the world in both  academic and practical contexts.  Maps reflect myriad
              cultural,  economic, political, social, scientific, and intellectual aspects 
              of human societies, and the different ways in which societies  have constructed
              and used maps provides insights into the ways  that different societies have
              viewed and interpreted their  environments.  Furthermore, maps have been a
              medium used by many  different scientific disciplines, so a more complete 
              understanding of how maps have evolved sheds light on the  development of
              interdisciplinary enterprises within science.  This award renews support for
              research and production of  references volumes produced by the History of
              Cartography  project.  Three volumes already have been published.  The first 
              volume focused on cartography in prehistoric, ancient, and  medieval Europe and
              the Mediterranean, the second and third dealt  with Asian cartography.  This
              award will facilitate completion of  volumes on cartography in other
              non-Western societies and  cartography in the European Renaissance, and it will
              contribute  to work on a volume examining cartography in the European 
              Enlightenment.  Each volume consists of essays that have been  commissioned
              from international experts who analyze and explain  relevant material from new
              theoretical perspectives.  Each  chapter is supplemented with full reference
              tables and lists of  maps, atlases (including their locations), cartographers,
              and  basic information.       Unlike other encyclopedic works that are
              descriptive,  idiosyncratic, and largely Eurocentric in character, this project
               involves considerable primary research into the ways that  cartography
              reflects its historical, cultural, socia l, and  technological contexts. 
              Authors of articles in the volumes also  make major philosophical and
              theoretical statements about the  importance of maps in different cultures and
              in the development  of scientific thought.  In addition to renewed support from
              NSF,  continued work on this project will be supported from a broad  range of
              other sources, including other federal agencies and  private sources.
