Title       : The Affect of Altered Ocean Heat Transports on Climate: Feedback Potential
               During Periods of Atmospheric Trace Gas Increase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9320372

Award Number: 9320372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391861             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Chandler mac59@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Rind  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vivien M. Gornitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas G. Martinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9320372  Chandler, Mark A.  Martinson, David  Gornitz, Vivien M. 
              Rind, David H.  Columbia University  Title: The Affect of Altered Ocean Heat
              Transports on Climate:          Feedback Potential During Periods of
              Atmospheric Trace Gas          Increase    The objective of this project is to
              investigate the decadal to  century-scale affects of ocean heat transports in
              numerical climate  change simulations.  The project uses the Goddard Institute
              for  Space Studies atmospheric general circulation model, coupled to an  ocean
              model that includes meridional transport of heat by the  oceans, to test
              directly whether changes in ocean heat transport  could enhance or ameliorate
              the effects of trace-gas-induced global  warming.  The project is designed as a
              three year, two phase study:   In the first phase, surface heat flux
              diagnostics from GCM  experiments will be used to calculate the potential ocean
              heat  transport associated with historical (20th century) anomalies in  sea
              surface temperatures and sea ice extent.  The SST and sea ice  anomalies will
              be acquired from the most comprehensive data sets  available including: COADS,
              Navy/NOAA, Walsh, ESMR, SMMR, and  SMM/I, all of which are currently in-house. 
              In addition, ocean  heat transports will be calculated from GCM simulations and
              proxy  data from the Little Ice Age (ca. 1700 AD) and Last Glacial Maximum 
              (ca. 18-2lky BP) in order to obtain larger variations of heat  fluxes that may
              be closer to the potential variability of the  system.  The second phase of the
              project focuses on simulations of  the climatic effects of altered ocean heat
              transports in  conjunction with transient trace gas increase scenarios.  Ten
              100-  year simulations are planned in which the ocean heat values,  calculated
              in phase one, will be used to perturb the normal pattern  of climate change
              associated with the atmospheric trace gas  increase.  The simulations in phase
              two will take approximately two  years to complete, based on estimates of the
              current comput ational  efficiency of the GISS 4ox5o GCM running on IBM
              RS/6000-580  workstation.  Individual transient experiments will be completed 
              and analyzed at the rate of one every three months.    The primary objective of
              this project is to identify patterns of  climate change that are associated
              with variability in the  air/sea/ice system and to estimate the potential ocean
              energy  feedbacks that may accompany climate changes induced by atmospheric 
              trace gas increase.  Fingerprinting of such climate patterns will  improve our
              ability to detect the signs of ocean-induced climate  change and can improve
              our ability to distinguish between natural  variability and anthropogenic
              climate change.  Furthermore, it will  provide us with a quantitative
              assessment of the oceans ability,  through energy transport feedbacks, to alter
              the climate  sensitivity and GCM predictions of future climate change.  In lieu
               of fully coupled atmosphere-ocean-ice models, which are unlikely to  reach a
              reliable predictive capacity in the near future, these  experiments provide the
              realistic alternative for gauging the  ability of the oceans to alter GCM
              future climate diagnoses.      This project is funded under the USGCRP NSF
              Climate Modeling,  Analysis and Prediction program.
