Title       : Spectroscopic Detection and Characterization of Chemical Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9320909

Award Number: 9320909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $903000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Prof. Terry A. Miller of the Ohio State University will conduct   fundamental
              investigations of chemical reaction intermediates and   clusters involving
              them.  The primary method for detection and   characterization of the species
              is high resolution spectroscopy.  The   species are produced in the cold,
              unreactive environment of a supersonic   jet expansion where they can be
              interrogated by bot moderate and very   high resolution laser induced
              fluorescence (LIF) spectroscopy.  Using the   same jet techniques, the zero
              kinetic energy (ZEKE) spectroscopy of the   chemically very important ions of a
              number of reactive, neutral free   radicals will be characterized.   Specific
              chemical intermediates to be   studied as neutrals and/or cations include
              alkoxy radicals and their   fluoro- and thio-derivatives, carbenes, amiodogen
              and related radicals,   and substituted methyl radicals (carbonium ions). 
              Concurrent theoretical   developments in fundamental spectroscopic theory,
              applied spectroscopic   analysis, and ab initio calculations on the chemical
              intermediates will   be undertaken.     Complex chemical reactions that occur
              in atmospheric, combustion, and   organic synthesis processes typically involve
              transient chemical   intermediates, such as free radicals and molecular ions,
              that determine   the overall result of the process.  Spectroscopic
              identification of the   intermediates is critical for the practical
              investigation and monitoring   of such reactions.  Spectroscopic
              characterization of the intermediates   provides a foundation for the basic
              understanding of the nature of   chemical reactivity.  This research involves a
              multifaceted approach to   the spectroscopic detection and characterization of
              these intermediates   and species involving them.
