Title       : Electronic Scientific Communities: A Challenge for STS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9320278

Award Number: 9320278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Star   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320278  Star  Scientific communities (and indeed the very ideal of a scientific
               community) are undergoing significant changes as a result of  rapidly changing
              electronic infrastructures.  These include  specialized electronic support for
              scientific collaboration, the  explosive growth of the Internet, very large
              databases, and  increasingly common long-distance collaborations using such
              tools.   There are serious difficulties for STS researchers in understanding 
              practice and social change in these geographically dispersed  workplaces and
              professional communities.  It is impossible to gain  access to the work using
              traditional ethnographic or survey tools.   In part this is due to the need to
              acquire significant information  systems/advanced user skills, something which
              can be difficult to  do in a social science department.  It is also due to
              conceptual  and methodological challenges as the very nature of work shifts.   
              In order to address these problems, Dr. Star is undertaking  professional
              development training in order to increase her skills  in information systems
              and electronic network usage while  conducting research on two scientific
              communities.  The purpose of  the training is severalfold:  to deepen ongoing
              collaborations with  information and computer scientists; to help better
              understand the  activities of her respondent scientists who use these systems'
              and  to hep develop methods for studying large electronic systems such  as
              Internet.  The research will develop tools and concepts for  understanding the
              impact and nature of electronically-supported  scientific work.    Dr. Star
              will be based at the Community Systems Laboratory and the  National Center for
              Supercomputing Applications (NCSA).  There she  will continue research on a
              community of biologists who are  sequencing the genetic structure of the
              nematode worm.  This  community has developed a large digital library (WCS). 
              Dr. Star  has been collaborating with this team since 1991 as an ethnographer 
              in aid of system devel opment.  She is also working with a second  community of
              scientists developing a large database describing the  results of autopsies of
              patients with severe dementia.  She will  also acquire skills in Unix
              programming, Internet use, information  retrieval and database programming
              through taking classes and on-  the-job training as a team member of the
              Software Development Group  at NCSA.    Her research focus extends and makes
              more rigorous three concepts  she has developed:  boundary objects, invisible
              work and  distributed problem solving.  Using these concepts, she is  analyzing
              how scientific work is being conducted electronically (as  well as off-line),
              in the two communities.  At a higher level, she  is interested in how these
              large-scale infrastructural changes  occurring in science are impacting both
              the structure and processes  of scientific communities.  ***
