Title       : Policy Agendas in the United States Since 1945
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1994   
File        : a9320922

Award Number: 9320922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan D. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank R. Baumgartner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320922  Jones    This research focuses on the creation of a large,
              comprehensive  database.  When complete, it will allow users to trace public 
              attention, media coverage, congressional attention, legislative  action, and
              budgetary outlays in the federal government to every  major social problem that
              the U.S. government has faced since  World War Two.  With this dataset, the
              researchers will answer a  central question of American politics:  why do out
              political  leaders attend to certain problems while they ignore others?   This
              topic, generally called agenda-setting within the political  science research
              community, has proved surprisingly difficult to  study in a systematic manner. 
              By gathering information on public  opinion polls, media coverage,
              congressional hearings, statutes  and federal budgetary outlays, the
              researchers will attend to  this question.    Essentially, this is a project on
              the setting of governmental  priorities.  The investigators want to know
              whether public  concerns, as reflected in polls and in media coverage, are 
              translated into governmental attention, law-making, or changes in  the federal
              budget.  There are strong reasons to suspect that the  process is not the
              simple unidirectional model of flow of public  concern to government action. 
              Rather, governmental actions  themselves may help determine the list of
              problems that the  public deems important.  With the creation of this large
              dataset,  the investigators will sort out these questions.    By developing a
              topic-coding system and by applying it uniformly  throughout the project, they
              can show when attention ah shifted  to any of a number of new problems.  For
              example, they can trace  when attention has risen or fallen on the topic of
              environmental  controls, race relations, housing, crime, or any of a number of 
              topics.  With this information, they will be able to see to what  extent
              congressional hearings, statutes, and budgetary  allocations stem from, lead
              to, or are independent from media  attention and pub lic concern.  ***
