Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Experimental Parallel and Distributed Computing
               Research at the University of Iowa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1994     
File        : a9320427

Award Number: 9320427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tse-yun Feng                            
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Cremer cremer@cs.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted Herman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Florian A. Potra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sukumar Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Paola Bonacina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320427  Cremer     This award is for creating a mixed shared and distributed
              memory computing cluster to be used in support of the following research
              projects in experimental parallel and distributed computing:    (1) Physical
              System Simulation and Applied Numerical Computing: While faster and more
              powerful hardware for scientific computation continues to be developed, that
              task of creating software to take full advantage of such hardware remains quite
              difficult.  This project aims to develop fundamental techniques and software
              tools that facilitate the development of high-performance physical system
              simulation environments.  Particular emphasis is on development of
              high-performance mechanical systems simulators, parallel real-time integration
              methods, and a framework for scenario control in real-time driving simulation. 
                (2) Automated Reasoning: Reasoning algorithms are used in many application
              areas of computer science and artificial intelligence, such as hardware and
              software verification, deductive data bases, constraint solving, deductive plan
              generation, program specification and generation, and logic programming.  The
              objective of this project  is to develop new high performance reasoning
              algorithms, focusing on user-friendly induction provers, satisfiability
              decision procedures, and distributed/parallel theorem provers.  Each of these
              requires a combination of implementation, experimentation, and theoretical
              analysis.    (3) Self-Stabilizing Systems: Self-stabilizing programs are
              programs that require no initialization and can recover from arbitrary
              transient failures.  In large systems, software failures ma y occur due to
              timing problems that can only be prevented by costly synchronization
              procedures.  Using the techniques of self-stabilization, the need for such
              synchronization procedures can be avoided by tolerating and recovering from
              faults.  Moreover, it has been such programs have applications beyond
              fault-tolerance -- stabilization can be useful to adapt to dynamic environments
              where changes to the system resemble transient faults.  This project examines
              the following problems: stabilizing simulation; stabilizing adaptive programs;
              and discrepancies between theoretical and empirical models of
              self-stabilization.  ***                    @ j       SOUNDRECEXE           @ j
                i   SSMARQUESCR           @ j    B  SSMYST  SCR           @ j    L  SSSTARS
              SCR           @ j    D  TADA    WAV           @ j &  l  TARTAN  BMP           @
              j 4 v   TERMINALEXE           @ j E  B  TERMINALHLP           @ j       9320427
               Cremer     This award is for creating a mixed shared and distributed memory
              computing cluster to be used in support of     d   n                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         U   W           .   0   _   d                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 $         $         $              G                                   d    
                                  n         d          Times    Symbol  " Helvetica   
              Chicago    Times New Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New  R ZapfDingbats    Palatino 
                Greek    GenMath    MathMeteor    MT Extra                                 " 
                               +  e+  e                        4    Cremer/Iowa    Mark
              Purvis Mark Purvis                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
