Title       : Physisorption Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9320860

Award Number: 9320860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George B. Hess gbh@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9320860  Hess    Technical abstract:  It is proposed to study the thermodynamic 
              properties of multilayer films of a number of adsorbates on uniform  surfaces
              of graphite and other substrates.  Ellipsometry will be  used to measure the
              film coverage as a function of gas pressure,  while the substrate temperature
              is regulated.  This will provide  direct information on microscopic wetting
              properties, layering,  layer critical points, and indirect evidence regarding
              surface  melting of the adsorbate.  Adsorbates which will be studied include 
              deuterium containing isotopic molecules of hydrogen, for comparison  with
              previous work on molecular hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon  monoxide.  Gas
              mixtures will be studied with emphasis on solubility  in films and displacement
              of pre-plated layers.  Infrared  absorption by adsorbate vibrational modes will
              provide additional  information on the film composition and molecular
              orientation.   Substrates in addition to graphite will include gold and cleaved
               faces of ionic crystals of the sodium chloride structure.    Non-technical
              abstract:  It is proposed to study films of one to a  few molecular layers in
              thickness formed on an atomic smooth  crystal surface (the substrate) when it
              is exposed to, and in  equilibrium with, a gas (the adsorbate).  Substrates
              will include  graphite, magnesium oxide, and other crystals, while the
              adsorbates  include hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon monoxide, rare gases, and 
              hydrocarbons.  An optical techniques is used to measure the film  thickness and
              its dependence on gas pressure and on temperature.   At low temperatures the
              film thickness typically increases in sharp  steps due to the addition of
              successive layers of molecules, until  the pressure is reached at which
              macroscopic crystals of the  adsorbate can form.  These studies provide
              information on the  thermodynamic properties of two-dimensional crystals, and
              the  ability of various adsorbates to "wet" the substrates, that is, to  form
              thick uniform films on them.  In addition,  it will be possible  to measure
              roughening of a layer at the surface of adsorbate  crystals at temperatures
              below their bulk melting temperature.  ***
