Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Robotic and Vision System Laboratory
               Instrumentation Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1994     
File        : a9320296

Award Number: 9320296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tse-yun Feng                            
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill D. Crisman crisman@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320296  Crisman     This award is for the acquisition of equipment which will
              be placed within the Robotic and Vision Systems Laboratory (RVSL) to support
              research in computer vision and robotics.  Specifically, this equipment will be
              used for four projects:      (1) Deictic Primitives for General Purpose
              Navigation--A deictic primitive is a command such as "approach that" where
              'that' is an area selected in a video image by the user.  Research will be
              performed to define a set of these primitives which can be used for general
              purpose navigation.     (2) Biologically-Based Shallow Water Robot
              Ambulation--This equipment will also be used in the development of a
              biologically-based robot control architecture for a shallow water walking
              robot.  The proposed architecture is based on central pattern generators and
              reflex models derived from lobster neurophysiology.     (3) Geometric
              Model-Free Robot Grasping--The RVSL will also explore robot mechanisms and
              control architectures to perform general purpose grasping where neither the
              position nor shape of the target object is explicitly computed by the robot
              system.  The proposed approach utilized a novel robot hand developed in the
              RVSL to reflexively grasp objects.     (4) Coordinated Multiple Robots for the
              Area Coverage Problem--To completely cover a search area, a typical robot must
              continually localize itself with respect to a prestored map.  The proposed work
              will investigate multiple robot solutions to this problem when a prior map of
              the area is unavailable.     ***               This award is for the
              acquisition of equipment which will be placed within the Robotic an d Vision
              Systems L                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               N   Q                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              $         $         $          
                 G                                                                           
                    Times    Symbol  " Helvetica    Chicago    Times New Roman  & Arial  5
              Courier New  R ZapfDingbats    Palatino    Greek    GenMath    MathMeteor    MT
              Extra                                 "                   .  e.  e             
                        <    Cisman/Northeastern    Mark Purvis Mark Purvis                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
