Title       : Collaborative Research on Dependence Assessment for Decision and Risk Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9320754

Award Number: 9320754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47303              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Clemen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              Expert judgments are key inputs in important decision-making   problems, and the
              elicitation and modeling of such judgments are   formalized in methodologies
              such as decision analysis, risk   analysis, and expert systems.  As problems
              grow in complexity   (e.g., multi-systems modeling for regional and global 
              environmental change), with many variables of interest, assessing  and modeling
              expert knowledge about relationships among variables  becomes more crucial.  Up
              to this point, conditional  distributions have provided the only formal,
              rigorous, and fully   general way to represent an expert's knowledge about a
              set of   interrelated random variables.  However, this approach becomes  
              unwieldy and infeasible unless the number of variables is very   small, and it
              may pose cognitive problems.  An alternative   approach involves representing
              joint distributions in terms of   copulas, which are functions of the marginal
              distributions and   encode the dependence among the variables.  The overall
              goal of   the proposed research is to develop procedures for dependence  
              assessment in practical expert-knowledge encoding situations.  In   this
              one-year pilot project, the researchers will focus primarily  on the
              mathematical development and dependence assessments.  They  will also begin an
              investigation into the behavioral issues  involved in the elicitation of expert
               knowledge via marginal  distributions and dependence measures (as  compared to
              marginal  and conditional distributions).  This initial work will provide  the
              basis for the future development of sound assessment  procedures and
              implementable protocols as well as an analytical  framework for using those
              assessments.
