Title       : Dataflow Networks: Calculi, Axiomatics, and Algebraic Semantics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9320846

Award Number: 9320846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene W. Stark stark@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Dataflow networks are a paradigm for concurrent computation in  which a
              collection of concurrently and asynchronously executing  processes  communicate
              by sending data values over FIFO  communication channels.  ``Determinate''
              dataflow networks, which  are composed of processes with  functional
              input/output behavior,  are a well-understood special case, whereas 
              ``indeterminate''  networks, which can contain non-functional processes, still 
              present some puzzles.  In particular, the goal of discovering a  useful and 
              powerful logic for reasoning about indeterminate  networks, has not yet been 
              fully achieved.    A step in the direction of such a logic is a formal theory 
              called  ``dataflow calculus''.  The syntax of the calculus is designed to 
              reflect in a natural way the  mathematical structure that has  seemed most
              important in previous semantic  studies of dataflow  networks.   In previous
              research a soundness and  completeness  theorem has been proved for a set of
              equational axioms for  dataflow networks, which shows that these axioms
              characterize an  interesting  notion of equivalence for dataflow networks.   
              This research project is  concerned with continuing the study of  dataflow
              calculus, and its uses, as a  concrete foundation on  which to build a more
              powerful logic of dataflow  networks, and as  a tool for understanding better
              the relationship between the  various abstract semantic models for dataflow
              networks.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
