Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9320323

Award Number: 9320323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tse-yun Feng                            
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25789              (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Klir gklir@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ute St. Clair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320323  Klir     This grant provides support for the establishment of a small,
              research-dedicated computer network serving several varied research groups. 
              The network consists of two SUN workstations, three 486 PC's, and one Macintosh
              microcomputer, each relevant to some aspect of the existing research projects,
              and each running appropriate software.    (1) Applications of Fuzzy Logic
              Control and Neural Networks to Intelligent Manufacturing Processes: The aim of
              this project is to find possible applications of fuzzy logic, neural networks
              and genetic algorithms into the area of manufacturing engineering.  The project
              focuses on the intelligent control system of screen printers in surface mount
              technology (SMT).    (2) Possibilistic Transformation of Probability:
              Uncertainty invariant transformations between probability and possibility are a
              topic which opens up a new research area in uncertainty-based information
              theory.  Much of this research is being conducted in the form of building
              mathematical computer models which calculate the relative information content
              of transformation from probabilities to possibilities and vice versa.    (3)
              Chaotic Systems: This research is motivated by current developments in the area
              of chaotic dynamical systems.  Several unsolved problems stem from a
              consideration of two aspects of chaotic systems: how can chaotic systems be
              defined in abstract, topological or measure spaces and what is the relationship
              of those generalized to "conventional" approaches?  These can be explored using
              the computational resources acquired by this award.    (4) Symbolic
              Mathematics: The research here is t o apply the current trends in symbolic and
              computational mathematics to complex engineering problems.  Specifically, the
              following three problem areas will be investigated: rational approximations
              using Fourier Series partial sums, a multiple scales approach to sound
              generation by vibrating bodies, and analysis of various new perturbation
              techniques.    (5) Bibliographic Database Management System: This is a project
              to compile and manage a very large research database of bibliographic materials
              used in approximate reasoning research.  With the help of this equipment, it is
              possible to support and expedite the research and publishing activities.  ***  
                                  @ j   i   SSMARQUESCR           @ j    B  SSMYST  SCR      
                  @ j    L  SSSTARS SCR           @ j    D  TADA    WAV           @ j &  l 
              TARTAN  BMP           @ j 4 v   TERMINALEXE           @ j E  B  TERMINALHLP    
                    @ j       9320323  Klir     This grant provides support for the
              establishment of a small, research-dedicated computer network serving seve     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                T   V                   P   R
                |                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                $         $         $              G         
                                                                                      Times  
               Symbol  " Helvetica    Chicago    Times New Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New  R
              ZapfDingbats    Palatino    Greek    GenMath    MathMeteor    MT Extra         
                                     "                   d  ed  e                        =   
              Klir/SUNY Binghamton    Mark Purvis Mark Purvis                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
