Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Science in the Deep: America and British
               Contributions to the Development of Oceanography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1994  
File        : a9320247

Award Number: 9320247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Kohler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9320247  Kohler  Oceanography, like high energy physics (HEP) and astronomy, is
              a  "big" science.  Much of the study of the oceans requires very large  teams
              of researchers with support technicians and massive  investments for
              instrumentation, facilities, drilling platforms,  etc.  Indeed, oceanography is
              the most highly-funded per capita of  all sciences, including physics.  Unlike
              HEP and astronomy,  oceanography is much more an interdisciplinary science
              drawing on  scientists whose degrees are in fields like biology, physics, 
              chemistry, and geology.  Further, much of the science has practical 
              application.  Despite--or perhaps because of--this  interdisciplinarity and
              practical, economic implications, the  history of oceanography has hardly been
              examined.   Helen  Rozwadowski, under the direction of Dr. Kohler, is examining
              the  origins of oceanography in the United States and Britain.      In the 19th
              century, the deep ocean was largely unfathomable:  a  dangerous byway that
              became a location for commercial and military  work on an unprecedented scale. 
              Because of commercial necessity,  however, scientists were driven by the 1880's
              to attempt to  understand what transpired below the surface of the oceans.  Ms.
               Rozwadowski has already undertaken the American half of her study.   With this
              dissertation grant, she will be able to fill out the  British part of this
              program. British investigation of the deep  ocean was firmly rooted in the long
              tradition of peace-time  scientific exploration, to which a group of natural
              scientists who  formed the various Dredging Committees of the British
              Association  for the Advancement of Science brought new questions about the
              deep  ocean and its strange inhabitants.  Submarine telegraphy was a  primary
              instigator for these studies.  The question the politicians  and industrialists
              gave to the scientists and engineers was how to  link via underwater telegraph
              cable various parts of the empire  upon which "the sun never set."  To
              accomplish this goal,  scient ists had to borrow industrial technologies
              ranging from  mining hoists to piano wire.  Producing scientific knowledge
              about  the deep ocean required oceanographers to integrate natural history 
              with existing maritime practices and customs, usually under  difficult physical
              conditions of constrained space, harsh  discipline, bad weather, and worse
              food. Scientific work at sea  involved a series of complex relationships --
              between officers and  common seamen, military men and civilian gentleman
              naturalists,  mariners and landlubbers.  The conflicts and potential for 
              cooperation inherent in these relationships and their negotiation  at sea
              shaped the practice of oceanographic work.  By examining how  the science of
              oceanography rose out of the very different cultures  of Britain and the United
              States, Ms. Rozwadowski promises to  expand greatly our understanding of how
              this science developed in  one of the biggest of big sciences today.  ***
