Title       : Ethics in Engineering: Good Works
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1994     
File        : a9320257

Award Number: 9320257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48542              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Pritchard michael.pritchard@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Jaksa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320257  Pritchard  If engineering and engineeering education are to encourage 
              responsible engineering practice that goes beyond simply avoiding  or
              preventing wrongdoing, it is essential to provide examples of  ethically
              commendable engineering.  This project is intended to  help fill this unmet
              need.  The goal of the project is to develop  a set of detailed stories about
              exemplary engineers and  engineering practice.  Prior to the research period,
              the  investigators will initiate contact with engineering societies,  primarily
              in Michigan, engineers, and their managers, to identify  appropriate candidates
              and arrange for interviews.  They will  prepare a questionnaire for the
              interviews.  Presentations to  engineering societies and interviewing will
              continue throughout  the project.  Qualified graduate students will assist in
              the  interviewing and assessing the findings.  From extensive  interviews with
              at least 20 engineers and managers, the  investigators will develop a set of
              detailed stories about  ethically commendable engineering.  These will be
              shared with  students in classes in engineering ethics, business ethics, 
              communications ethics, and professional ethics.  The most  promising stories
              will be prepared for publication.  The  investigators will also prepare summary
              results of preliminary  efforts to identify criteria for exemplary engineering
              that are  commonly acknowledged by engineers and their managers.  These  will
              include not only examples of exemplary engineering but also  reflections on the
              qualities of character that seem to underlie  such conduct.  In addition, the
              investigators will summarize  their findings about factors that seem either to
              facilitate or to  present obstacles to exemplary engineering.  Because the
              proposed  project would help to understand engineers in context, it should 
              contribute as well to overall understanding of what engineers do.   Results
              will be disseminated through presentations, articles, and  educational
              materials.    ***
