Title       : RUI: Hydrogen Peroxide Variability in Coastal Rainwater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9320971

Award Number: 9320971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan D. Willey willeyj@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Kieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9320971  Willey         This research will investigate the chemical composition
              of  rainwater in coastal North Carolina.  This location is ideal for  rainwater
              research because it receives precipitation of both  continental and maritime
              origins.  Previous work has shown that  these two general source types are
              compositionally very different  with respect to inorganic ions as well as
              formic and acetic  acids.  The specific objective of this study is to define 
              patterns of variation in the rainwater concentrations of the  strong oxidant
              hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).  At this time the factors  controlling the
              concentration of H2O2 in maritime and continental  storms are poorly defined
              and unpredictable.  The question  addressed in this research project is whether
              H2O2 concentrations  are greater in rain of marine or continental origin.  It
              could be  argued that H2O2 levels would be lower in continental rain because 
              it can oxidize sulfur dioxide to sulfuric acid and nitrogen  oxides to nitric
              acid, thereby resulting in a net loss of H2O2.   Hydrogen peroxide is, however,
              photochemically produced along  with other pollutant atmospheric oxidants,
              which would increase  its concentration in rain of continental origin.        
              The relative concentrations of H2O2 in continental versus  maritime rain must
              be defined to allow global modeling of many  important atmospheric oxidants. 
              Hydrogen peroxide is involved in  cycles of other stronger atmospheric oxidants
              including the  formation of hydroperoxyl radical and the destruction of
              hydroxyl  radical.  Model calculations suggest that concentrations of  strong
              atmospheric oxidants may increase dramatically during the  next decade because
              of stratospheric ozone losses at temperate  latitudes.  Hence, this is a
              particularly timely project.         Rainwater and atmospheric condensate are
              appropriate media  for the study of H2O2 due to its large water solubility. 
              For  example, hydrogen peroxide is often present in rainwater at  micromolar
              concentrations.  It is st able in rain for time periods  of hours, which makes
              this laboratory well suited for the project  because of the proximity of the
              collection sites and the  analytical laboratory.  There is approximately a
              decade of  rainwater composition data for one of the North Carolina sites. 
              This relatively long term data record will be useful in  interpretation of new
              measurement data and will also facilitate  comparisons with other sampling
              locations.  ***
