Title       : The Ethics of Human Induced Environmental Change: The Case of Pacific Northwest
               Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9320801

Award Number: 9320801
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Proctor jproctor@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9320801  Proctor  This project addresses the ethics of recent human-induced 
              environmental change, considering Pacific Northwest Forests as a  case study. 
              The research focusses on the underlying ethics  informing public opinions on
              old-growth forest management in the  Pacific Northwest.  Though the range of
              recent public attitudes  and values toward old-growth forests has been fairly
              well  documented, little detailed work has been done to explore the  specific
              ethical presuppositions of these attitudes and values,  and to derive
              implications regarding public support for, or  criticism of, practices
              responsible for environmental change in  Pacific Northwest forests.  In this
              study, public attitudes  regarding old-growth forest management will be viewed
              as  surrogates for positions taken on recent and near-future  environmental
              change in Pacific Northwest forests.  These  attitudes will be analyzed to
              determine their delineating ethical  features, major forms of ethical
              justification, and resultant  approach to moral judgment in terms of balancing
              ecological and  socioeconomic concerns.  The primary source of data for this 
              project is the administrative record, and its accompanying  database, of public
              comments received for a recent Draft  Supplemental Environmental Impact
              Statement on Pacific Northwest  old-growth forest management, residing in
              Portland, Oregon.   Individuals submitted comments which will be analyzed
              following a  two-by-three matrix of subcategories.  The matrix will be divided 
              according to location of residence and position with respect to  Option 9, the
              Clinton administration's preferred management  alternative.  Data analysis
              involves (a) search, sort, and simple  statistical operations using all
              appropriate records on the  existing database, and (b) more detailed content
              analysis using a  random sample of roughly 50-100 records from each
              subcategory.   Results will be compared across subcategories in order to draw 
              implications regarding the relationship between major syste ms of  ethics
              suggested in the analysis and recent and near-future  human-induced
              environmental change involving pacific Northwest  forests.  Results will be
              disseminated through presentations and  articles, and yield valuable insight
              into future research needed  in this significant area.    ***
