Title       : Characterization of Membrane Proteins in the Synaptic Junction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9320823

Award Number: 9320823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Lasher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The normal functioning of the brain depends upon the ability  of nerve cells to
              rapidly transmit chemical signals to each  other.  This chemical transmission
              is accomplished through  cell contacts called synapses.  Synapses form mainly
              during  embryonic and fetal life, and childhood, though they may  form in adult
              life as well.  One nerve cell may make as many  as 50,000 synapses, and as
              there are over a billion nerve  cells in the brain there would be over a
              trillion synapses  in the brain.  The synapse is a relatively stable contact, 
              tightly binding together the nerve cells involved.  This  tight contact
              provides both the stability and closeness  necessary for chemical signals to be
              predictably and rapidly  transferred between neurons.  Recent research has
              provided  considerable insight into the mechanisms involved in  chemical
              neurotransmission.  However, very little is known  about the molecules involved
              in generating the adhesiveness  or mechanical stability in the zone of synaptic
              contact.  About a half-dozen proteins have been identified recently  which
              reside almost exclusively in the cell membranes in the  zone of synaptic
              contact in developing and adult brains of  mammals (and probably other
              vertebrates as well).  Based  upon their preliminary characterization these
              proteins  appear to be good candidates to be at least some of the  molecules
              involved in synaptic adhesion.  This proposal  outlines experiments which would
              investigate further the  ability of these proteins to function as adhesion
              molecules.  A number of approaches will be taken.  These molecules will  be
              isolated from synaptic junctions of rats and examined for  their ability to
              bind each other or to other synaptic  molecules.  For example, the proteins
              will be linked to tiny  beads alone or in different combinations to see if they
              can  promote the aggregation of the beads (as has been seen for  other kinds of
              adhesion molecules).  In a second approach,  the isolated proteins will be
              coated on the surface of  tissue cult ure dishes or inert beads to see if they
              have any  ability to act as a favorable substrate for the formation of 
              synaptic contacts by cultured nerve cells.  In a third  approach, rabbit
              antibodies will be generated to these  proteins to see if they can either
              disrupt the stability of  the synaptic contact or prevent synapses from
              forming.  If  one or more of these proteins appears to have the properties  of
              an adhesion molecule then a new grant proposal will be  developed to further
              study their molecular organization and  the regulation of their synthesis and
              turnover.
