Title       : Toward Accurate Inference in Nonlinear Dynamic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1994   
File        : a9320376

Award Number: 9320376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101464             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Ronald Gallant ron_gallant@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320370  Gallant  This project develops econometric methods that do not rely on
              the   correct specification of the structure of economic models for       their
              validity.  This is an extremely important line of research    because these
              methods permit empirical research to concentrate on   drawing economic
              inferences from data without risking potentially   large specification errors. 
              The basic idea is to replace the       structural model with an approximation
              that sequentially improves   as more information becomes available.  The
              methods developed by    this project permit reliable inference at each
              intermediate stage   of model evolution.  The procedures are general enough to 
                       encompass most econometric inference procedures.  Under a          
              previous grant the investigator succeeded in developing             statistical
              methods that have certain advantages particularly       relevant to econometric
              applications: simplicity, ease of           implementation, and ease of
              extension to nonlinear, multivariate,   and time series applications.  Under
              this grant these methods       will be extended to a dynamic setting and used
              to analyze           financial markets.  As in the past, algorithms
              implementing the     theoretical and empirical work will be coded and
              documented to      current standards for professionally written, scientific
              software   and put in the public domain.                                       
                                                                                 The methods
              developed under this project are termed                 seminonparametric (SNP)
              methods because they are parametric yet     have nonparametric properties.  The
              procedures replace the          structure models with a truncated series
              expansion, the error       density with a truncated expansion, or both.  By
              letting the        truncation grow adaptively with sample size, the
              approximation is   accurate enough at each intermediate stage to permit
              reliable       inference and ultimate convergence to th e underlying data      
                 generating mechcanism.  Applications are made to conditionally     
              heterogeneous time series such as occur in finance and             
              macroeconomics.  Bayesian methods are also studied.  ***
