Title       : Bankruptcy Reform and Financial Contracting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9320845

Award Number: 9320845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver D. Hart oliver_hart@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,GLCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320845  Hart         This project continues research on the financial structure
               of firms and bankruptcy reform that were stimulated by and are  relevant to
              the political and economic changes in Eastern Europe  and the Former Soviet
              Union.  Specifically, the investigator and  collaborators have devised new
              bankruptcy procedures which appear  to be superior to Chapters 7 and 11 of the
              U.S. Bankruptcy Code.   This project will study theoretical and practical
              questions  raised by the procedure.  The investigator will also continue  work
              on entrepreneurial debt contracts, corporate financial  structure and the
              theory of the firm.         Under the previous project the investigator studied
               bankruptcy procedure as part of the transitions to capitalism in  Eastern
              Europe and the Former Soviet Union.  This research led to  a new bankruptcy
              procedure that the investigators found to be  superior to existing procedures. 
              Under this bankruptcy  procedure, a bankrupt firm's debts are cancelled, all
              the equity  is given to the former creditors and these creditors as the new 
              owners decide whether the firm should be sold off for cash or  reorganized as a
              going concern.  The judge supervising the  procedure solicits cash and noncash
              bids.  In a noncash bid,  someone offers securities in the post-bankruptcy firm
              instead of  cash.  For example, the old management team or a new management 
              team could offer the new owners of the firm a combination of  shares and bonds
              in the post-bankruptcy firm.  The creditors  would decide by a simple majority
              vote which bid to select.  The  firm then exits from bankruptcy.  This
              procedure is superior to  existing bankruptcy law because it transforms a group
              of people  with different claims and therefore different objectives into a 
              homogeneous class of shareholders with a common objective (value  maximization)
              and then puts the firm's future to a simple  majority vote.  The procedure
              avoids costly and inefficient  haggling over the division of the assets of a
              bankrupt firm  be cause it provides a mechanical procedure for the division of 
              the pie.           This project pursues a number of extensions and elaborations
               of the proposed procedure.  These extensions include analysis of  alternative
              voting arrangements, more precise estimates of the  benefits of adopting this
              new procedure, and an ambitious effort  to derive optimal bankruptcy procedures
              in an incomplete  contracting setting.
