Title       : Set Theoretical Naturalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1994     
File        : a9320220

Award Number: 9320220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47057              (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope Maddy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320220  Maddy  The theory of sets functions as a framework for most
              contemporary  work in mathematics:  all mathematical entities are ultimately 
              modelled as sets and all mathematical theorems are ultimately  provable from
              the standard axioms of set theory (i.e. from the  system ZFC).  Unfortunately,
              the axioms of ZFC are probably not  strong enough to settle some questions that
              turn up in the various  branches of mathematics:  e.g., in algebra, in
              analysis, and in set  theory itself.    One reaction to this problem has been
              to embrace all relatively  consistent extensions of ZFC as equally admissible,
              and thus to  dismiss the independent questions as meaningless (they are true in
               some models, false in others, and that is the end of the story).   For various
              good reasons, this solution is not acceptable to many  leading set theorists. 
              The alternative is to search for new axioms  to add to those of ZFC in hopes of
              answering the independent  questions.    The pressing philosophical question is
              how to make sense of this  evaluation of new axiom candidates.  If there is an
              objectively  existing world of sets, then such candidates should be accepted 
              insofar as they reflect the truth about that world.  Philosophers  have puzzled
              over the nature of that world and our cognitive access  to it.  These
              philosophical matters aside, this realistic position  has shortcomings from a
              purely mathematical point of view:  it  short-circuits various legitimate
              methodological questions inside  set theory itself.  In this project, Dr. Maddy
              aims to produce a  better understanding of the proper means of evaluating axiom
               candidates with less attention to extra-mathematical philosophical 
              quandaries, and more attention to the texture of the mathematics  itself.    
              Her approach, which she calls `set theoretic naturalism', provides  a framework
              for the defense of various general methodological  principles for set theory,
              principles defended by their ability to  generate good mathematics rather than
              by some purported  ability to  generate truths about some extra-mathematically
              characterized  reality of sets.  With these principles in place, it is possible
              to  defend various additional axioms and hypotheses and to answer at  least
              some of the independent questions.  ***
