Title       : Finite Sample Performance of Multivariate Location and Scatter Estimators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0322776

Award Number: 0322776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1947               (Estimated)
Investigator: Yijun Zuo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              TITLE:

Finite Sample Performance of Multivariate Location 
and Scatter
              Estimators

ABSTRACT:

This research develops new methodology and theory in
              the 
performance evaluation of multivariate location and scatter 
estimators.
              The research is to propose finite sample performance
criteria of multivariate
              location and scatter estimators based on 
their ``tail behavior'', to
              investigate and assess the performance 
of existing and new multivariate
              location and scatter estimators 
with respect to the proposed criteria, and to
              provide guides to 
statistical practices in applications. 
 
Given an
              estimator of some unknown parameter, a natural question
is -- how good is the
              estimator? or how should one measure its 
performance? These questions are
              fundamental in statistical 
estimation and inference. To answer these
              questions, various 
performance criteria have been proposed and studied. Among
              the 
existing performance criteria, asymptotic approaches including 
Fisher
              consistency and large sample normality are the most prevalent 
ones. These
              approaches have been based on the behavior of the 
estimator as the sample
              size approaches infinity. This, however, 
raises some serious concern about
              the relevancy of the asymptotic 
results in practice, where the sample size is
              always fixed and 
finite. The study of the finite sample performance of
              multivariate 
location and scatter estimators thus is not only practically
              
significant but also theoretically interesting. In sharp contrast 
with the
              asymptotic approaches, in this research the performance 
of multivariate
              location and scatter estimators is studied for 
fixed and finite sample size. 
               

The research develops new methodology and valuable insights 
into the
              comparison of estimator performance particularly from 
robustness standpoint.
              Inherent connections of our finite sample 
performance measures with two most
              crucial and promising notions 
in the robust and nonparametric statistical
              analysis and inference, 
the finite sample breakdown point and the data depth
              (especially
Tukey-Donoho halfspace depth), are to be explored and illuminated.
              
It is to be shown that the estimators with high breakdown point or
              
halfspace depth possess remarkable finite sample tail performance. 
Findings
              like this in the research offer new insights into and deepen 
our
              understanding of the notions of breakdown point and halfspace depth, 
and
              establish the important role of the finite sample tail behavior as a
              
quantitative assessment of robustness of estimators. The research has
              
profound impact on statistical applications in various disciplines of
              
sciences such as social, behavior and life sciences, environmental and
              
biology sciences, industry, and economics. The research suggests, 
for
              example, that location estimators with appealing tail performance 
(e.g.
              depth-based multivariate medians) should be preferred in practice
to
              traditional least-squares estimators (e.g. the multivariate mean) 
for
              robustness against the influence of extremities of observations in
              
multivariate data analysis. The research also benefits education through
              
the training of graduate students and the incorporation of the developed
              
methodology in statistics courses.

