Title       : RUI: Incidental Nest Predation in Songbirds: Using Behavioral Indicators to
               Determine Ecological Processes and Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0322589

Award Number: 0322589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78204              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Schmidt kenneth.schmidt@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089588.  Kenneth Schmidt.  

Predation rates and the subsequent impact of
              predators on prey are thought to be determined mostly by the population density
              of predators.  Nonetheless, much predation by generalist predators may occur
              when secondary prey types are encountered coincidentally by a predator while
              searching for its primary prey.  Such incidental predation is determined by the
              behavioral responses of individual predators to the abundance and distribution
              of alternative prey types, as well as to features of the predator's
              environment.  Incidental predation may be extremely common in generalist, and
              to a smaller degree in specialist predators.  Because such weak interactions
              potentially stabilize community structure, they are of considerable importance.
               More specifically, the rate of incidental predation may be related to amount
              of enemy-free space (areas unutilized by predators).  Understanding this
              mechanism is critical because of its relationship to the strength of the
              predator-prey interaction, as well because enemy-free space influences the
              stability of predator-prey dynamics and the coexistence of multiple prey
              species.

The proposed research examines incidental predation in a community
              of breeding songbirds, whose eggs and nestlings are preyed on by small mammals,
              primarily the white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus).  It focuses on
              predation from the perspectives of individual behaviors and population
              dynamics, as well as their repercussions to community-level phenomena.  The
              approach combines theoretical, observational, and experimental components,
              ultimately to test explicit underlying mechanisms.   More specifically, the
              research involves (1) monitoring the density of common vertebrates
              (white-footed mouse, eastern chipmunk, gray squirrel) which are nest predators
              of songbirds (2) monitoring nest predation rates using artificial songbird
              nests, and (3) monitoring the success of natural nests of selected songbird
              species, (4) testing if enemy-free space is a key control of incidental
              predation, (5) evaluating the utility of giving-up densities as indicators of
              ecological patterns and processes at multiple spatial scales, and (6)
              estimating the influence of population density and individual behavioral
              responses of predators on the survival of nests of
              songbirds.










