Title       : Aspects of Harmonic Analysis and Hamiltonian PDE's
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0322370

Award Number: 0322370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Bourgain bourgain@math.ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Jean Bourgain, University of Illinois, U-C
DMS-0322370

Abstract:

The
              PI proposes to study issues in Hamiltonian turbulence such as growth of higher
              Sobolev norms in smooth solutions of Schroedinger equations.  Considering for
              instance the 2D defocusing cubic NLS with periodic boundary conditions, what
              can one say about transition of energy to higher modes for large time? Only
              power like upper bounds seem presently known. The PI proposes to explore
              dynamical systems methods in this context.

In linear Schroedinger equations,
              things are better understood, partly due to progress in quasi-periodic
              localization. For instance the PI established recently the absence of chaotic
              diffusion for the quantum kicked rotor for small kicks and almost all values of
              the parameters. He proposes here to study further the problem of large kicks
              and estimating localization lengths.

Most partial differential equations
              studied by mathematicians originate from Physics or elsewhere. They are
              supposed to model certain phenomena and their relevance here is often confirmed
              numerically. But while this stage of development from phenomenology to
              mathematical modeling is by most scientists considered satisfactory, it is
              usually only the beginning of purely mathematical exploration. The aim now is
              to study these equations rigorously as mathematical objects, independently of
              any a priori assumptions, and to try to recover the expected behaviour as
              mathematical theorems. On one hand, this line of thought has in the past led to
              some of the great mathematical theories of modern days (integrability,
              turbulence, etc.). But even so, much more challenges remain, as well in the
              dissipative as conservative regime. The emphasis in this proposal lies on
              diffusion in Hamiltonian equations, in particular the Schroedinger equation.

