Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Curvature and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1992    
File        : a9208073

Award Number: 9208073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan Stolz stolz.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will continue to study the relationship                  
              between the curvature and the topology of manifolds.  In                       
              particular, he will continue to study the existence and concordance            
              classification of positive scalar curvature metrics.  He has                   
              recently shown that if a closed manifold M admits a positive scalar            
              curvature metric, then the concordance classes of such metrics are             
              in bijective correspondence to a certain bordism group which                   
              depends only on the fundamental group and the first two Stiefel-               
              Whitney classes of M.  Also, M admits a positive scalar curvature              
              metric if and only if M represents zero in this bordism group.  If             
              the universal cover of M is spin, this bordism group maps to the               
              real K-theory of the 'twisted' group C*-algebra of the fundamental             
              group of M, the twist being determined by the first two Stiefel-               
              Whitney classes of M.  An optimistic hope is that this is in fact              
              an isomorphism.  The investigator intends to continue his study of             
              the relations between positive Ricci curvature, elliptic genera and            
              elliptic homology; in particular, to pursue his conjecture that the            
              Witten genus of a positive Ricci curvature manifold M vanishes                 
              provided M is spin and its first Pontrjagin class is zero.  In a               
              different direction, he hopes to show that all the possible                    
              multiplicities of a Dupin hypersurface with four distinct                      
              eigenvalues are realized by the known examples, i.e. the                       
              homogeneous examples and the Clifford examples.                                
                   Topology treats those properties of geometric objects which               
              are not dependent upon distances or angles, which are so                       
              fundamental that they persist after stretching and bending an                  
              object short of tearing it.  In a topological sense, a phonograph              
              record and a wedding ring are the same, for no topological                     
              properties distinguish one from the other.  In fact, each is                   
              topologically the same as a coffee cup.  Their shapes are wildly               
              different, and yet there are some geometric properties that all                
              will have in common as a result of their common topology.  The                 
              famous Gauss-Bonnet theorem, well-known in electromagnetic theory              
              as well as differential geometry, requires that the total                      
              (Gaussian) curvature of any of their surfaces will be zero.  Now               
              curvature is a very non-topological property, and locally it can               
              have any value whatsoever on one of these surfaces, but the values             
              cannot be totally unrelated as one moves from point to point, for              
              the theorem says they will all sum to zero if one weights them by              
              elements of area.  Prominent among the results this project seeks              
              are modern variants of this wonderful theorem for manifolds of                 
              other dimensions and for other kinds of curvature.
