Title       : Data Distribution and Routing in Shared and Distributed Memory Parallel
               Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1992    
File        : a9208784

Award Number: 9208784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32753              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajendra V. Boppana boppana@cs.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              Distribution of data of a parallel computation such that data                  
              are accessed free of memory bank and interconnection network                   
              conflicts, is a critical issue for efficient use of shared and                 
              distributed memory computers.  Conflicts in memory banks and                   
              interconnection networks increase inter-processor                              
              communication delays, which in turn adversely affect the                       
              execution times of parallel computations and cost-performance                  
              ratio of parallel computers.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research investigates hardware and software solutions,                    
              which can be applied in the design of parallel architectures                   
              for consistent high performance for a variety of parallel                      
              computations and efficient execution of tasks in a transparent                 
              manner, even in the presence of faults.  In the first part of                  
              the research, recent work on hardware techniques, called                       
              skewed storage schemes applicable at the time of task                          
              execution, will be expanded upon.  The new techniques will be                  
              useful to design and use efficiently fault-tolerant and                        
              gracefully degrading memories, multidimensional memories, and                  
              memory hierarchies for large data accesses in parallel                         
              computations.  Suitability of the techniques will be                           
              investigated with theoretical analysis, experiments on current                 
              parallel computers, and simulations.  In the second part of                    
              the research, software techniques, applicable at compile-time,                 
              will be investigated to utilize and assist hardware techniques                 
              for partitioning and allocation of data, including heavily                     
              accessed and hotspot type data.  Effectiveness of these                        
              results will be evaluated experimentally.
