Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Theory and Applications of Functionaland Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9208818

Award Number: 9208818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50767              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Cooke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wenzhang Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexader Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8131

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues research on theoretical and applied                
              problems involving functional and partial differential equations.              
              Work will be done investigating the stability and Hopf                         
              bifurcation problems for a general class of functional                         
              differential equations with state-dependent bounded delay.                     
              Another line of study concerns singularly perturbed nonlinear                  
              differential difference equations where the goal is to show the                
              existence of a pulse-like periodic solutions.  Several problems                
              involving the existence of distributional solutions of classes of              
              partial differential equations.  Closer to immediate                           
              applications, work will be done on the dynamics of population                  
              models.  It includes a generalization of Volterra's population                 
              equation to include spatially distributed population and delay in              
              the birth process.  Models for disease transmission of sexually                
              transmitted diseases will also be analyzed.  Here the additional               
              element in the model incorporates risk-behavior change.                        
                   Differential equations form the backbone of mathematical                  
              modeling in the biological sciences.  Phenomena which involve                  
              continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials and                   
              energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                        
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              only to state the relationships, but also to extract qualitative               
              and quantitative meaning from them.
