Title       : Ecomorphology and the Evolution of Phenotypic Divergence in Sunfish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1992    
File        : a9208295

Award Number: 9208295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Ehlinger ehlinger@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A successful individual must function trophically (i.e. to eat but             
              not be eaten) as well as reproductively (i.e. to mate and produce              
              successful offspring). These strong and sometimes divergent                    
              pressures can create trade-offs between the optimal phenotypes for             
              foraging versus reproduction. However, it is seldom possible to                
              study the concurrent effects of sexual and trophic selection on the            
              evolution of morphology. Recent laboratory and comparative studies             
              show that morphological variation in bluegill sunfish , Lepomis                
              macrochirus, is intimately related to both reproductive and                    
              foraging success. The data suggest that females adapt                          
              morphologically to the demands of the foraging niches of lakes                 
              whereas the morphology of nesting males responds to changes in the             
              intensity of intrasexual selection.                                            
                                                                                             
              The proposed research investigates the interaction between                     
              selection on trophic morphology and sexual morphology in bluegill.             
              Morphological and behavioral comparisons among populations                     
              collected from different lake types will correlate phenotypic                  
              variation in feeding and reproductive abilities. Experimental                  
              crosses and common garden rearing of young will attempt to identify            
              a genetic basis for phenotypic variation. A manipulation of nesting            
              male density in a natural lake will assess the degree of behavioral            
              and morphological flexibility of individual males, and quantify the            
              relationship between phenotype and nesting success under different             
              social conditions. This research may eventually address critical               
              questions about the relative importance of sexual selection and                
              trophic radiation in the evolution of the genus lepomis.
