Title       : Electron and Proton Transfer in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9208249

Award Number: 9208249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin A. Wraight cwraight@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the mechanisms of electron and proton                   
              transfer in the reaction center complex of the photosynthetic                  
              bacteria, Rhodobacter sphaeroides and Rhodopseudomonas viridis, for            
              which the structure of the reaction center (RC) is known at atomic             
              resolution.  The main focus is the two quinone molecules that act              
              as electron acceptors to the photochemical events.  The quinones               
              undergo one-electron reduction to the semiquinone, and double                  
              reduction to the quinol state, which also requires uptake of                   
              protons from the aqueous medium.  The work aims to identify amino              
              acid residues active in the binding of both quinones, in the                   
              stabilization of the semiquinone states, in the establishment of               
              the functional redox potentials of the two quinones, and in the                
              proton transfer pathways leading to formation of the quinol state.             
              The effects of specific mutations on the functional redox and acid-            
              base properties of the to-electron gate, in Rb. Sphaeroides, will              
              be investigated by kinetic and equilibrium techniques based on                 
              optical spectroscopy and electrometric measurements.  These will be            
              supplemented by structural studies, including X-ray difference                 
              analysis where possible, and infra-red spectroscopy (FTIR), and by             
              computational approaches, utilizing the comparative virtues of                 
              mutant RCs to maximum effect.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              The primary goals of this work are (1) to demonstrate and                      
              understand how specific activities and properties are induced in               
              biological cofactors by protein-ligand interactions, and (2) to                
              investigate the mechanism of proton transfer through proteins.                 
              These are important general issues in enzymatic catalysis and                  
              biological specificity.  The reaction center quinones are uniquely             
              suited for these investigations, through the great experimental                
              amenability of the system for biophysical measurements and for                 
              protein engineering.
