Title       : Scientific Workstations for Research in Computationally- Intensive Econometric
               Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1992 
File        : a9208620

Award Number: 9208620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lung-Fei Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1333,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Dramatic increases in the capacity of computers to                        
              store and process information has resulted in a                                
              reorientation of microeconomic analyses.  Computer-                            
              intensive methods increasingly have been used to explore                       
              larger and more complex databases and to sharpen the                           
              inferences based on those analyses.  Innovation has been                       
              especially significant with respect to the improvement of                      
              semiparametric and nonparametric estimation procedures.  To                    
              address this problem, a group of leading economists, all of                    
              whom are experienced and productive scientists in their own                    
              rights, have developed a network to collectively address                       
              remaining problems in the development of estimation and                        
              other computational networks.  Those investigators have                        
              begun development of an integrated network of computer                         
              workstations.  Through this network, they will exchange                        
              data and programs in order to further stimulate development                    
              and testing of new methods.  This award provides funds to                      
              enable an investigator at the University of Michigan to                        
              acquire a workstation and link it into this network.  The                      
              workstation will be used by the investigator and his                           
              faculty colleagues and graduate students to improve                            
              computational approaches and to test those approaches                          
              through analyses of microeconomic data related to a broad                      
              range of issues.                                                               
                   This award will enable a group of researchers led by a                    
              nationally recognized leader in advancements of                                
              computational methods for microeconomic analysis to                            
              accelerate the pace and expand the scope of their                              
              inquiries.  These researchers will make valuable advances                      
              of both general and more focused benefit regarding                             
              computational methodologies, and through their involvement                     
              in a network of other leading economists, they will                            
              stimulate research in other settings.
