Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Geometric Group Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9208071

Award Number: 9208071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth M. Charney charney@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie I. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   New directions in geometric group theory have emerged in the              
              past few years in the areas of word hyperbolic groups, automatic               
              groups, and spaces of nonpositive curvature.  Professors Charney               
              and Davis will continue research on a number of problems in these              
              areas.  Charney (together with M. Shapiro) plans research on                   
              several questions related to the automaticity of Artin groups.  She            
              also plans to study the problem of putting a metric of nonpositive             
              curvature on several building-like complexes.  Davis (also with M.             
              Shapiro) plans to work on the conjecture that all Coxeter groups               
              are automatic.  Related to this is his project to study properties             
              of the boundary of a Coxeter group.  This might also be useful in              
              finding a group of cohomological dimension two but geometric                   
              dimension three (the Eilenberg-Ganea Question).  Finally, jointly,             
              Charney and Davis intend to work on strict hyperbolization                     
              procedures and relative hyperbolization procedures.  "Strict"                  
              refers to the possibility of converting a complex into a space of              
              strictly negative curvature (rather than just nonpositive                      
              curvature).  "Relative" refers to the problem of keeping the metric            
              on a subcomplex fixed.  Charney and Davis also plan to continue                
              their research on nonpositively curved orbifolds.  The issue here              
              is to decide when certain piecewise spherical metrics on spheres               
              are "large."                                                                   
                   Groups are the appropriate algebraic structures for describing            
              the notion of symmetry with precision.  For this reason they play              
              an extensive role in geometry (and topology).  While the more usual            
              interaction between group theory and geometry is the use of                    
              algebraic computations involving groups to prove theorems about                
              geometric objects possessing symmetry, there is a very significant             
              mathematical subdiscipline in which the roles are reversed and our             
              intuition about geometric objects assists us in conjecturing and               
              proving theorems about associated groups.  A fascinating recent                
              development is the influence of the computer in all this.  Not only            
              is it the ubiquitous timesaver that everyone knows, enabling one to            
              undertake computations that would otherwise be too formidable, but             
              it has actually influenced the questions in geometric group theory             
              in a more fundamental way.  Certain classes of groups have been                
              defined in terms of the types of hypothetical machines that would              
              be able to perform certain computations about them.  Real hardware             
              is not involved in this, and the same definitions could have been              
              conceived long ago, but they were not, for the existence of                    
              computing machines has influenced the way we look at the world, the            
              types of questions we ask about it, the kinds of properties that we            
              find interesting.
