Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Partial Differential Equations"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1993  
File        : a9208188

Award Number: 9208188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Kohn kohn@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award supports three investigators working on various                
              aspects of problems combining several complex variables and                    
              partial differential equations. One primary focus will be                      
              continuing research on the regularity of two first order                       
              differential operators, the complex derivative d-bar which                     
              measures the degree to which a function is holomorphic and the                 
              associated operator restricted to manifolds or domain boundaries               
              called the d-bar-b operator.  The study of regularity is governed              
              by sub-elliptic inequalities.  Regularity is analyzed both                     
              locally and globally through these inequalities, and will be                   
              considered both in the analytic sense as well as that of infinite              
              differentiability. Related to regularity, and possibly one of the              
              strongest motivations for studying it, is the question of how                  
              smooth the boundary values of a function remain after projection               
              onto the space of holomorphic functions on a domain.  A concrete               
              expression for the projection is given by integration against the              
              Bergman kernel.  A second thrust of this project is to understand              
              the boundary behavior of the Bergman kernel on various kinds of                
              domains, especially those of finite type. A third, somewhat more               
              geometric line of work concerns the regularity theory of level                 
              surfaces, problems of crystal growth and degenerate equations.                 
              Level surfaces of solutions of differential equations, expecially              
              those which analyze the level sets of viscosity solutions of heat              
              equations will be studied.  Among the most fundamental questions               
              to be considered is one due to De Giorgi, which seeks the                      
              regularity of the surfaces as a function of a parameter in the                 
              differential equation.                                                         
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them.
