Title       : Investigations of Polymer Conformation and Colliod Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1993      
File        : a9208428

Award Number: 9208428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161421             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley B. Grant sbgrant@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Polymer surface coatings strongly affect colloid stability in                  
              a broad spectrum of important engineering processes.  Polymers                 
              are used as flocculants or stabilizers in water and waste                      
              treatment, mineral processing, coal-water slurry                               
              stabilization, paint production, food colloid stabilization,                   
              separation of bacterial suspensions, paper making, brewing,                    
              ceramics fabrication, pharmaceutical preparation, and                          
              agrochemical formulation.  The stability, mobility, and                        
              chemical reactively of colloidal particles naturally present                   
              in groundwater and other aquatic systems are strongly                          
              controlled by surface coatings of organic molecules.  Since                    
              these particles influence the transport of chemical or                         
              radioactive contaminants and the survival of pathogenic                        
              microorganisms, the presence of organic-coated colloids must                   
              be accounted for in models that predict the fate of hazardous                  
              wastes in the environment.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research seeks to clarify the mechanisms by which                         
              surface-adsorbed polymers influences colloid stability in                      
              aqueous systems.  Theoretical and experimental studies                         
              indicates that the stability of coated colloidal particles                     
              depends critically on the conformation of the adsorbing                        
              molecule.  Despite the implied importance of polymer                           
              conformation on colloid stability, there are no experimental                   
              techniques which directly measure the conformation of adsorbed                 
              polymers.  A major goal of this research is to develop a                       
              method for examining the conformation of single-stranded DNA                   
              molecules adsorbed to colloidal latex particles using a                        
              technology called "DNA footprinting".  This technology,                        
              originally developed by biochemists to investigate protein/DNA                 
              interactions, will be used to ascertain the fraction of                        
              adsorbed DNA that is distributed between trains, loops and                     
              tails.  The response of this distribution to changes in                        
              surface and solution chemistry will be investigated and                        
              related to concomitant changes in colloid stability.
