Title       : Physical, Chemical, and Structural Investigation of ReactionCenters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9208129

Award Number: 9208129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. L. Dutton dutton@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Photosynthetic reaction centers in plants are the key to                       
              photosynthesis and hence life on Earth.  The specific projects                 
              involve a variety of measurements on the quinone constituents of               
              the reaction center.  These include a) in vitro analyses, b)                   
              binding free energies of systematically varied quinonoid probe                 
              molecules and c) binding free energies of quinones in binding                  
              site structure varied through selected mutation.  These data                   
              will, aided by computational methods, be used to construct a                   
              binding free energy map of the QA sites of the reaction center of              
              Rb. sphaeroides and Rp. viridis.  Building on this knowledge, we               
              will test novel electron transfer events by making use of                      
              tethered diquinone molecules in which one quinone is in the QA or              
              the QB site and the other occupies positions down the binding                  
              domain normally occupied by the native isoprene chain.                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This work is also important for the following reasons:  Quinone                
              binding sites in proteins of respiration and photosynthesis are                
              the targets of many herbicides and antibiotics.  Quinones                      
              represent the structural foundation of a large class of chemical               
              that includes certain vitamins, hormones, redox cofactors and                  
              drugs.  Knowing how they bind and function in this system is                   
              yielding information that is of general application to the design              
              of such molecules of value to the agricultural and medical                     
              fields.  The opportunities they offer in addressing outstanding                
              questions regarding how electrons transfer through proteins has                
              similar importance.  Control of how these common chemicals                     
              interact with natural tissue and what controls their redox                     
              activity again has impact on understanding the mechanisms of                   
              biological energetics, the side reactions of many drugs, and also              
              forms the basis of developing guidelines for the design and                    
              ultimate synthesis of redox proteins.
