Title       : Developmental Biology and Phylogeny for the Gigartinales (Rhodophyta)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1992  
File        : a9208255

Award Number: 9208255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Max H. Hommersand hommersand@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The most recent classification of the red algae (Rhodophyta)              
              recognizes one class and seventeen orders, the largest being the               
              Gigartinales with over forty families.  For the most part, growth              
              takes place by means of apical cells and the plant body is                     
              composed of branched filaments linked by pit connections.  This                
              feature makes it possible to describe vegetative and reproductive              
              development cell by cell, event by event using morphological and               
              cytological markers seen with light microscopy.  Growth is                     
              punctuated by discrete events and transitional stages that                     
              bracket each phase of development.  These include formation of :               
              juvenile uprights, adult thalli, reproductive organs, and                      
              filamentous structures employed in nutritional strategies for                  
              fruit development and spore production.  Characters used in                    
              classification are resolvable into component ontogenetic                       
              sequences.  Primitive and advanced character states are readily                
              polarized, apparent reversals resolved, and instances of                       
              convergent evolution (homoplasies) identified.  Analysis shows                 
              that every red algal order can be defined by its basic                         
              developmental plan, except the polyphyletic order Gigartinales.                
              This study investigates the developmental morphology of family                 
              clusters in the Gigartinales to complete a phylogenetic analysis               
              of the group.
