Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9208273

Award Number: 9208273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6326               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane F. Collier jcollier@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation project focusses on the intersection of             
              legal discourses and discourses on ethnic and national identity in             
              the British Virgin Islands.  It examines the ways ethnic and                   
              national identities have been mutually constructed during the                  
              islands' twentieth century experience of continued colonial status,            
              an economic boom fostered by tourism, and a concomitant increase               
              in migration from other Caribbean islands.  British Virgin Island              
              national identity has been precariously defined against migrants               
              from independent Caribbean nations who come to work there (who                 
              currently make up almost half of the islands' population), the                 
              islands' relationship to the UK, and the tourists British Virgin               
              Islander businesses hope to attract.                                           
                                                                                             
              Unlike earlier research which took ethnic and national identities              
              as "givens" and attempted to explain their interactions in terms               
              of "adaptation" resulting from competition over scarce "resources,"            
              this study follows leads from recent work on India which questions             
              the premises of adaptationist approaches.  Using court cases,                  
              records, and interviews, the study will contest the definition of              
              "resources" and "competition" as self-evident, and test the                    
              proposition that "resources" themselves are historically                       
              constructed along with legal and cultural processes of national and            
              ethnic identity formation.  This research will add to                          
              anthropological theory on nationalism, ethnicity and law.
