Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9208169

Award Number: 9208169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5261               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley R. Herwitz sherwitz@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                   Open-canopied jack pine and jack spruce stands, in which                  
              reindeer lichens comprise a significant component of the ground                
              cover, occur on dry, nutrient-poor sites throughout northwestern               
              Ontario.  These lichen woodlands are predominantly fire produced.              
              With the suppression of forest fire and the continued northward                
              movement of logging activity in northwestern Ontario, timber                   
              harvest is replacing fire as the most prevalent cause of large-                
              scale disturbance in the lichen rich forests of the region.                    
              Although the effects of forest fire on reindeer lichens and                    
              patterns of terrestrial lichen succession are well-documented,                 
              little is known about how timber harvest affects reindeer lichens              
              or about post-harvest reindeer lichen regeneration.  This study                
              will examine changes in biomass, percent cover, species                        
              composition, and growth rates of reindeer lichens that survive                 
              timber harvest in lichen woodlands and those that colonize                     
              harvested sites on two soil types in several regions of                        
              northwestern Ontario.  Sampling will cover five time-since-                    
              disturbance classes for different sites.  Data will be                         
              statistically analyzed for differences in biomass, percent cover,              
              growth rates and species compositions of reindeer lichens on                   
              sites of various age classes, disturbance types, and soil types.               
              Results of this research will provide an increased understanding               
              of the rate at which reindeer lichens survive timber harvest, the              
              rate of recovery of lichen biomass on harvested sites, and the                 
              roles of lichens that survive and colonize harvested sites in                  
              post-harvest recovery.                                                         
                   The effect of timber harvest on lichen abundance is                       
              significant because of the importance of reindeer lichens to                   
              woodland caribou.  Woodland caribou winter in lichen woodlands                 
              and feed on the reindeer lichens.  Destruction of habitat and the              
              associated decrease in reindeer lichen availability has been                   
              proposed as a cause of the decline in caribou numbers.  The                    
              findings from this study will elucidate some of the processes in               
              reindeer lichen recovery following fire and harvest, and they                  
              will inform management policy of woodland caribou for whom                     
              reindeer lichen are the primary winter fodder.
