Title       : H-Exchange Rates and Hydrogen Bonding of Individual Peptide NH Protons in
               Alpha-Helices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1994      
File        : a9208648

Award Number: 9208648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Baldwin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Baldwin proposes to measure, for the first time, exchange rates            
              of individual peptide NH protons within single, isolated alpha-                
              helices.  A nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technique will be                 
              used, based on 15N spectral editing of the one-dimensional proton              
              spectrum.  A single peptide NH will be 15N-labeled by chemical                 
              synthesis of the peptide, and 15N spin echo difference spectroscopy            
              will be used to give the 1H spectrum of the single 15N-labeled                 
              peptide NH.  A trial experiment demonstrating the feasibility of               
              this approach has been made.  The new method will be used to test              
              the basic assumptions of helix-random coil transition theory, and              
              also to provide background information about exchange rates of                 
              amide protons in single alpha-helices, for use in interpreting data            
              on protein folding intermediates.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              The proposed experiments will provide a new technique for obtaining            
              structural information about short peptides, for example, when the             
              peptide is complexed with a specific receptor.  Currently there is             
              wide interest in " peptide libraries", both in the biotechnology               
              field and in biomedical science generally.  Methodologies have been            
              developed for synthesizing astronomical numbers of different short             
              peptide sequences and then for selecting a small number of                     
              sequences that can bind specifically to a receptor in a signal                 
              transduction pathway.  This method will provide an important tool              
              for characterizing the structure of a peptide in a peptide-receptor            
              complex.  As pointed out above, the method also has direct                     
              application to the problem of characterizing structures of kinetic             
              intermediates on the pathway of protein folding.
