Title       : Middle and Upper Paleolithic Research in Southern Belgium: Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1992       
File        : a9208832

Award Number: 9208832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41474              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence G. Straus lstraus@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lawrence Straus and              
              his collaborators will continue research at two paleolithic                    
              archaeological sites, both located in Southern Belgium.                        
              Preliminary work was conducted at both in 1990 and excavation                  
              indicated that in situ archaeological materials were present.                  
              Trou Magrite is a cave which contains an extended sequence which               
              spans Mousterian (prior to ca. 40,000 years ago) through                       
              following Upper Paleolithic times. A second site, Huccorgne, is                
              located in open air and contains a single archaeological horizon               
              which dates to Gravettian times ca. 23,000 years ago. This marks               
              an extremely cold period when glaciers extended far South in                   
              Europe. Both sites are rich in cultural materials including well               
              preserved faunal material. Dr. Straus and his collaborators will               
              return to both in the summer of 1992 and conduct archaeological                
              excavations. A variety of materials will then be analyzed to                   
              reconstruct the changing environment and human adaptation to it.               
                                                                                             
              Archaeologists are extremely interested in this time period in                 
              Europe for several reasons. First, approximately 40,000 years ago              
              a major transition in both culture and human physical type took                
              place. Neanderthal peoples who manufactured distinctive                        
              Mousterian type stone tools disappeared from the archaeological                
              record. About this time the first anatomically modern humans (as               
              determined through skeletal remains) first appear in Europe. A                 
              different type of culture with a new stone tool technology and                 
              practices such as the production of art accompany this                         
              transition. Although this change can be observed, the underlying               
              processes responsible for it are little understood. It is unclear              
              whether one group replaced another or whether in situ development              
              took place. Dr. Straus excavations should shed light on this                   
              question. They should also provide additional insight into the                 
              methods humans with a simple technology employed to cope with a                
              harsh and changing environment.                                                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists. It will                  
              increase our understanding of the emergence of modern humans and               
              the adaptive strategies associated with this.
