Title       : Emotion, Regulation, and Social Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9208375

Award Number: 9208375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370646             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Eisenberg nancy.eisenberg@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Fabes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                  Many behaviors in everyday social life are based on people's              
              emotional reactions.  Thus, one can better understand both                     
              differences among people in social behavior and the development                
              of social competence in children by attending to differences in                
              individuals' emotional responding and regulation of emotion.                   
              Currently there is some research both on aspects of emotional                  
              responding (such as the tendency to experience negative emotions               
              and the intensity of people's emotional responses) and on self-                
              regulatory and coping behaviors.  However, few researchers have                
              studied the combined effects on social outcomes of differences                 
              among people in both emotional reactivity and the ways in which                
              people regulate their emotion and emotion-based behavior (e.g.,                
              sympathy, anger).  The purpose of the present study is to examine              
              the relation of individual differences in tendencies to react                  
              emotionally, emotion-regulation, and styles of coping to                       
              vicarious emotional responding (e.g. sympathy and empathy),                    
              social behavior (e.g., behavior when angered), popularity with                 
              peers, and social competence at school and at home.  In this                   
              research, the PI's will take a multimethod approach, using self-               
              report and behavioral measures, facial reactions and                           
              physiological measures as markers of emotion, and naturalistic                 
              observational techniques as well as laboratory studies.                        
              Participants in the studies are preschool and school-aged                      
              children and adults.  The goals of this research are to better                 
              understand how people cope with emotions (especially vicariously               
              induced emotions such as sympathy and personal distress and                    
              anger), the factor related to constructive coping with emotions,               
              and the relation of how one deals with emotions to socially                    
              competent and positive behavior.  This research will enhance our               
              understanding of the development of socially competent modes of                
              behavior and the regulation of negative emotion, and the results               
              could be used to foster positive social development in children.
