Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Degree Structures and Forcing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9208408

Award Number: 9208408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia J. Groszek marcia.groszek@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project involves both set theory and recursion theory,               
              focusing on various degree structures and the applications of                  
              forcing to degree-theoretic questions.  The investigator will                  
              continue to work on the analysis of priority arguments in the                  
              theory of recursively enumerable degrees and on the proof-theoretic            
              strength of these arguments.  Groszek and Theodore A. Slaman (Univ.            
              of Chicago) have been developing a uniform presentation for all                
              levels of priority argument and tying these arguments to a standard            
              proof-theoretic hierarchy of fragments of Peano arithmetic.  In                
              addition to continuing this development, Groszek will investigate              
              specific statements about the partial order of recursively                     
              enumerable Turing degrees, considering whether and how their proof-            
              theoretic strength reflects this analysis.  In a different vein,               
              Groszek will work on some long-standing open questions regarding               
              the degrees of constructibility.  Finally, she will consider the               
              question of which partial orders can be embedded into the Turing               
              degrees (assuming the failure of CH), one of the remaining open                
              questions about the global structure of the Turing degrees.                    
                   Prominent among the questions to be addressed by this project             
              are a number that bear on theoretical computability.  They lie in              
              what is known as recursion theory, which deals with a model of                 
              computability knowing no bounds on time or space.  Although answers            
              to such questions have the ability to illuminate practical                     
              questions, they are really practical only when their answers are               
              negative, for it is a very strong statement indeed to say that                 
              something cannot be computed even when one puts no limits on                   
              resources available for the purpose.  The finer structure of                   
              computability theory is sometimes more relevant to actual                      
              computations, and various aspects of that will also be considered.             
              A major thrust of the project is to equate degrees of computability            
              with specific levels in a well studied hierarchy dealing with the              
              logic of arithmetic.
