Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Continuum Mechanics and Hyperbolic Systems of
               Conservation Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1993   
File        : a9208284

Award Number: 9208284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daljit S. Ahluwalia                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantine M. Dafermos Constantine_Dafermos@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will conduct research on the problems lying              
              on the interface between continuum physics and the theory of                   
              hyperbolic systems of conservation laws.  One project will                     
              involve employing the method of generalized characteristics to                 
              study regularity, large time behavior and propagation of                       
              singularities in solutions of quasilinear hyperbolic systems that              
              may or may not be in conservative form.  Another project will                  
              consist of a systematic study of the admissibility of wave fans                
              in systems of conservation laws, modeling specific physical                    
              phenomena, in which the issue of admissibility is still                        
              unresolved either due to the presence of phase boundaries or                   
              because strict hyperbolicity fails.  Finally, a third project                  
              will involve considering hierarchies of systems of conservation                
              laws, like those generated by the Boltzmann equation or through                
              "extended thermodynamics," and studying the process by which                   
              simpler theories are embedded as special or limiting cases into                
              more complex ones.                                                             
                   Continuum physics is founded on balance laws and                          
              constitutive relations.  The former determine the framework of                 
              the theory (for example, mechanics, thermodynamics,                            
              electrodynamics) while the latter identify the type of the                     
              continuous medium (for example, elastic, viscoelastic, solid,                  
              fluid).  The problems here concern media with "elastic" response               
              in which case the combination of balance laws and constitutive                 
              relations leads to quasilinear hyperbolic systems, commonly known              
              as hyperbolic systems of conservation laws.  Despite considerable              
              progress in the study of such systems over the past 25 years, the              
              basic goal of establishing existence, uniqueness, regularity and               
              large time behavior of admissible solutions has only been                      
              achieved partially in the case of one space dimension and remains              
              entirely unfulfilled in higher space dimensions.  Progress in the              
              field requires understanding a combination of continuum physics,               
              mathematical analysis, and scientific computation.
