Title       : Studies in Dynamic Economies with Boundedly Rational Agents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1994     
File        : a9208954

Award Number: 9208954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213306             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Kreps   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Four specific topics will be covered in this research.  (1)                    
              Axiomatic models of choice in the face of unforeseen contingencies             
              will be developed, with emphasis given to models of dynamic choice             
              and choice in multiperson settings.  The objective would be to                 
              establish axioms that represent rational preferences when the                  
              decisionmaker is unsure of what future contingencies are even                  
              possible, much less which will occur.  (2) Efficient contractual               
              forms in the presence of unforeseen contingencies will be analyzed,            
              emphasizing how bilateral, relational contracts will change with               
              changes in the knowledge the parties have about each other's                   
              preferences and future contingencies.                                          
                                                                                             
              (3) The impact of unforeseen contingencies on liability insurance              
              will be studied, emphasizing the second best form of liability                 
              insurance in the face of limited liability laws.  (4) The creation             
              of a notion of similarity between different situations through the             
              use of cheap talk will be investigated, where one party simply                 
              declares one situation to be similar to others.  The questions are             
              when such declarations will be credible and whether such a                     
              situation can arise naturally through a heuristic learning process.            
                                                                                             
              An important general theme of this research, more apparent in the              
              first three topics than in the fourth, is how individuals adapt and            
              equilibria are constructed in contexts where the individuals are               
              constantly confronted with situations that their earlier plans did             
              not anticipate.  This is a hallmark of global, as well as more                 
              local, change; how do individuals, economies, and societies adapt              
              to an environment in which the rules and conditions are always                 
              changing?  How, for example, should we proceed in the face of the              
              greenhouse effect, where there is honest controversy as to what the            
              eventual consequences of various actions (or inactions) will be?               
              How should national economies construct their trade relations, a               
              context in which there are clear choices to be made between                    
              bilateral and tri- or multi-lateral contracting forms, and the                 
              different countries are constantly working out the nature of their             
              relationships in the face of changing conditions?  Some of the                 
              tools developed and the paradigmatic forms of research employed in             
              this project will be useful in providing answers to specific                   
              questions such as those posed above.
