Title       : Salvage and Curation of St. Augustine Archaeological Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9208707

Award Number: 9208707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93917              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Deagan deagan@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kathleen Deagan                  
              acquire for the Florida Museum of Natural History and curate                   
              approximately 800,000 to 1,000,000 objects excavated from the                  
              site of St. Augustine, Florida. These materials are currently                  
              held by the Historic St. Augustine Preservation Board.  A severe               
              and destructive flood in 1990 in the Board's basement artifact                 
              repository along with the loss in 1991 of its only archaeological              
              collections manager position have made it impossible for the                   
              Board to continue to adequately care for this artifact                         
              collection. The materials are packed in closed cardboard boxes,                
              stored in a variety of rooms, hallways and closets and are                     
              totally inaccessible to researchers. Dr. Deagan and colleagues                 
              will transfer these materials to the Florida Museum of Natural                 
              History at the University of Florida where a second large                      
              collection of materials from the site is currently housed. They                
              will inventory, accession and computer catalogue the new                       
              materials and rehouse them in inert specimen boxes and closed                  
              cabinets. The associated records will be organized and duplicated              
              and a survey conducted of immediate conservation needs. In this                
              way the collection will be made available for scientific                       
              research. (NSF support provides funds for both transport and                   
              curation. No purchase fee is involved.)                                        
                                                                                             
              St. Augustine, the oldest city in the United States, was first                 
              occupied ca. 1566. It has been the focus of intensive                          
              archaeological study and excavations have been conducted at 28                 
              domestic, religious, military and commercial sites. The ca.                    
              1,500,000 objects recovered include ceramic, metal, shell, bone,               
              glass and stone artifacts as well as soil, floral, charcoal,                   
              malacological and other environmental samples. Together they                   
              permit anthropologists to ask a wide range of questions not only               
              about human behavior but also about environmental interaction and              
              change. The materials are also relevant for studies of historical              
              ecology, cultural evolution, social history, materials sciences                
              and post-1500 technology. They provide one of the primary                      
              foundations for our understanding of Euro-American adaptation,                 
              acculturation, the demise of Native American society and the                   
              emergence of Euro-American culture.                                            
                                                                                             
              While the Florida State Museum materials have been widely used,                
              the Preservation Board collection is inaccessible for scientific               
              study. Dr. Deagan's project is important because it will curate                
              this valuable body of data and make it available for study.
