Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Infinite Particle Systems and Hydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9208490

Award Number: 9208490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fraydoun Rezakhanlou rezakhan@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator is working on the derivation of a              
              macroscopic equation for the stochastic Ising model.  Studies of               
              the problem at low temperatures where different phases coexist                 
              indicate that the droplets of different phases evolve according                
              to some type of "motion by mean curvature" PDE.  Related problems              
              can be proposed for either this model or its appropriate                       
              variations such as simple exclusions with speed change or the                  
              Ginzburg-Landau model.  Another problem of interest is the                     
              derivation of conservation laws for asymmetric simple exclusions               
              with speed changes.  Analyzing the asymptotic behavior of a                    
              tagged particle in this model is also of great interest.                       
                   An important task in statistical mechanics is to derive the               
              evolution of a fluid from its molecular structure.  At the                     
              molecular level, a fluid consists of a large number of molecules               
              moving according to physical laws.  Microscopically, molecules                 
              collide incessantly and move somewhat erratically in a random                  
              like fashion.  Due to conservation laws of mass, momentum and                  
              entropy, molecules manage to organize themselves in such a way as              
              to form a flow pattern on a large scale.  Various Caricature                   
              models of a fluid will be studied to derive their macroscopic                  
              evolution from their microscopic structure in a mathematically                 
              rigorous fashion.
