Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Adaptive Numerical Methods for Singularly-Perturbed
               Reaction-Diffusion Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1993      
File        : a9208684

Award Number: 9208684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37132              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Estep   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                Estep proposes to analyze and implement adaptive finite element              
              methods for systems of singularly-perturbed reaction-diffusion                 
              equations and dissipative ordinary differential equations.                     
              Solutions of such problems typically evolve on multiple scales,                
              and to be useful, numerical results need to be uniformly accurate              
              for the physically meaningful range of the parameters. He is                   
              attempting to overcome these difficulties by constructing a                    
              theory of adaptive error control based on a posteriori and a                   
              priori error analyses. A posteriori results measure the error in               
              terms of the regularity of the approximation and the stability of              
              the solution and provide a basis for adapting the discretization.              
              A priori results bound the error in terms of the regularity of                 
              the solution and the stability of the scheme and guarantee                     
              convergence. Estep is also examining the dynamical properties of               
              numerical schemes in the context of producing approximations with              
              the correct dynamical behavior. Finally, he is studying the                    
              implementation of adaptive error control in finite element codes               
              for parallel computers. The ultimate goal of this project is the               
              public release of a parallel code that can solve systems of                    
              reaction-diffusion equations in two and three dimensions with                  
              minimal user interface.                                                        
                 Many models in applied science result in nonlinear                          
              reaction-diffusion differential equations that contain source                  
              terms balanced against terms that diffuse energy. This balance is              
              usually delicate and difficult to handle mathematically,                       
              consequently numerical approximation is an important tool. Yet,                
              solutions of such problems typically evolve on several scales,                 
              i.e. some interesting behavior occurs in very localized regions                
              in space-time while other behavior evolves over long times and                 
              over larger regions in space. The use of a uniform numerical                   
              discretization for a real application results in huge                          
              computations that tax even the largest computers. Estep's goal is              
              to produce numerical schemes that adapt themselves to the                      
              localized behavior of the target solution so as to make the                    
              computations both as accurate as desired and as efficient as                   
              possible. Mathematically, he is trying to understand how to use                
              the information provided by an approximation to adapt the                      
              discretization, that is, make the computations self-governing. He              
              is also working on the implementation of this theory into a                    
              parallel code that solves very general problems with minimum user              
              input. Success of this project will lead to the public release of              
              the code, to the great benefit of the engineering and scientific               
              communities.
