Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Advanced Training in Modern Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1994   
File        : a9208907

Award Number: 9208907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Wolf jawolf@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Arveson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award to Professors Arveson and Wolf is made under the               
              Mathematical Sciences Research Group initiative.  It will support              
              postdocs and graduate students in Modern Analysis at the                       
              University of California at Berkeley.  The research supported by               
              this award will deal with various aspects of Modern Analysis                   
              including the representation theory of Lie groups, the theory of               
              operator algebras, and ergodic theory.                                         
                   As the mathematical vehicle for exploiting the symmetries                 
              inherent in a system, the representation theory of Lie groups has              
              had a profound impact upon mathematics itself, particularly in                 
              analysis and number theory, and upon theoretical physics,                      
              especially quantum mechanics and elementary particle physics.                  
              The theory of operator algebras begins with the notion of                      
              operator, which can be thought of as finite or infinite matrices               
              of complex numbers.  Special types of operators are often put                  
              together in an algebra, naturally called an operator algebra.                  
              These abstract objects have a surprising variety of applications.              
              For example, they play a key role in knot theory, which in turn                
              is  currently being used to study the structure of DNA, and they               
              are of fundamental importance in noncommutative geometry, which                
              is becoming increasingly important in physics.  Ergodic theory in              
              general concerns understanding the average behavior of systems                 
              whose dynamics is too complicated or chaotic to be followed in                 
              microscopic detail.  Under the heading "dynamics can be placed                 
              the modern theory of how groups of abstract transformations act                
              on smooth spaces.  In this way ergodic theory makes contact with               
              geometry in its quest to classify flows on homogeneous spaces.
