Title       : Environmental Heterogeneity and Woody Species Diversity in Low-elevation
               Tropical Secondary Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1995     
File        : a9208031

Award Number: 9208031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $812401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Stone nao@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1128,9169,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study addresses basic ecological processes that influence the             
              nature and diversity of tree regeneration during secondary forest              
              succession in low-elevation tropical forest.  It is hypothesized               
              that seedling recruitment during succession is strongly dependent on           
              both resource availability and heterogeneity.  Specifically, it is             
              suggested that changes in canopy and gap structure, as successional            
              forests age, increase both light availability and light                        
              heterogeneity at ground level.  It is expected that species richness           
              of the regeneration pool is enhanced by both overall light                     
              availability and the diversity of light environments represented in            
              older, structurally heterogeneous stands.  Seedling recruitment is             
              further enhanced by availability of patches of disturbed soil                  
              associated with gaps or animal activity.  This interdisciplinary               
              approach integrates ecosystem-level studies of the patterns of                 
              tropical forest succession with detailed analyses of within-stand              
              processes producing those patterns and studies of physiological and            
              growth responses of representative species.                                    
                                                                                             
              Changes in forest composition and structure with be documented in              
              the species richness of seedlings, and in within-stand environmental           
              heterogeneity in a chronosequence of secondary and old-growth                  
              premontane rain forests of northeastern Costa Rica.  Detailed                  
              measurements of the spatial variation of light availability, soil              
              disturbance, and litter cover in selected forests will be performed            
              along this chronosequence.  The influence of distance to seed                  
              sources on propagule diversity will be assessed in these stands by             
              sampling soil seed stocks in the study sites and by comparing the              
              diversity of seedlings and saplings as a function of distance from             
              seed sources.  Investigators will experimentally examine the effects           
              of resource availability and heterogeneity on seedling establishment           
              and growth by manipulating light availability and soil disturbance             
              in a series of 15-25 year old stands.  Light will be manipulated by            
              creating large and small canopy gaps and removing understory shrubs            
              in a replicated single-factor (4 treatments) design in which we will           
              assess the effects on natural seedling recruitment and species                 
              richness.  Additional manipulative studies in gaps and closed-canopy           
              sites will examine the interactive effects of light and soil                   
              disturbance on natural seedling recruitment and the germination and            
              survival of seeds of selected species.                                         
                                                                                             
              Experimental and observational field data will be used to model the            
              effects of stand structure and light availability of seedling                  
              abundance and diversity using a spatial, mechanistic, simulation               
              model of forest dynamics.  To evaluate the role of species-specific            
              differences in canopy light transmission within secondary forest, a            
              comparative study of canopy structure and light transmission will be           
              conducted for five abundant canopy tree species in the stands.  The            
              model will also simulate the effect of spatial heterogeneity on the            
              diversity of seedling regeneration, based on measured                          
              ecophysiological and growth responses of selected species.  Model              
              inputs will be based on field data from representative stands within           
              the chronosequence.  This modelling effort will integrate measured             
              organismal responses in the context of stand-level changes in                  
              resource availability in tropical forests.  Project results will               
              contribute to basic ecological research on the maintenance of                  
              biological diversity in moist tropical forests, with direct                    
              applicability to studies of tropical forest restoration, secondary             
              forest management, and sustainable tropical forestry.
