Title       : US-Czechoslovakia Research: Identification and Utilization of Critical
               Conditions for Polymer Characterizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9208552

Award Number: 9208552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32250              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Hunkeler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5930,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project in chemistry is                      
              between Dr. David Hunkeler of Vanderbilt University and                        
              Dr. Dusan Berek of the Polymer Institute, Slovak Academy                       
              of Science.  The researchers will use the concept of                           
              chromotographic invisibility to identify critical                              
              conditions where the retention volume of a polymer in a                        
              mixed element is independent of molecular weight.  They                        
              will compare two approaches for generating critical                            
              conditions:  (1) Belenki's method where the elution                            
              strength of the binary mixture is varied to control the                        
              adsorption and exclusion of the macromolecules and (2) the                     
              Hunkeler-Macko-Berek technique where the thermodynamic                         
              quality of the mobile phase is varied to balance the free                      
              energy of adsorption and precipitation with that of                            
              redissolution and exclusion.  The influence of                                 
              temperature, pressure and sample concentration on the                          
              behavior of selected polymers at their critical conditions                     
              will also be evaluated.  The critical conditions will be                       
              correlated with properties which characterize the                              
              macromolecule in solution.  The identified critical                            
              conditions will then be applied to the separation and                          
              identification of polymer blends and block and graft                           
              copolymers according to their molecular weight and                             
              composition.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project in polymer research fulfills the program                          
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                        
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to                     
              combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas                      
              of strong mutual interest and competence.
