Title       : Antarctic Meteorological Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9208864

Award Number: 9208864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $764813             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Stearns chucks@ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1303,9188,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Antarctic Meteorological Research Center (AMRC), one of                    
              three research centers in the Science and Engineering Technology               
              Center at McMurdo, is a resource for meteorological research and a             
              test bed for improving operational synoptic forecasting.  The Man-             
              Computer Interactive Data Access System (McIDAS), a versatile                  
              computer-based system for organizing, manipulating, and integrating            
              antarctic environmental data will form the basis of AMRC.  It will             
              capture the flow of meteorological information from polar orbiting             
              satellites, automatic weather stations, operational station                    
              synoptic observations, and research project data.  It will also                
              receive environmental data products, such as weather forecasts,                
              from outside Antarctica, and will act as a repository for existing             
              archived data bases.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Phase I, to begin in the 1992-93 summer season, consists of                    
              the installation and operation of work stations that can manipulate            
              and display AVHRR data based on the existing satellite imagery                 
              acquisition system.  Phase II will consist of the acquisition and              
              integration of a system that will provide data collection, data                
              display and archiving, scientific applications, network communi-               
              cations, and remote user access.                                               
                                                                                             
              The McIDAS system, developed at the University of Wisconsin in                 
              the mid-1970's, ingests meteorological data from various sources:              
              standard synoptic observations, radiosonde profiles, satellite-                
              based visible and infra-red imagery, atmospheric profiles inverted             
              from multi-spectral scanning sensors, and non-standard data such as            
              TOMS ozone data, SAR sea ice information, and the AWS network                  
              observations.  The system automatically registers, calibrates, and             
              locates (by geographical coordinates) the ingested information and             
              allows a user at a work station to manipulate the data base.  The              
              manipulations include sectorization, false color, enhancements,                
              brightness stretching, overlays, looping, differencing, and are                
              quite definitely keyed to synoptic meteorological research and                 
              weather forecasting.  The antarctic system is based primarily on               
              data streams provided by polar orbiters (AVHRR/HRPT and DMSP),                 
              since the look angles from geostationary satellites are so                     
              extremely low.  The full utilization of McIDAS capabilities in                 
              producing meteorological data products useful in both forecasting              
              and research will include a data transfer and communications                   
              capability to, for example, the Australian Bureau of Meteorology               
              (ABOM), the University of Wisconsin Space Science and Engineering              
              Center (SSEC), the Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center (FNOC),                 
              Monterey, and the European Center for Medium Range Weather                     
              Forecasts (ECMRWF), Reading, U.K.
