Title       : Flexilbe Collaborative Software Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9208319

Award Number: 9208319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lou L. Rosenberg                        
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56094              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasun Dewan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is collaborative research with John Riedl, University of                  
              Minnesota (IRI-9208546).  Much of software engineering-design,                 
              programming, debugging, testing, code reviews, program                         
              demonstrations, and program management-requires collaboration among            
              multiple users, possibly geographically dispersed.  In this project            
              the researchers propose to investigate flexible support for the                
              activities of cooperating software engineers.  In particular they              
              propose to investigate an approach that offers (i) a wide range of             
              concurrency control mechanisms including serializable transactions             
              and interactive transactions; (ii) fine-grain access control for               
              collaborative applications that allows a user to recover from other            
              users' mistakes and explore various alternatives with them, (iv)               
              a multidimensional inheritance model that allows collaboration                 
              parameters to be specified independently in hierarchies of groups              
              of objects and groups of users; and (v) multimedia support                     
              integrated with concurrency control,  access control, and                      
              undo/redo.  The unique features of this research are its focus on              
              the relationships of these five goals, on flexible mechanisms for              
              achieving each of the goals, and on structured specification of                
              options by end-users.  The researchers will use results from                   
              previous research done in flexible coupling, long transactions,                
              adaptive concurrency control systems. inheritance, single-user                 
              undo/redo, capability-based protection, collaborative tools, and               
              software engineering tools,  They plan to implement the approach               
              by extending an existing system developed at Purdue and Minnesota.             
              They will evaluate the performance of the various collaboration                
              methods and study how a particular method can be automatically                 
              chosen by the systems based on a minimum performance level                     
              requested by the user.  In addition to an understanding of the                 
              applicability of collaborative technology to software engineering,             
              the research will produce prototype software engineering tools to              
              demonstrate the novel aspects of the research.
