Title       : Numerical Study of Stellar Collapse Neutron Star Collision, Heavy Ion Collisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9208881

Award Number: 9208881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13500              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Wilson jimwilson@llnl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Wilson's research objectives are divided into three                   
              major categories:  supernovae, heavy ion collisions and neutron                
              star collisions.                                                               
                   Research in supernovae includes the clarification of the                  
              nature of the supernova explosion mechanism utilizing a numerical              
              computer model, surveying the implications to particle physics of              
              supernova events and providing theoretical and design support for              
              a prototype supernovae neutrino observatory now being                          
              constructed.  Interesting results are expected from all these                  
              projects, in particular, restraints on massive neutrino models                 
              (with their associated oscillation properties) and axion mass                  
              limits.                                                                        
                   The heavy ion collision project is based on modeling the                  
              collision of heavy ions by a hydrodynamical approximation for the              
              baryons and a mean field model for the pions.  From comparison of              
              the model with heavy ion collision experiments at low energies                 
              (about one GeV per nucleon) important information for supernovae               
              equations of state will be derived. At higher collision energies,              
              the issue of nuclear transparency will be addressed.                           
                   A numerical program to study the collisions of neutron stars              
              has almost been completed.  The frequency and total energy                     
              emitted in gravitational radiation will be computed as well as                 
              the neutrino signal expected during the final spiraling inward                 
              and coalescence of a neutron star pair.
