Title       : Molecular Genetic Studies of Neurogenesis in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1994        
File        : a9208955

Award Number: 9208955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Yedvobnick biolby@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The earliest stage of neural development relies on a decision                  
              making process that determines whether groups of uncommitted cells             
              are directed into a neural pathway of development or a pathway that            
              produces skin.  This process is fundamental and shared by a wide               
              range of organisms, including human.  In the fruit fly, this                   
              decision is regulated by a group of genes called the neurogenic                
              loci whose gene products mediate intercellular communication.                  
              Molecular studies of these loci have demonstrated that they encode             
              membrane, cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins.  The mastermind (mam)              
              gene, is a member of the neurogenic loci that codes for a nuclear              
              protein with a novel structure.  It is the only member of these                
              loci where sequence information has not provided a clear model for             
              function.  To understand the function of the mam gene, three                   
              strategies will be undertaken.  First, the hypothesis that mam                 
              encodes a DNA binding regulatory protein will be tested.  This will            
              involve biochemical assays, and the use of a new yeast selection               
              system that may elucidate the targets of mam regulation in the                 
              nucleus. Secondly, a screen for a temperature-sensitive mam allele             
              will be made in order to inactivate the mam protein at any time                
              during development and observe the consequences of mam elimination             
              on neural development.  Thirdly, genetic screens for modifiers of              
              mam function will be performed.  These screens may produce                     
              mutations in genes that interact with mam and also play a role in              
              early neural development.  It is expected that a complete                      
              characterization of the mam protein and interacting genes will                 
              provide new insights into neural development that are generally                
              relevant to many species.
