Title       : Soil-stream Interfaces as Control-Points for Speciation and Transformations of
               Nitrogen in a Heterogeneous Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1992    
File        : a9208395

Award Number: 9208395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars O. Hedin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathaniel E. Ostrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Philip Robertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1128,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the role of soil-stream interfaces as                  
              control-points for the speciation (NO3-vs. NO2-vs. NH4+vs. DON vs.             
              N2O) and flux of N in a heterogeneous landscape.  Biogeochemical               
              transformations of N at the soil-stream interface may have                     
              important effects on both the quantity and quality (speciation) of             
              N lost to downstream ecosystems, and may modify the extent to                  
              which h the chemistry of watershed streams are affected by                     
              watershed processes.  A mechanistic understanding of such N                    
              transformations along soil-stream flowpaths may therefore be                   
              critical in order to predict how watershed disturbances (both                  
              short-term and chronic) will affect surface-water chemistry.                   
              Preliminary studies from the Augusta Creek Watershed have pointed              
              to soil-stream interfaces as potential control-points for                      
              downstream speciation and flux of N.  The work outlined in this                
              project seeks to provide an understanding of rates and mechanisms              
              of N transformations along explicit soil-stream hydrologic                     
              flowpaths in the watershed.  The principal investigators will use              
              both descriptive and experimental approaches, including the use of             
              tracers of hydrologic flowpaths (LiBr) and tracers for specific                
              biogeochemical reactions (stable N isotopes).  The main goal is to             
              understand how patterns of N transformations at soil-stream                    
              interfaces vary in space, time,and as a function of hydrology.
