Title       : Lake Food Webs: Properties and Artifacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1993      
File        : a9208122

Award Number: 9208122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Goldman crgoldman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heath J. Carney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1184,
Abstract    :
                   We propose to assemble some of the most detailed and                      
              complete food web data yet collected, and use these data to                    
              evaluate, extend, and integrate food web theory.  Data will be                 
              collected from several of the most thoroughly studied ecosystems               
              in the world including Lake Tahoe, Castle Lake, and Clear Lake in              
              California, and Mirror Lake in New Hampshire.  In constructing                 
              food webs for these lakes we will emphasize complete species                   
              lists (several webs will include over 500 species), even                       
              resolution of producers, consumers and decomposers, and estimates              
              of the dominance of species and strengths of trophic                           
              interactions.  With these data we will evaluate the effects of                 
              scale (extent and resolution of the data) on food web structure,               
              extend food web theory to more precisely account for real food                 
              webs (i.e., food webs with at least an order of magnitude more                 
              species than those in current food web collections) and integrate              
              food web theory by delineating the complementarily between binary              
              descriptions and functionally prioritized descriptions of food                 
              webs.  We will examine major food web patterns including                       
              connectance, links per species, chain length, and proportions of               
              top, intermediate and basal species.  The data will also be used               
              specifically to test several pertinent hypotheses about food web               
              structure including the intermediate trophic state hypothesis,                 
              the constant connectance hypothesis, and previously described                  
              effects of scale and aggregation on food web structure.  I Larger              
              goals of this proposal include improving procedures for                        
              constructing food webs and integrating food web theory by                      
              assembling data using both structural (binary) and functional                  
              approaches for the same systems.  These studies will help                      
              stimulate the clearly needed interaction and integration of                    
              theory and empiricism for development of this vital subdiscipline              
              of ecology.
