Title       : Use of Summer Precipitation Along a Summer Precipitation Gradient
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9208021

Award Number: 9208021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Ehleringer ehleringer@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal is directed at understanding the ability of common               
              arid region plants to utilize summer precipitation events and the              
              consequences of different water sources for growth and for the                 
              efficiency of dry matter production.  Preliminary data indicate                
              that several of the dominant perennial species in the Intermountain            
              West appear not to utilize summer precipitation, even though summer            
              rain is a major component of the annual water input to these                   
              ecosystems.  It is proposed to examine several hypotheses related              
              to a plant's utilization of summer precipitation and how this                  
              relates to the efficiency of biomass production along a gradient of            
              increasing summer precipitation.  Research will be centered on                 
              using stable isotope analyses to determine both water sources and              
              efficiency of dry matter production.  Field studies will be                    
              conducted at five sites, which range from 15% to 52% summer                    
              precipitation, but which are otherwise similar in total                        
              precipitation and temperature.  The study will focus on dominant               
              tree-subtree species in the ecosystem transitional between desert              
              and temperate forest ecosystems: Juniper (Juniperus osteosperma),              
              pinyon pine (Pinus edulis) and scrub oak (Quercus gambelii).  There            
              is strong potential for applied aspects of the proposed research.              
              Stable isotope analyses provide integrated long-term estimates of              
              plant parameters involving water use and efficiency of dry matter              
              production.  The information and techniques derived from this study            
              will be useful in determining the kinds of characters to be used               
              for evaluation of forest timber and pulp species.  Foresters and               
              agronomists are already beginning to use these stable isotope                  
              approaches for integrated analyses of different genetic lines.
