Title       : The Effect of Solar Cycle Variations on the Troposphere/ Stratosphere System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1993    
File        : a9208266

Award Number: 9208266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166190             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Rind CDDHR@NASAGISS  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nambath K. Balachandran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses the question of whether Solar variability              
              can affect our atmosphere through UV insolation.  Effects have been            
              found statistically (LBitzke and Van Loon), but we do not know if              
              these have physical causes or just statiscal "quirks".  The effect             
              of solar ultraviolet (uv) insolation variations on the troposphere             
              and stratosphere will be investigated with a General Circulation               
              Modedl extending from the surface to  85 km.  Solar uv variations              
              at wavelengths less than 0.3u will be input into the model in three            
              situations: the model control run (which has light cast tropical               
              winds in the lower stratosphere) and the two phases of the QBO                 
              (strong east winds and strong west winds).  The model simulations              
              for the control, QBO experiments and increased uv experiments will             
              each be run for three years, in an attempt to separate the solar               
              impact from the interannual variability.  The uv increase first                
              utilized will be large (50%) to clarify the nature of potential                
              responses.  Future experiments will reduce the increase to 10%, and            
              may alter the spectrum of the increase, so that a greater                      
              percentage of the change is at the shortest wavelengths.                       
              The goal of these experiments is to investgate and understand the              
              potential impact solar cycle variations may have on the troposphere            
              and stratosphere.  The stratosphere is most likely to be directly              
              affected, and the method of any potential interaction with the                 
              troposphere will be closely  examined.  Possible tropospheric                  
              impacts of interest include variations in jet stream, storm track              
              and the general synoptic climatology, all of which have been                   
              reported in the literature but whose mechanism has yet to be                   
              identified.  Successful simulation of such responses, if they                  
              occur, will help validate the observations, as well as the ability             
              of coupled troposphere/stratosphere models to simulate the                     
              dynamical interactions between these two regions.
