Title       : Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction: Theory and Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9208590

Award Number: 9208590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol K. Hall hall@turbo.che.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9181,9216,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              When two aqueous solutions of water soluble polymer such as                    
              PEG and dextran are mixed together, above critical                             
              concentrations, a liquid-liquid phase separation occurs.  A                    
              similar situation occurs when PEG and salt are mixed together.                 
              Proteins or enzymes added to either of the resulting two phase                 
              mixtures will tend to partition unequally between the two                      
              phases, thus allowing for the extraction of a particular                       
              protein.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Over the past three years, in collaboration with Professor                     
              Kula of the Institute for Enzymetechnology in Julich, West                     
              Germany, and under the auspices of an NSF grant (CBT-872084),                  
              the PI has been developing a statistical mechanical theory for                 
              aqueous two phase partitioning, and has been undertaking                       
              complementary experiments on the phase behavior of the PEG/Dx                  
              system.  The experimentation involved the careful assemblage                   
              of phase equilibria diagrams, and the identification of the                    
              interfacial tension between the two phases as a sensitive                      
              indicator of composition.  Theoretically, simple models of                     
              polymer-polymer, polymer-protein, ion-ion, protein-protein,                    
              protein-ion and polymer-ion interactions have been developed                   
              which can be used to calculate potentials of mean force in                     
              water.  The proposed research suggests additional theoretical                  
              work along the same lines.  The mean force potentials which                    
              have been developed are to be used to obtain the radial                        
              distribution function via the closure postulation of the                       
              integral equation technique.  From the radial distribution                     
              function, thermodynamic properties can be obtained, and phase                  
              separations behavior identified.  These calculations will be                   
              supplemented by Gibbs Monte-Carlo computer simulations of the                  
              phase equilibria.  These simulations will allow verification                   
              of the equilibria obtained by the integral equation route, and                 
              will provide a method for obtaining phase equilibria for which                 
              the integral equation approach proves inadequate.  Simulations                 
              and integral phase equilibria calculations will be carried out                 
              to develop theories capable of predicting phase equilibria in                  
              polymer/polymer and polymer/salt mixtures, and the segregation                 
              g of proteins including multiple protein partitioning and                      
              possibly the effect of affinity ligands attached to the                        
              polymer molecule.. Complementary experiments on protein                        
              partitioning will also be undertaken.
