Title       : Systematics and Phylogeny of Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9208433

Award Number: 9208433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ihsan A. Al-Shehbaz ihsan.al-shehbaz@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1131,
Abstract    :
                   Arabidopsis thaliana, or commonly known as mouse-ear cress, a             
              small European weed of the mustard family, to which the cabbages,              
              Brussel sprouts, broccoli, cauliflower, and radishes belong, has               
              become the model flowering plant in basic studies of classical and             
              molecular biology.  Thousands of biologists are working on this                
              organism to understand many fundamental biological processes.                  
              Worldwide interest in mouse-ear cress stems from the fact that this            
              organism has the smallest and simplest genome among flowering                  
              plants, has a generation time of four to six weeks, and has a small            
              size to 30 cm high (because of its small size, dozens can be grown             
              in a small pot and several hundred thousands in a small room).                 
              These and several other attributes make the plant ideal for basic              
              studies in biology.  Yet the very basic information on Arabidopsis,            
              especially on its nearest relatives, limits, number of species, and            
              various aspects of its individual species is almost non-existent.              
              To understand the origin of this organism, basic systematic studies            
              on the genus are urgently needed, and living material of all taxa              
              should be made available.  The proposed research is designed to                
              address these very problems.                                                   
                   Intensive field work will be done in central Asia, especially             
              the adjacent portions of China, Pakistan, India, Afghanistan,                  
              Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, which represent the center             
              of greatest diversity of the genus.  Seed collections will be                  
              deposited at the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center at Ohio                
              State, where they will be made available to botanists worldwide.               
              Extensive systematic studies based on herbarium material from more             
              than 80 herbaria will be conducted, and detailed studies on the                
              morphology, reproductive biology, cytology, seed anatomy, and                  
              chemistry of Arabidopsis and its relatives will be done.  The                  
              proposed two-year grant will result in a systematic study of                   
              Arabidopsis and will provide the scientific community with much                
              needed living material of the various species including mouse-ear              
              cress.
