Title       : The Photochemistry of Dinuclear Organometallic Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1994       
File        : a9208703

Award Number: 9208703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Bursten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                     
              Organometallic Chemistry Program, involves a combined                          
              experimental and theoretical study of the photochemical                        
              reactions of a variety of dinuclear metal carbonyl complexes.                  
              The objective of the study is to develop a detailed                            
              understanding of the elementary processes that accompany                       
              absorption of a photon by the organometallic molecule and how                  
              these are affected by changes in the ligands.  The research                    
              will proceed with conventional preparative scale photolyses,                   
              matrix isolation, and flash photolysis studies of several                      
              series of dinuclear compounds in which the bridging ligands,                   
              terminal ligands and metal atoms are varied.  These studies                    
              will be followed by detailed, ultrafast laser studies designed                 
              to probe the elementary processes.  In addition to monitoring                  
              by conventional visible spectroscopy, picosecond, transient                    
              Raman scattering and infrared techniques will also be used in                  
              order to obtain structural information concerning transient                    
              intermediates.  Finally, molecular dynamics will be modeled via                
              theoretical electronic structure calculations using both                       
              approximate and ab initio computational methods.                               
              %%%                                                                            
              This research is designed to experimentally and theoretically                  
              investigate events that occur extremely rapidly following                      
              absorption of a photon by an organometallic compound. Through                  
              the combination of experimental and theoretical studies to be                  
              utilized it is expected that our understanding of these events                 
              will develop to the point that in the future predictions can be                
              made about how the reactivity of an organometallic compound                    
              will be affected by changes in the groups attached to the metal                
              atom.  Ultimately these results may be important in the                        
              synthesis of new materials and in the design of new catalysts.
