Title       : Molecular genetics of the Mu transposons of maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9208646

Award Number: 9208646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkatesan Sundaresan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The Robertson's Mutator (Mu) transposable element system is a             
              highly active transposon system in maize that generates new                    
              mutations at frequencies of 50-fold over background.  The Mu system            
              has several unusual properties that distinguish it from other                  
              eukaryotic transposable element systems, and there is little known             
              regarding the mechanism of transposition of the Mu elements.  The              
              proposed studies are aimed towards a better understanding of this              
              transposon system at the molecular level.  We will characterize                
              previously generated genetic material which show altered                       
              transposition properties as follows.  We plan to clone and                     
              characterize a derivative Mu element that heritable exhibits a 10              
              to 100 fold increase in excision frequency relative to the                     
              progenitor Mu1 element.  This element can be used to answer                    
              specific questions about Mu transposition, as well as providing a              
              sensitive marker for excision activity.  We will also analyze a Mu             
              lineage in which the transposon system was inactivated by continued            
              selfing, in order to understand the basis of dose-dependent                    
              regulation of Mu transposon activity.  In addition to the above                
              studies, we will develop assays for Mu transposition in transgenic             
              dicotyledenous plants.  The assays will be used to determine the               
              sequence requirements for transposition, and the function of                   
              specific sequences within the Mu termini that we have previously               
              identified as likely to play an important role in transposition.               
              %%%                                                                            
              Due to the unusual properties of Mu transposons, these studies                 
              should add to our knowledge of mechanisms of transposition and DNA             
              re-arrangements.
