Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9208190

Award Number: 9208190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Craig craigw@gauss.math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The underlying theme of this mathematical research is the                 
              analysis of solutions of nonlinear partial differential                        
              equations, particularly in conservative evolution equations that               
              arise in mathematical physics and in fluid dynamics.  Emphasis                 
              will be on the study of the existence question for classes of                  
              equations, in particular, the existence of periodic solutions,                 
              and the study of a priori regularity and other properties of the               
              evolution.  The work is limited to three objectives.  First, in                
              the area of infinite dimensional dynamical systems and KAM                     
              theory, continuing research will be done in extending techniques               
              of Hamiltonian perturbation applied to the wave equation to other              
              equations and to investigate methods related to studies in higher              
              space dimensions.  The second direction involves smoothing                     
              properties of dispersive equations.  It has been known for some                
              time that solutions of dispersive evolution equations can be                   
              smoother than their initial conditions.  But their quadratic                   
              norms can grow unbounded without cut-off restrictions in spatial               
              directions.  Work will be done to isolate the parts of the                     
              equations which contribute to the growth and try to develop                    
              estimates on the norm size.  The final part of the project                     
              studies waves in free surfaces and interfaces.  The problem,                   
              known as Stokes conjecture, concerns the solitary wave of                      
              extremal form.  Such waves are known to be analytic except at                  
              their crest.  It is the object of this study to show (i) that a                
              Lipschitz singularity of interior angle 120 degrees must occur at              
              the crest and (ii) that the extremal wave profile is monotone                  
              decreasing and convex on either side.                                          
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws expressible in               
              terms of the interactions and relationships between partial                    
              derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not to state the                  
              relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative and                          
              quantitative meaning from them.
