Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic and Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9208052

Award Number: 9208052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128400             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Davis jfdavis@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent E. Orr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Two investigators are involved in this project.  James F.                 
              Davis' main emphasis is the use of surgery theory to study rational            
              information in manifold theory.  Surgery theory is the main tool               
              for classification of manifolds of dimension greater than 3,                   
              although complexities in homotopy and integral representation                  
              theory make it efficacious only in special cases.  However, if one             
              works over the rational numbers, complete results are available for            
              manifolds with finite fundamental group.  Davis will attempt                   
              extensions of these results to manifolds with infinite fundamental             
              group, and to spaces more general than manifolds, but which still              
              possess some form of duality.  A second and quite different                    
              direction of Davis' research is knot theory.  He will study the                
              homology of covers of the 3-sphere branched over a knot, the set of            
              periods of a knot, and their relationship with algebraic number                
              theory.  In related work, Kent E. Orr will continue to study                   
              linking and knotting phenomena in codimension two, as well as                  
              investigate the implications of the recent Cochran-Orr work to                 
              Casson-Gordon invariants and four-dimensional surgery.  Among other            
              things, he hopes to answer the following two questions about the               
              link slice problem:  Are all even-dimensional links slice?  Do the             
              presently known homotopy theoretic linking invariants of links in              
              the 3-sphere (such as the transfinite invariants of Levine and Orr             
              and the Le Dimet invariant) reduce to classically defined                      
              invariants such as Milnor's invariants and Massy products?                     
                   The details of these parts vary, but all are concerned with               
              reducing geometric information to a subject for calculation or to              
              perfecting the algebraic machinery used for the calculations.  The             
              nature of the geometric information involved is the crux of the                
              difficulty.  While questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes,            
              and so forth virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is            
              far different with what are known as topological properties of                 
              geometric objects.  These are properties such as connectedness                 
              (being all in one piece), knottedness, having no holes, and so                 
              forth.  All systematic study of such properties, for example, how              
              to tell whether two geometric objects really differ in respect to              
              one of these properties or are only superficially different, or how            
              to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all these               
              have only truly been comprehended and mastered when they have been             
              reduced to matters of calculation, and two of the principal tools              
              for this are homotopy theory and surgery theory.
