Title       : Phylogeny and Co-evolution of Fungal Mutualists (Ascomycota) of Arthropods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9208027

Award Number: 9208027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredith Blackwell mblackwell@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed study will build upon two data bases of DNA                  
              sequences ?nuclear encoded small subunit ribosomal DNA (SSU rDNA)              
              and B-subunit of vacuolar ATPase (vATPase)!.  Cladistic analysis               
              of sequences from taxa selected in a current study to reconstruct              
              the phylogeny of ascomycetes with features enhancing arthropod                 
              dispersal supports the hypothesis that these features (including               
              long-necked ascomata and evanescent asci) are examples of                      
              convergence and parallelism in fungi.  The research proposed here              
              includes 1) field studies to provide fungal life history details               
              within the complex arthropod assemblages and to obtain specimens               
              for 2) expansion of the molecular data sets.  Taxon sampling is                
              based upon the hypothesis that phoretic symbioses of fungi and                 
              arthropods provide opportunities for obligate mutualisms between               
              the organism.  Taxa for sequencing (yeasts, pleomorphic                        
              ascomycetes with yeast stages, and some apothecial forms) include              
              many species that have mutualistic associations with arthropods.               
              Due to the sampling design, an additional outcome of the study                 
              may be answers to age-old questions of fungal phylogeny.  These                
              questions include the relationships of yeasts to other fungi                   
              (reduced and non-monophyletic as currently suggested?) and the                 
              relative position of perithecial and apothecial ascomycetes to                 
              each other and to yeasts (also involving questions of monophyly).              
              Established field and culture techniques as well as DNA                        
              sequencing will be used to obtain data.  Cladistic analysis will               
              be performed on the independent rDNA and vATPase data sets, and                
              congruence (or non-congruence) will be used as a measure of                    
              support of the hypotheses.
