Title       : Human Capital and Wage Inequality: Analysis of Recent Changes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9208958

Award Number: 9208958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Mincer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In sharp contrast to the past, the American economy has                        
              experienced stagnation in the growth of average, real wages over               
              almost two decades now.  This stagnant growth covers an equally                
              unprecedented divergence in the trend of real wages between high               
              and low wage earners, which became apparent in the 1980's.  The                
              more skilled and educated workers continued to experience                      
              significant growth in real wages, while wages of the less                      
              educated and skilled remained the same or even declined.                       
              Consequently, as the average standard of living has barely                     
              increased in almost two decades, wage and income inequality has                
              risen.  Looking at this situation form the vantage point of the                
              labor market, two basic hypotheses emerge to explain this growing              
              income inequality.  One is that the growth of information and new              
              technologies and the globalization of economic activity has led                
              to increased demand for a well educated and flexible work force.               
              The other is that there is a growing gap between desired labor                 
              force quality and its actual supply, and that the quality of                   
              worker performance may have actually deteriorated.                             
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this research is to analyze earnings inequality                 
              from 1967 through 1990 using micro data from the Current                       
              Population Survey in order to shed light on which hypotheses or                
              combination explains the increase in earnings inequality.  Annual              
              changes in wage inequality of men will be studied by means of                  
              human capital analysis.  The exhaustive and computable factors in              
              this analysis are: (1) changes in levels and dispersion of human               
              capital across workers; (2) changes in rates of returns on human               
              capital investments; and (3) changes in dispersion of rates of                 
              return.  The analysis also distinguishes between effects of                    
              schooling and of job market investments, as well as between                    
              annual and life-time inequality.  A more complete understanding                
              of the developments of and prospects for earnings inequality                   
              requires the analyses of supply responses to changes in the wage               
              structure and in job market investment costs.  An attempt will                 
              also be made to identify, directly or indirectly, obstacles to                 
              supply adjustments which may affect the future course of earnings              
              inequality.
