Title       : Flexible Collaborative Software Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9208546

Award Number: 9208546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Su-Shing Chen                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48936              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Riedl riedl@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is collaborative research with Prasun Dewan, Purdue                       
              University (IRI-9208319).  Much of software engineering-design,                
              programming, debugging, testing, code reviews, program                         
              demonstrations, and program management-requires collaboration                  
              among multiple users, possibly geographically dispersed.  In this              
              project the researchers propose to investigate flexible support                
              for the activities of cooperating software engineers.  In                      
              particular they propose to investigate an approach that offers                 
              (i) a wide range of concurrency control mechanisms including                   
              serializable transactions and interactive transactions; (ii)                   
              fine-grain access control for collaborative applications that                  
              allows a user to recover from other users' mistakes and explore                
              various alternatives with them, (iv) a multidimensional                        
              inheritance model that allows collaboration parameters to be                   
              specified independently in hierarchies of groups of objects and                
              groups of users; and (v) multimedia support integrated with                    
              concurrency control,  access control, and undo/redo.  The unique               
              features of this research are its focus on the relationships of                
              these five goals, on flexible mechanisms for achieving each of                 
              the goals, and on structured specification of options by                       
              end-users.  The researchers will use results from previous                     
              research done in flexible coupling, long transactions, adaptive                
              concurrency control systems. inheritance, single-user undo/redo,               
              capability-based protection, collaborative tools, and software                 
              engineering tools,  They plan to implement the approach by                     
              extending an existing system developed at Purdue and Minnesota.                
              They will evaluate the performance of the various collaboration                
              methods and study how a particular method can be automatically                 
              chosen by the systems based on a minimum performance level                     
              requested by the user.  In addition to an understanding of the                 
              applicability of collaborative technology to software                          
              engineering, the research will produce prototype software                      
              engineering tools to demonstrate the novel aspects of the                      
              research.
