Title       : Technological Momentum and Modern War: Revisiting the 'Chemists' War,' 1915-1919
               (International Conference in Paris, September 2001)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a0081712

Award Number: 0081712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9887               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Johnson jeffrey.johnson@villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    610/519-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports U.S. participation in a conference of  twelve to fifteen
              scholars whose purpose is to test several premises that have emerged in the
              course of a current NSF-sponsored research project by the PI in collaboration
              with Roy M. MacLeod (University of Sydney).  These scholars are studying Allied
              and German responses to the "chemical war" during World War I.  In so doing,
              the two investigators are focusing not upon the development of chemical
              weapons, which has been extensively studied, but the emergent chemical
              explosives industries and its transformation in Britain, France, Germany and
              the United States.

In recent years, several scholars, working independently
              both in Europe and the United States, have revisited many of the key issues
              involved in the mobilization of science and the wartime applications of
              science-based industries between 1914 and 1918. To avoid overlap and
              duplication, and to ensure the best chances of success of their current
              three-year NSF study, Johnson and MacLeod plan this conference.  They are
              inviting a selection of colleagues to outline, describe and analyze the key
              issues they see as definitive in deciding the direction of the military
              chemical industries of the United States and Europe, including explosives and
              related intermediates and raw materials such as nitrates, during the war and in
              the immediate postwar period. In particular, each is examining and testing the
              concept of "technological momentum," one of the more salient current ideas for
              describing patterns in the development of science-based industry.   Johnson and
              MacLeod are using this term and seek to refine it through their own
              investigations.  Primary interests here are the ways in which the "momentum" of
              the industry's development initially shifted from the conditions of peace to
              those of war, how the momentum of wartime production was shaped and grew as the
              war became more "total," and finally the ways in which wartime momentum did or
              did not carry over to peacetime. To test the utility of this concept in a
              variety of contexts, the organizers are inviting colleagues familiar with the
              experience of the chemically-based industries in the United States and Europe,
              including nations that the organizers themselves are unable to study directly,
              such as the Netherlands and Russia. Also central to the investigators' work are
              some other ideas to be-considered, including the notions of "total war" and
              "chemists' war" in their relation to the militarization of the chemical
              industry during the 1914-1918 period and immediately afterward, as it affected
              the victorious Allies' efforts to bring about and maintain the "chemical
              disarmament" of Germany. Moreover, the conference encourages comparative and
              transnational analyses on each topic discussed, in accordance with the
              organizers' view of the war as an international system.

To facilitate
              analytical discussion based on details as well as generalizations, the
              organizer have prepared clear guidelines highlighting the issues mentioned
              above. The organizers are circulating the papers in advance to all
              participants. The group is small enough to allow all participants to take part
              in all sessions, to be held at in Paris, possibly the Centre de Recherche en
              histoire des Sciences et des Techniques (CRHST), in the Cite des Sciences et de
              l'Industrie. This location is convenient because a majority of the participants
              will be Europeans or working in Europe at the time. Following the conference,
              the organizers expect revised papers to constitute an edited volume, possibly
              published by Kluwer in its "Chemists and Chemistry" series, which already
              offers several related conference volumes. The organizers expect the results of
              the conference will not only enhance their own research and that of the other
              participants, but also contribute to a broader understanding of the
              interrelationship of war, science, and industrial development. This is of
              interest not only to historians, but also to scientists, economists, and
              policymakers working in the area of international security and arms
              control.


