Title       : Quantum Critical Phenomena and Non-Fermi-Liquid Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0081075

Award Number: 0081075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Millis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0081075
Millis

This grant supports the theoretical work of a distinguished,
              mid-career PI on strongly
Correlated electron systems.  The list of research
              projects in this grant includes (1)
Disorder and Quantum Critical Phenomena,
              (2) High Temperature Superconductivity and
(3) Nonequilibrium phenomena in
              highly correlated systems.  The class of problems here
is frequently referred
              to as non-Fermi liquid effects.  They lie beyond the edge of
understanding of
              electrons in metals offered by Landau's Fermi liquid theory.  The
anomalies
              beyond the Fermi liquid theory include the large number
              of
thermodynamic/calorimetric results in rare-earth alloys, which are believed
              to be near a 
quantum critical point due to disorder.  There are related
              effects in materials relevant for
high-density magnetic memories and in
              relaxor ferroelectrics.  There are nonequilibrium
effects such as the high
              temperature resistivity of high Tc copper oxides.  The projects
involve
              analytical and numerical approaches along with close contact with
              relevant
experimental work.
%%%
The theoretical work supported in this grant
              comes from two themes in current research on materials.  There are certain
              anomalies in the properties of electrons in metals, which
Apparently lie
              outside the conventional paradigm, referred to as the Landau's theory
              of
metals.  They are caused by the presence of substantial disorder and or
              extreme
environmental such as pressure, magnetic field or temperature.  The
              work here is
fundamental and far-reaching in that it may require development
              of sophisticated, new
mathematical tools and at the same time it is motivated
              by a need to understand materials
which are important for high density
              magnetic memories or materials which use their
ferroelectric properties for
              memory applications.  This work will be carried out in close
contact with
              experimentalists and will make use of both analytical and
              numerical
techniques, as may be necessary.
***  

