Title       : ITR: Analysis of the Capacity Improvement for Wireless Networks with Multiple
               Transmit and Receive Antennas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0081476

Award Number: 0081476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold L. Swindlehurst swindle@ee.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian D. Jeffs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4096,4097,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              It is very well known that there is sometimes a striking divergence between the
              continuous and the discrete. The theory of time scales has been initiated by
              Stefan Hilger ten years ago in order to unify study for differential and
              difference equations. Not only is it able to treat these two cases
              simultaneously, but it also can handle numerous other cases \in between" the
              continuous and the discrete, and those cases might be important for
              applications. For this reason it also could be worth to think about the
              consequences of a better developed time scales theory for graduate and in
              particular for undergraduate education. As the theory is very new and virtually
              important to every area in analysis, work on this subject done now will be
              fundamental. If NSF funds this proposal we would expand the theory of dynamic
              equations on time scales in various ways. We would like to conduct study of
              linear dynamic systems on time scales which would result in a better
              understanding of higher order dynamic equations. For those the task of
              characterizing disconjugacy is an interesting one, and this question we also
              want to address for higher order Sturm-Liouville dynamic equations or, more
              general, linear Hamiltonian dynamic systems on time scales. Such systems also
              would be
interesting if an eigenvalue parameter was involved, and we would
              like to derive an existence theorem, an expansion theorem, Rayleigh's
              Principle, and more general oscillation results for these eigenvalue problems.
              Another interesting task, which is intimately connected to the above problems,
              would be to establish a theory of variational analysis on time scales. To give
              necessary and sufficient conditions for strong and weak local minima would be
              the main concern of such a project, and it would also be of use to establish a
              Weierstrab Theory for variational problems on time scales.

