Title       : Phenomenology of Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0081039

Award Number: 0081039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Joynt rjjoynt@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0081039
Joynt
Some of the deepest problems in science have to do with the 
              motion of electrons, the carriers of electricity.  Their behavior is governed
              by quantum many-body theory, whose laws often lead to strange and beautiful
              consequences.  The understanding of these particles, and the resulting control
              that we have over them, underlies a wide range of technology from chemical
              engineering to computers.

A particularly difficult challenge for solid-state
              physics is to understand the behavior of groups of electrons under special
              circumstances: when they act collectively because of their mutual interactions.
               This is a much deeper problem than the individual behavior of isolated
              electrons.  The understanding of the latter is relatively well developed and
              forms the basis for today's electrical technology.  The understanding of
              collective behavior will be important for the technology of tomorrow.  The
              research in thi sgrant attacks this problem from two different directions:
              experimental analysis and fundamental calculations.

In order to understand
              collective, or correlated, behavior of electrons, we must have well-developed
              tools for gathering information about them.  One very important such tool is
              the photoelectric effect, which probes electron behavior by looking at the
              electrons that emerge from a metal when light is shown on it.  In order for
              this experiment to give accurate information about the metal, we must
              understand the various ways that the electron can slow down and lose energy
              before it is detected.  Calculations of thi senergy loss, and the resulting
              experimental signatures, i sone focus of the research.

A second focus is to
              calculate the energies of electrons in very small structures called quantum
              dots.  These structures are sure to be important in future computer technology,
              as miniaturization of chips and memory elements continues.  Current theory does
              not furnish a good account of the motion of electrons in these structures.
              Their energy levels are puzzling: we even lack a rough, statistical
              description.  We will use an algorithm based on biological ideas, the so-called
              gentic algorithm, to calculate these levels.  This will be the first time such
              ideas have been applied specifically to the quantum nature of these
              particles.

One very important example of collective behavior of electrons is
              superconductivity: the ability of electrons to carry electrical current as a
              group.  Important new classes of these materials have been discovered in recent
              years, and their properties are novel and, in many cases, poorly understood. 
              The theoretical research in this area, a continuation of a long-standing
              effort, focuses on understanding numerous experiments and constructing models
              that combine the phenomena of superconductivity and magnetism.
***



