Title       : ITR: Validating simulation to observed data with source coding methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0081636

Award Number: 0081636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344691             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Kennel mkennel@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1640,1656,1660,1667,4096,4097,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary
Objectives - This project aims to develop new applied
              mathematical technologies that add res a
widespread need in computational and
              simulation science: the quantitative optimization and verifi-
cation of
              dynamical models, incorporating both chaotic and stochastic behaviors, against
              observed
data. In the last couple of decades, great effort has been devoted to
              constructing simulation-based
models for complex phenomena, with profound
              advances in both analytic techniques for numerical
approximation and
              implementation technology on digital computers. Progress along one of
              the
final steps to gaining scientific insight, the verification of models
              against Nature, has been more
haphazard. When model and natural physical
              system produce temporally unpredictable variables
one cannot match any
              specific time-dependent behavior but only compare statistical
              quantities
extracted from both. Here, common practice is frequently quite
              crude, and is where we direct our
investigation.
Methods to be employed - We
              exploit recent developments in coding theory, specifically, context-
tree
              methods developed for universal data compression by the information theory
              community.
These techniques are computationally rapid, have excellent
              empirical performance and theoretical
properties. Our goal is not literally to
              compress data, of course, but to use the data structures
and models of the
              coding methods as high-quality statistical intermediaries between
              computational
models and observed data sets, providing a common mathematical
              "meeting ground" where fair,
and theoretically justifiable comparisons may be
              made.
Potential impact of the project - Large scale simulations play an
              increasingly important role in
the study of complex phenomena of national and
              global importance, from the efficiency, capability
and byproducts of complex
              industrial combustion and reaction systems, to environmental moni-
toring,
              culminating with global climate models. Predictions derived from these models
              inevitably
enter into the public discourse about policies, with significant
              legal and economic impact upon
many. The scientific community thus bears a
              burden to ensure that the models have been tested
against actual experiment
              and cross validated with intellectually sound approaches, and herein lies
the
              principal scientific value of the proposed investigation.
The Institute for
              Nonlinear Science at UCSD has an excellent international reputation and
              has
been able to attract high-quality post and pre-doctoral students with
              diverse backgrounds and
educational emphasis. This particular project offers
              will offer an opportunity for the students to
simultaneously learn about
              intriguing statistical and theoretical developments from the engineering
and
              applied mathematics community applied, in an novel cross-disciplinary approach,
              to models
of realistic, and important engineering problems, all set in the
              Institute's milieu and language of
"applied theoretical" physics. The skills
              that a successful student will take from this project com-
prise as are some
              mathematical fluency, physical intuition, engineering practicality and
              integrated
numerical and symbolic computational skills.
Finally, to the
              computational community, we anticipate developing and universally
              offering
free-standing software to perform the analyses described in the
              project proposal. We hope to
lower the barrier to entry for on-the-front-line
              computational and experimental scientists to employ
these algorithms, raising
              the quality of common scientific practice in dynamical model
              verification
without being so impractical or esoteric that few are able to
              successfully adopt our viewpoint.
