Title       : Microwave Atmospheric Remote Sensing Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0081116

Award Number: 0081116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182496             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Haimov haimov@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gabor Vali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Kubichek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops increased instrumental and human capabilities in microwave
              remote sensing and related fields by making the existing Wyoming Cloud Radar
              (WCR) and dual-wavelengths radiometers (MR) system available for development
              work in ground-based setting under normal operating conditions, and by using
              the ground installation for education and training.  Both WCR and MR were
              developed in collaboration with the University of Massachusetts-Amherst.  The
              WCR/MR system has been assembled for use in atmospheric research primarily on
              board of the University of Wyoming's King Air aircraft.  The radar, in
              operation since 1995, has proved to be a productive research tool and the
              current work will continue its development, including sensitivity and internal
              calibration capabilities.  The WCR/MR airborne system is typically used 2-3
              months per year.  During those times, exclusive focus is on the collection of
              cloud physics data, with very limited opportunities for system development,
              training, and education.  When not airborne, the system will undergo minor
              modifications and be installed in an existing mobile laboratory.  This will
              provide greater access to and increased utilization of this advanced microwave
              remote sensing instrumentation.  In addition, these ground-based data can place
              air-based data into a better perspective.  Education and training will be
              directed toward graduate students working on theses and dissertations related
              to airborne remote sensing, microwave and signal processing hardware and
              software projects, and atmospheric sciences graduate and undergraduate courses.
              
 
