Title       : ITR: Theory and Design of Watermarking Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0081268

Award Number: 0081268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499633             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Moulin moulin@ifp.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralf Koetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1655,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the widespread dissemination of digital video, images, audio and other data
              on the Internet and other media, information protection and copyright
              protection have become areas of vital importance.  These applications have
              generated an extraordinary level of interest in digital watermarking techniques
              in recent years.  Whereas novel watermarking algorithms and novel ways to
              defeat them have been developed, fundamental principles of information theory
              have barely skimmed the surface of this field, and recent results by the PI
              have shown that existing schemes operate far below the ultimate achievable
              limits.  We intend to develop our ideas for a theory of watermarking codes and
              to construct codes that approach capacity.  We also plan to develop a closely
              related thrust of research on robust watermarking and authentication techniques
              for images and video.  Our research will be guided by extensive body of
              knowledge (much of it developed in the last decade) developed in the context of
              modern communication systems on one hand, and image analysis on the other hand.
               Our plan is to explore the following topics:

Codes for Gaussian channels. 
              We have recently derived closed-form solutions for the hiding capacity of
              channels involving Gaussian sources and squared error distortion metrics.  Our
              first goal in this research is to develop codes whose performance approaches
              capacity for such channels.  This model, in addition to being useful in the
              context of practical watermarking applications, will shed light on the
              fundamental issues involved in constructing watermarking codes.  Hence its
              implications go beyond the particular model studied.

Estimation of Attack
              Channel Parameters.  In blind watermarking applications, the decoder does not
              have access to the original data, and does not know the particular attack that
              may have been used to corrupt the data.  Desynchronization attacks such as
              scaling, shifting, rotating or warping of image data can then be deadly.  We
              will explore fundamental mechanisms for the decoder to estimate the parameters
              of such attacks.

Codes for arbitrary channels.  While Gaussian channels are
              the worst channels under certain conditions, watermarking codes need to be
              robust against a variety of attacks.  One of our goals is to develop codes and
              decoding techniques that perform well not only against Gaussian noise attacks,
              but also against desynchronization attacks, erasures, and other
              attacks.

Application to Image and Video Watermarking.  While information
              theory and coding theory provide fundamental guiding principles to the design
              of watermarking systems, application of these principles presents unique
              challenges in specific situations such as image and video watermarking.  These
              two applications will be investigated in detail.

Fingerprinting and
              Authentication Codes.  There are several information-hiding problems closely
              related to watermarking that we intend to explore.

	Many graduate students
              are interested in moving into such an attractive research area, which combines
              breadth and strong emphasis on fundamentals with practical relevance.  We
              intend to train these students for leadership roles in information technology. 
              We also plan to involve undergraduate students, as they find this subject to be
              a truly enjoyable learning experience.

