Title       : An Insect Model for Physiology of Taste Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a0081051

Award Number: 0081051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : April 1,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Alan A. Renwick JAR14@CORNELL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol I. Miles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research is designed to examine the physiological processes that occur
              during development and suppression of the sense of taste.  Previous studies of
              taste development and modification have been severely handicapped by a lack of
              suitable animal models and a lack of known chemical compounds.  Our recent
              discovery of diet-dependent taste sensitivity and development in a caterpillar
              suggests that this insect may serve as an ideal model.   Newly hatched larvae
              of the cabbage butterfly are insensitive to bitter feeding deterrents present
              in unacceptable plants, but taste sensitivity develops as they feed on a
              suitable food plant such as cabbage.  At the same time, larvae feeding on
              cabbage become dependent on, or addicted to specific chemicals for continued
              feeding.  However, when the larvae are reared on a wheat germ artificial diet,
              development of sensitivity to deterrents and dependence on stimulants never
              occurs.  Two major questions need to be answered before this model can be fully
              utilized. (1) To what extent are taste receptors involved in the modified
              ability of animals to taste?  (2) What are the compounds in wheat germ that are
              responsible for taste suppression?  We propose to answer these questions using
              behavioral tests after selective removal of known taste receptors from
              sensitive larvae.  The involvement of these receptors will be confirmed by
              electrophysiological recordings from taste hairs of individual insects as their
              sensitivity to stimulants and deterrents develops.  Behavioral assays also will
              be used to monitor isolation and identification of the active compounds from
              wheat germ.  This work is expected to pave the way for more detailed studies of
              the biochemical processes involved in molecular recognition of specific food
              constituents as well as the development of cravings and addiction.   If these
              taste hairs are in fact involved in sensitivity changes, the results are
              expected to help in explaining development and loss of taste in humans.  The
              availability of an insect model may serve to eliminate or reduce the use of
              higher animals for clinical testing, and information about dietary experience
              that can influence food choice by insects could have significant agricultural
              importance in the design of new pest management strategies.


