Title       : Evolution of Growth Rate: Tradeoffs Between Costs of Growth and Benefits of
               Increased Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2002  
File        : a0081916

Award Number: 0081916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419998             (Estimated)
Investigator: David O. Conover dconover@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Genetic variation and local adaptation may be responsible for many of the
              differences in somatic growth rate that are common among populations of fishes
              and other organisms. The existence of genetic variation in juvenile growth is
              an enigma, challenging the belief that organisms should maximize energy intake
              and utilization in the early life stages. If higher rates of juvenile growth
              and larger size translate into greater fitness, sub?maximal rates can only be
              explained by the existence of tradeoffs associated with rapid growth. Recent
              evidence suggests that a major tradeoff exists between the amount of energy
              allocated to growth as opposed to locomotory performance and vulnerability to
              predators. Using a marine fish, the Atlantic silverside (Menidia menidia) as a
              model system, this project will explore the mechanisms responsible for this
              tradeoff and its life history implications. In silversides, the genetic
              capacity for growth varies inversely with length of the growing season across
              latitudes (termed "countergradient variation"). Northern genotypes grow at up
              to twice the rate of southern forms by consuming more food and converting it
              more efficiently into somatic tissue. But northern fish are poor swimmers and
              are more vulnerable to predators compared with southern fish. And within
              populations, juveniles that consume large meals and/or grow more rapidly are
              also more vulnerable to predators. This project will combine modeling,
              experimental, and field studies to explore the trade?off between the cost of
              growth and the benefits of increased size in different environments. There are
              five major objectives. First, 1) a life history model will be constructed to
              evaluate the optimal growth strategy when both grow rate?dependent and
              size-dependent sources of mortality and reproductive success affect fitness.
              The model will be used to predict how the optimal growth strategy changes
              across a latitudinal gradient. 2) To parameterize the model, experiments will
              be conducted to determine the functional response of swimming performance to
              feeding level, and 3) long?term mesocosm experiments will be used to test the
              model's predictions. 4) To validate the importance of these trade?offs under
              natural conditions, tests for an association between growth rate of silversides
              in the field (as estimated from otoliths) and those found within the stomachs
              of their major predator, young bluefish (Pomatomus saltatrix), will be
              conducted. 5) Finally, in order to generalize results to other species,
              experiments will be conducted to determine the physiological basis of the
              trade?off between grow rate and swimming performance. The results of this
              project will greatly increase understanding of the strategies and tactics that
              larval and juvenile fishes employ during recruitment to the adult stage and
              will further illustrate the capacity of marine organisms to adapt to abiotic
              and biotic change.
