Title       : ITR: The Construction and Analysis of Information Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0081334

Award Number: 0081334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon M. Kleinberg kleinberg@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bart Selman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lillian J. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claire Cardie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven H. Strogatz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,1660,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Sources of on-line information are becoming increasingly decentralized,
              heterogeneous, and complex even as they become correspondingly richer and more
              valuable.  Determining the structure of these information sources is becoming
              key to extracting and managing the knowledge they contain.  Some of these
              sources exhibit an explicit network structure --- the hyperlinks of the World
              Wide Web form an excellent example.  In other domains, ranging from electronic
              communication to informal human social networks, subtle hidden linkage
              relations play a large role in determining the information flow within and
              between communities.  The link structures of both types of environments can
              yield a surprising wealth of latent information about their content, making
              their complexity manageable.
 
The proposed research seeks effective
              mechanisms for eliciting a global understanding of link structures in
              information networks.   A key component of this effort is the design of
              techniques and tools enabling a richer level of interaction with on-line
              information. The research focuses on the development and integration of new
              techniques in three areas: natural language understanding methods to uncover
              implicit relationships in on-line content, efficient algorithms to analyze
              complex networks of inter-connections, and mathematical models of the dynamics
              and social processes by which networked information evolves.

