Title       : Estrogen Modulation of Learning Strategy: A Neural Systems Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0081061

Award Number: 0081061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna L. Korol dkorol@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to identify the brain areas through which estrogen
              acts to modulate learning and memory.  The underlying hypothesis is that the
              effects of estrogen on learning and memory are specific to types of learning,
              and associated brain areas, used to solve different mazes.  Two mazes that tap
              two different types of learning strategies, place learning and response
              learning, will be used to determine whether estrogen acts directly at specific
              discrete brain sites, the hippocampus and dorsal striatum, respectively,
              important for good performance in these tasks.  Two experiments examine the
              role of estrogen on learning in rats that have had their ovaries removed, thus
              removing the intrinsic source of estrogen.  In the first experiment, rats will
              receive estrogen directly into either the hippocampus or the striatum and will
              then be tested for place and response learning.  In the second experiment, rats
              will receive injections of estrogen into the circulation after an estrogen
              blocker is administered directly into the hippocampus or the striatum, and the
              rats will then be tested for place and response learning. 
   
	Some prior
              reports suggest that estrogen impairs learning and memory, while other reports
              indicate that estrogen improves learning and memory.  The approach taken in
              this proposal may clarify the basis for these conflicting reports by showing
              that both conclusions are correct.   Estrogen might activate or inhibit
              different brain areas, thereby changing the learning strategy used and thus
              what and not necessarily how much is learned under different hormone
              conditions.  The basic finding that estrogen's effects on learning strategy are
              governed by different neural systems will prove useful for understanding the
              neural and cognitive processes that accompany the decline in hormones with
              menopause. 

