Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Syntax of Passamaquoddy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0081003

Award Number: 0081003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Pesetsky pesetsk@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Hale  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Eastern Algonquian languages, members of a family of Native American
              languages spoken across North America, occupy a culturally, historically, and
              linguistically significant position.  They were among the first languages to be
              encountered by the Europeans, and among the first to succumb to the
              unfortunately widespread subsequent pattern of language loss on this continent
              (only four Eastern Algonquian languages are still spoken today).  They also
              fall into the typologically significant class of 'polysynthetic' languages
              currently under intense scrutiny in theoretical linguistics.  Polysynthetic
              languages make extensive use of agglutinative morphology in the construction of
              complex verbal and nominal stems; exhibit a similarly extensive use of
              agreement morphology and accompanying null pronominals; and possess relatively
              free word order, including the use of discontinuous constituents.

This
              project will investigate these properties by carefully exploring the syntax of
              Passamaquoddy, an Eastern Algonquian language currently spoken by approximately
              500 people in Maine and New Brunswick.  The dissertation will attempt to
              illuminate theoretical issues raised by polysynthetic phenomena through a study
              of double-object constructions and transitivity alternations in
              Passamaquoddy.

In addition, the study will have two descriptive goals: the
              systematic description of a broad range of syntactic constructions, not touched
              on in previous studies; and the recording, in digital form, of as large a
              sample of the spoken language as possible over the term of the project.  The
              work will directly contribute to current efforts to document and revitalize the
              language, such as a web-based dictionary project and ongoing bilingual
              education programs.
