Title       : ITR: Differential Modulation in Space and Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0081706

Award Number: 0081706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Hughes blhughes@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4096,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              One of the goals of third and fourth generation cellular systems is to provide
              broadband data access to highly mobile users. Space-time transmission
              strategies, which exploit the presence of multiple antennas at the transmitter
              or receiver, have been cited recently as one of the key technologies needed to
              achieve this goal. While there has been great progress on space-time coding and
              modulation in recent years, most of this work has assumed that perfect channel
              estimates are available at the receiver. In certain situations, however, it may
              be difficult or costly to obtain accurate channel estimates.  The goal of this
              project is to design new space-time modulation strategies that do not require
              channel estimates at the transmitter or receiver. The core idea is a new and
              general architecture for differential modulation using multiple antennas, which
              can be applied to any number of antennas and any signal constellation.
              Modulation techniques adhering to this architecture can be demodulated
              coherently or noncoherently. These techniques permit the receiver to exploit
              accurate channel estimates when they are available, but performance degrades
              only slightly when estimates are not available. The tools developed here also
              over a fresh perspective on pilot-assisted space-time modulation and provide a
              systematic way to jointly design the training symbols, receivers, and
              modulation schemes. This project addresses a broad spectrum of issues,
              including fundamental performance limits, new modulation and coding techniques,
              and low-complexity receivers. The ultimate goal of this work is to more fully
              exploit the potential of multi-antenna radio channels, and in the process
              reduce the power and bandwidth requirements of wireless communication.
