Title       : Geographies of Innovation: Silicon Valley and Its Imitators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0081146

Award Number: 0081146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart W. Leslie swleslie@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-81146 - Stuart W. Leslie (Johns Hopkins University) 
"Geographies of
              Innovation:  SiliconValley and Its Imitators"


This award supports the
              research required to complete an electronic, web-based book about the origins
              of the Silicon Valley model of regional economic development and subsequent
              attempts to deploy this model elsewhere in the United States and abroad. The
              medium may or may not be the message, but the medium can certainly reinforce
              the message. Consequently an electronic book seems a particularly appropriate
              format for a study of Silicon Valley and its imitators, not only because
              producing a conventional book with as much graphical and photographic material
              as the subject deserves would be prohibitively expensive, but because the
              layout of the book can take advantage of multimedia in a way that underscores
              the book's thesis about the importance of space and interconnection. The
              essential template will be a map, which not only shows where these places are
              and how they are interrelated to one another, but which allow the readers to
              trace those interconnections throughout the account, underscoring the spatial
              dimensions of the modern electronics industry.

This project seeks to
              discover whether regions, like corporations, can reinvent themselves. It asks
              if models of regional development originally intended to foster the growth of
              new industries in new places could be adapted to reinvigorate older, or at
              least established industries, in old places. It also asks if other models may
              be more appropriate for maintaining the vitality of high technology industry in
              regions facing economic maturity or decline. It considers what role, if any,
              the state should play in an era of declining federal support for corporate and
              academic science. It thus asks whether the state should attempt to serve as a
              catalyst for economic development, either by direct subsidy or by supporting
              new kinds of partnerships between industry, universities, and state agencies;
              or whether industrial policy better left in private hands, so that individual
              corporations, large or small, can decide for themselves how best to leverage
              their research and development investments.

Where other accounts have
              generally focused on successful efforts at regional development in new places
              (e.g. Research Triangle Park), this study gives equal attention to older
              industrial regions which have drawn upon what they believed to be the Silicon
              Valley model in an effort to retain and revitalize existing high technology
              industries, and explore places such as South Korea and Taiwan which have
              translated the Silicon Valley model into new idioms. In addition to
              reinterpreting Silicon Valley itself, with particular attention to the role of
              large firms such as IBM, Bell Labs, and Xerox, the planned electronic book will
              include chapters on the electronics industries of New York State and New
              Jersey; on Texas and Oregon, regions which have become satellites of Silicon
              Valley; and South Korea and Taiwan, which have, through deliberate government
              policy and a strategy of foreign investment and reverse brain drain, developed
              indigenous versions of Silicon Valley. These choices are not arbitrary. Each of
              them represents a place that hired Frederick Terman, the acknowledged "father
              of Silicon Valley" as a consultant to advise them on high technology policy. It
              will conclude with a comparison of Silicon Valley, the exemplar of postmodern
              production and Las Vegas, the exemplar of postmodern consumption, each
              unexpectedly dependent on the other.

