Title       : ITR: Environment-Aware Communication for Mobile Grouped Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0081308

Award Number: 0081308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin Kravets rhk@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Advances in processor technology, both in increased processing power and
              decreased energy
consumption, have led to the creation of a new breed of small
              intelligent devices from tiny
laptops, to PDAs, to smart phones, to wearable
              computers made from a collection of small
independent devices. The advent of
              such devices and wearable computers brings to light new
possibilities and new
              needs, specifically: cooperation among devices and elimination of cables.
The
              development of short-range radio technology, such as Bluetooth, enables the
              cooperation of
such devices over wireless links. As users collect multiple
              small computing devices, the amount
of communication resources available to
              the user increases and so the demand for coordination of
resources between
              these devices increases. The overhead of this coordination may tax
              the
available bandwidth and energy resources of the devices. The goal of this
              research is to support
such cooperation and coordination through intelligent
              communication management with an
emphasis on the efficient use of available
              resources.

As the user moves between different environments, these MObile
              grouPEd Devices (MOPEDs)
cooperate as a coordinated local area network that
              provides the user the desired mobile services.
This cooperation and
              coordination between a single user's devices changes the definition of what
it
              means to communicate with a user. With a MOPED, communicating with any of the
              devices in
the MOPED represents a successful connection to the local area
              network, and so to the individual.
In order to better support the needs of the
              user, the MOPED may interact with networks in the
current environment
              surrounding the user in order to determine the availability of local
              services.

The researchers' approach relies on decision algorithms; services
              and protocols for determining what communication channels are available to
              which devices, as well as resource and quality
information about such
              channels. The researchers address four major challenges faced in the design of
              such a solution.

1) Channel Discovery:  The researchers propose the design
              of intelligent service discovery protocols based on the requirements of the
              user and the tradeoff between having current
information about the
              availability of communication channels with the overhead in
resources (i.e.
              bandwidth and power) used to acquire that information.
2) Resource Monitoring:
              The researchers propose the design of a distributed resource
              information
repository, which is a database internal to the MOPED. The
              algorithms governing the
dissemination of resource information to devices in
              the MOPED must take into
consideration the topology of the network, the energy
              and bandwidth availability of each
device, and the priority at which each
              device actually needs the information.
3) Resource Allocation: The researchers
              propose the design of intelligent transport and routing
protocols able to use
              the resource availability information to determine which and how
many of the
              MOPED's external channels to use to complete a specific connection.
4)
              Mobility Management: The researchers propose mobility management techniques to
              provide the ability for external users to communicate with the user, and so the
              devices of the
MOPED, wherever it is currently connected to the Internet and
              propose the design of
mobility management protocols based on the current
              technology for host mobility.

The results of the research will enable
              simultaneous connections through all available
communication channels. This
              creates a very robust environment, where it becomes easier to
guarantee
              complete communication coverage. It allows using MOPEDs for critical tasks such
              as
patient monitoring where it is important to maintain connectivity at all
              time, through there may be
some flexibility in the amount of data that is
              transferred as well as the importance of that data. If
the communication
              patterns of such a MOPED are not well monitored, certain devices
              may
unacceptably lose power due to inefficient connection management.

