Title       : Dissertation Research: Microbes, Markets and Medicines: Confronting Tuberculosis
               in post-Soviet Georgia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0081389

Award Number: 0081389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11549              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rayna Rapp Rapp@Newschool.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New School Univ
	      66 West 12th Street
	      New York, NY  100118603    212/741-5600

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation project investigates institutional and technological changes
              in the production of scientific and medical knowledge about tuberculosis (TB)
              in Soviet Georgia. It examines the impacts of social and political instability
              on healthcare reform and on the experiences of healthcare practitioners with
              processes of national reconstruction in scientific and medical settings.
              Georgia, like much of the former Soviet Union (FSU) is currently facing
              widespread epidemics of TB and multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB). Massive social
              and economic changes throughout the FSU have led to extremely high levels of
              poverty, crowded living conditions and shortages of food and energy, all of
              which create the conditions in which TB has become endemic in many parts of the
              world. With the demise of the Soviet Union came the dismantling of the
              centralized healthcare infrastructure. Severe shortages in technological
              resources necessary to effectively treat and control TB, and in the financial
              resources necessary to pay healthcare practitioners, to obtain basic diagnostic
              and treatment supplies and to otherwise maintain stable biomedical research and
              treatment facilities present great difficulties for local healthcare systems.
              Georgia is in the throws of a severe energy crisis and political and economic
              upheavals that persist after years of interethnic conflicts. The cultural,
              political and economic conditions fuel the spread of TB and further complicate
              healthcare reform in general and TB eradication in particular. This health
              crisis has drawn a great deal of attention from the World Health Organization
              (WHO) and other members of the international health community, as well as other
              Western European and US based humanitarian aid agencies such as SOROS and
              USAID. They are working to coordinate efforts with a heterogeneous
              constellation of locally and internationally based public and private aid
              organizations, hospitals, labs, pharmaceutical corporations and governmental
              organizations to implement the standardization of WHO-based management and
              treatment strategies. By employing ethnographic methods of participant
              observation, interviews and document analysis within this network of labs,
              clinics and administrative sites, the researcher will pursue three main goals.
              Specifically: 1) to map the changing constellation of actors populating the
              landscape of knowledge production about TB in Georgia and the transnational
              routes and relationships through which they travel and interact; 2) to
              understand the processes through which "western" scientific and medical
              discourses, technologies and practices take on local meaning in the Georgian
              context and 3) to thus understand larger processes of decentralization and
              national reconstruction via the lens of healthcare reform in general, and of
              changing institutional and technological aspects of TB management and control
              strategies in particular. This research will contribute to an understanding of
              these processes, and to the inseparability of the organization and distribution
              of biomedical institutions and resources from local and global cultural,
              political and economic forces. As a cultural approach to biomedical knowledge
              production concerning infectious diseases, this project will enhance
              participants' understandings of the effects of recent political and economic
              upheavals on health and on responses to health-related issues in Georgia and
              the former Soviet Union.

