Title       : Alternative Camera Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0081365

Award Number: 0081365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199999             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Yiannis Aloimonos yiannis@cfar.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The PI will investigate the stucture and function of new multiview eyes, that is
              new imaging devices built out of several conventional cameras. The research is
              motivated by the variety of eye designs
in the biological world and obtains
              inspiration for an ensemble of computational studies that relate how a system
              sees to what that system does. This, coupled with the geometry and statistics
              of multiple views, points to new ways of constructing powerful imaging devices
              which suit particular tasks in robotics, visualization, video processing and
              augmented reality. First, the "Argus" eye will be designed and built, which is
              a system
consisting of up to 12 cameras attached to a sphere-like structure
              and pointing outwards. The video cameras, equipped with a synchronizer will
              simultaneously record data onto disk. Next new algorithms will be developed and
              implemented for processing video collected by the new sensor for the purpose of
              very accurately estimating 3D motion and subsequently shape models of the
              imaged scene. how to use such models in video editing and manipulation will be
              shown. In the second stage of the project, new algorithms for "negative
              spherical eyes", i.e. networks of video cameras attached to the walls of a room
              pointing inwards, will be developed. The main effort will consist of algorithms
              for recovering descriptions of action, in particular human movement.
              Specifically, software will be developed for building representations of 3D
              motion fields,  and these structures will be analyzed using geometric and
              statistical techniques to develop invariant characterizations of action. It is
              expected that these developments
will have a strong impact to automatic
              animation.

