Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Resource Allocation and Denial of Service
               Prevention in Active Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0081360

Award Number: 0081360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417746             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott M. Nettles nettles@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gustavo A. de Veciana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Internet is used by a rapidly expanding and changing set of applications.
              The need for the network to evolve and even to provide application specific
              processing is significant. However the current network infrastructure is hard
              to evolve and does not readily support customizability. The goal of Active
              Networking [21, 3, 2] is to facilitate this evolution and customization by
              making the network infrastructure programmable. One way of adding
              programability is to allow code to be down-loaded into the routers, thus
              enabling the addition or modification of services. A more radical approach is
              to allow the packets themselves to carry programs to be executed selectively on
              the network's routers. Among other issues, these two approaches increase the
              possibility of denial of service attacks whereby a user places excessive
              demands on network resources in order to deny access to another user. However,
              they also enable new approaches to handling such attacks and to addressing the
              general problem of allocating resources within the network.

The proposed
              research focuses on issues involving programmable, or active, packets. Active
              packets facilitate denial of service attacks in several ways. First, unlike
              conventional data transport packets, an active packet may require processor
              cycles and memory at the routers beyond those needed to simply forward the
              packet. Second, in general, the execution of an active packet at a router may
              cause more than one active packet to be transmitted from the router. Such
              behavior is useful, since it allows a packet to fan out across the network, but
              it is potentially dangerous since it can lead to an exponential growth in the
              resources used by a single initial packet. Experience with active packet-based
              systems [9, 8, 23, 22, 24] suggests that denial of service is the single
              biggest obstacle which must be overcome before such systems are
              feasible.

The proposed research tackles this problem along various fronts.
              First, the researchers propose to design packet programming languages that make
              some types of behavior intrinsically impossible. For example, in PLAN [9],
              packet programs are guaranteed to terminate and thus can never use an
              un-bounded number of router cycles. The researchers will explore tradeoffs
              between restricting behavior in terms of resource requirements and limiting the
              expressibility and thus the flexibility of active packets. However, not all
              potentially harmful behaviors can be eliminated in this manner. Thus, on a
              second front, the researchers will consider mechanisms that explicitly account
              for a packet's resource usage in the network. For example, each packet may
              carry a resource bound, which is decremented as resources are used, and which
              triggers termination when the bound is used up. The proposed research combines
              both implicit and explicit mechanisms for controlling resource usage, with
              algorithms to control the flow of traffic into the network to decrease the
              likelihood of denial of service. More generally, one can envisage assessing
              costs to active packets that execute on congested resources. Thus, on a third
              front, the researchers propose to investigate mechanisms based on congestion
              costs to achieve more efficient resource allocations and how they can be
              facilitated via active packets.

Three methodologies will be used to validate
              proposed solutions. First, the researchers will draw on mathematical modeling
              to motivate the benefits and investigate the characteristics of the proposed
              solutions. Second, the researchers will leverage expertise and past work on 
              implementing active networks to demonstrate what is feasible to build, and
              explore the constraints each solution will place on eventual applications.
              Finally, the researchers will use network simulation to investigate systems on
              a scale not achievable on the experimental testbeds.

