Title       : Theoretical Studies of Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0081006

Award Number: 0081006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Drabold drabold@ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0081006
Drabold

This grant supports the work of a mid-career PI, interested
              in a theoretical study of the electronic properties of chalcogenide glasses. 
              These are glasses, which involve selenium and sulfur, in their pure form and
              also alloys involving them.  There are three research projects: In the first
              one, there is a calculation of the electron states near the optical gap,
              including lattice dynamics effects and using state of the art methods.   These
              states are of critical importance in the transport, doping and optical
              characteristics of these materials.  The second project studies light induced
              structural changes.  Experiments show that such light induced structural
              changes may be spatially non-local and lead to dramatic phenomena such as
              athermal photo-melting and giant photo-expansion. There will be a study of
              models of these glasses, using the activation-relaxation technique of Mousseau
              and Barkema, in conjunction with fast, approximate ab initio methods.  A
              limited study of the surface states of selected glasses will be performed, both
              for their fundamental interest as well as for light-induced structural changes,
              especially photomelting.  Finally, there are the associated methodological
              aspects, e. g. non-adiabatic dynamics.  These studies will involve a judicious
              application of techniques ranging from the simplest empirical potentials to
              density functional methods in the local spin density approximations with
              generalized gradient corrections.
%%%
This grant supports the work of a
              mid-career PI who is intrigued by the photomechanical effects in chalcogenide
              glasses.  The subject is key to an understanding of the solar cells' operating
              efficiency in that if their are substantial structural changes in the material,
              as a result of its operation as a photoelectric device, then an understanding
              of how that happens might suggest ways of improving the battery lifetimes. 
              Additionally the subject is of fundamental importance since the physics
              involved is subtle and the effects have been beyond the reach of conventional
              methods and approximations.
***

