Title       : ITR: Analysis of Internet Algorithms: Optimization, Game Theory and Competitive
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0081698

Award Number: 0081698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Karp karp@icsi.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Shenker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos H. Papadimitriou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As the complexity of the Internet, the nature of its applications, and its
              socioeconomic framework evolve, new algorithmic and architectural ideas will be
              proposed, tested, and adopted.  While the original Internet design principles
              will likely remain valid, the researchers believe that it is important to have
              in place a mathematical framework within which these design principles can be
              expressed and applied to the next generation of Internet algorithms and
              architectures.  Building such a framework is the ultimate goal.  The
              mathematical tools will come from optimization, game theory and competitive
              analysis. The researchers shall work on the following topics.

Multicast. 
              The researchers shall seek to determine the relative efficiency, in terms of
              link usage, of multicast versus unicast, devise and analyze efficient methods
              of multicast error recovery, and determine how efficiently multicast can be
              simulated in the application layer by a coordinated set of
              unicasts.

Congestion Probing.  The TCP congestion control protocol controls
              its window size with an additive-increase and multiplicative-decrease  (AIMD)
              algorithm.  One can think of this as a probing algorithm in  which the flow
              attempts to discover the maximum rate of traffic that
can be send under
              current conditions; if a packet drop is recorded it is assumed the bandwidth
              rate was too high and so the window size is reduced. The researchers shall
              develop efficient probing algorithms and  theoretical limits on the efficiency
              of probing under different models of Internet congestion.

Cost Sharing. How
              are the recipients of a multicast transmission to share the network costs?  The
              researchers assume that the information to be multicast is of a certain value
              to each possible recipient, but this value is private to that individual. The
              researchers shall investigate strategyproof cost sharing methods where each
              user is assured that their outcome is maximized if they truthfully reveal their
              value to the network.  The researchers' goal is to characterize the set of
              protocols that are acceptable on both game-theoretic and complexity
              grounds.

Information Dissemination.  While traditional databases require
              transactional consistency, many repositories of information require only the
              much weaker notion of eventual consistency.  That is, in such cases we care
              only whether, and how quickly, the information is disseminated, but do not
              require global consistency during the dissemination. The researchers shall
              identify message-efficient strategies for selectively propagating information
              so that the network will eventually converge to a fully updated state.


