Title       : ITR: Augmented Reality and Computer Vision for Enhancing Human Assembly Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0081935

Award Number: 0081935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajeev Sharma rsharma@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award. This project
              aims at addressing basic issues for enabling an augmented reality interface
              using computer vision. Augmented Reality has the goal of enhancing a person's
              perception of the surrounding world, offering the potential for the computer to
              be integrated into the activities of a user, serving as a personalized helper.
              There are two key challenges to enable such an interface. The first is
              "sensing", which would allow the augmentation to be matched to the state of the
              world as the user interacts with it. The second challenge is that of developing
              systematic "augmentation schemes" that result in user-centered information
              flow. To aid in the conceptualization of the problem and for experimental
              verification, the main focus of the project is on an "assembly domain". The
              context is that of a human engaged in assembling a mechanical object from its
              components. The focus on the "assembly domain", allows us to suitably formulate
              and address the sensing, augmentation, and other issues in the novel
              human-computer interface. At the same time, it allows us to examine specific
              interactive assembly tasks using augmented reality, such as guiding and
              training during assembly and for evaluation of prototype assembly sequences. 
              To address the key problem of tracking the "context", the project seeks to
              advance the state of art of computer vision techniques for recognizing assembly
              states. A combination of appearance-based and CAD-based approach will be used
              for addressing the problem of simultaneously tracking a large number of known
              assembly parts. A probabilistic approach is proposed to improve the performance
              of assembly state recovery over time as the assembly task progresses. Another
              focus is to look for efficient approaches for building the model spaces for
              subassemblies with larger number of parts. Geometric modeling and analysis of
              the assembly domain will be utilized in the development of systematic flow of
              augmentation to aid various assembly tasks. Two experimental setups will be
              used, involving a see-through head-mounted display and a computer monitor with
              graphics overlaid on live video. Specific assembly task scenarios will be
              devised to determine the practical feasibility of augmented reality interface
              for the assembly domain.  Another goal will be to experimentally evaluate the
              effectiveness of augmented reality interface as a training tool compared to
              other means of instructions. The resulting augmented reality interface is
              expected to impact many applications that benefit from the on-line,
              scene-dependent presentation of multimodal information, such as assembly
              prototyping, aircraft maintenance, repair of space vehicles, cost-effective
              training of factory workers, and perhaps guiding inexperienced users through
              complex repair of machinery.
