Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Holocene Fluvial Response to Environmental
               Change in the Uinta Mountains of Northeastern Utah
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0081896

Award Number: 0081896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Knox knox@geography.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Mickelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Long-term chronologies of relations between climate change and floods in North
              America during the Holocene (post-glacial) epoch primarily are restricted to
              the Upper Mississippi Valley and American Southwest.  These areas provide
              valuable insights, but the dynamics of post-glacial physical system dynamics in
              other locales and for the continent as a whole remain incomplete.  This
              doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the responses of runoff
              and floods to climate change recorded in relict river systems along the north
              slope of the Uinta Mountains in northern Utah.  Low-gradient streams in this
              region have experienced extensive lateral migration, with former channels
              preserved as abandoned meanders.  The magnitudes of past floods that filled
              these channels will be quantitatively reconstructed by applying hydraulic
              equations to the surveyed dimensions of relict channels.  Fill sediments will
              be analyzed using drill cores along transects perpendicular to each relict
              channel.  The magnitude of the modal flood for each relict channel will be
              compared with the magnitude of the modern modal flood at the same location and
              calibrated for the associated drainage basin area.  Absolute ages of relict
              channels will be constrained directly through the use of radiocarbon dating on
              organic material in the channel fills.  The results of these analyses will be
              used to reconstruct a chronology of post-glacial floods in this semi-arid
              region of northern Utah.  The results of past flooding are expected to
              contribute to improved understanding of how future climate changes might
              influence runoff and flooding in this same region.  The results also should
              provide evidence to test models that predict regional hydrologic responses to
              continental-scale changes in atmospheric circulation patterns.  The Uinta study
              area is particularly appropriate for examination of linkages between climate
              change and flooding behavior because the region lies along a large-scale
              atmospheric circulation boundary.  Variability in large-scale hemispheric
              circulation patterns, such as those associated with El Nino/Southern
              Oscillation, has been shown to influence the magnitude of the snowmelt floods. 
              The records of past floods from these relict channels will be used to evaluate
              sensitivity of flood regimes to climate changes and will be compared to
              long-term chronologies of past floods from other regions to assess the behavior
              of hemispheric circulation patterns through the Holocene.  The hydrologic
              responses recorded in the stratigraphic record also will enhance understandings
              of the dynamics affecting water supply in the Colorado River basin, because
              summer water production in this basin is sustained by runoff from the Uintas
              and surrounding ranges.  Furthermore, the study area's transitional location
              between locations of similar prior studies in the arid Southwest and the humid
              Midwest provides a framework for understanding continental-scale linkages
              between climate change and hydrological responses.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

