Title       : ITR/ACS :Collaborative Research: Advanced Algorithms for Visualizing Sources of
               Noise and Vibrations of Complex Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0081270

Award Number: 0081270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498782             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas K. DeLillo delillo@math.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sean F. Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tomasz Hrycak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor M. Isakov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop advanced algorithms for visualizing the
              sources of noise and vibrations of complex vibrating structures based on simple
              measurements of acoustic pressures. The software developed will provide an
              efficient, robust, and user-friendly tool to practicing engineers concerned
              with identification and control of noise and vibration.  For example, this will
              allow aircraft designers to reduce the amount of noise inside the passenger
              cabin of an airplane, or make quieter cars. 

This project will address
              mathematical, computational, and engineering issues related to finding the
              source of acoustic radiation from a vibrating structure, also known as acoustic
              holography. This process involves determining the vibrational patterns in a
              structure based on simple acoustic pressure measurements from an array of
              microphones near the structure. The mathematical part of acoustic holography is
              an inverse problem, the direct problem being to determine the radiated acoustic
              pressure field in the fluid medium, given the vibration responses of the
              structure. Inverse problems such as this are ill-posed, thus requiring
              effective regularization techniques as filters. In this project, the
              researchers will pool their expertise and experience in advanced computational
              science, mathematical analysis, and mechanical engineering to elevate the
              acoustic holography to a higher level for solving engineering noise and
              vibration problems in a cost-effective manner. The algorithms and
              regularization techniques will be firmly based on current work in numerical
              linear algebra, mathematical analysis, and engineering practice. Iterative
              methods will be developed to provide fast computational techniques for both the
              single layer and Helmholtz-Kirchhoff integral equation methods. Estimates of
              stability and accuracy will be established to provide guidance for optimal
              regularization strategies, measurement locations, and number of expansion
              functions for the Helmholtz Equation Least Squares (HELS) method and combined
              HELS (CHELS) method. Experimental validation of the methods will be carried out
              for both interior and exterior regions on an aircraft cabin and a vehicle front
              end.

