Title       : ITR: Volume Illustration: Non-Photorealistic Rendering of Volume Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0081581

Award Number: 0081581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penny Rheingans rheingans@cs.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Ebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the process of visualizing information at every point in
              space through volume rendering. Traditionally, volume rendering has employed
              one of two approaches. The first attempts a physically accurate simulation of a
              process such as X-rays passing through tissue or light passing through a fog,
              producing the most realistic views of volume data (at least for data with an
              appropriate physical meaning). The second approach is only loosely based on the
              physical behavior of light, using instead an arbitrary appearance of each value
              in space and an accumulation process through space to create a wider range of
              appearances for the volume in the visualization. This project proposes a new
              approach to volume rendering: the augmentation of a physics-based rendering
              process with non-photorealistic rendering (NPR) techniques to enhance the
              expressiveness of the visualization. NPR draws inspiration from such fields as
              art and technical illustration to develop automatic methods to synthesize
              images with an illustrated look from geometric surface models. The new
              approach, called volume illustration, combines the familiarity of a
              physics-based illumination model with the ability to enhance important features
              using non-photorealistic rendering techniques.

Technically, the project
              faces several challenges. In surface-based NPR, the surfaces (features) are
              well defined, whereas with volumes, volumetric feature areas are often
              amorphous regions that must be determined through analysis of local volumetric
              properties. Once these volumetric feature volumes are identified, user selected
              parametric properties can be used to enhance and illustrate them. Volume
              illustration provides a flexible unified framework for enhancing structural
              perception of volume models through the amplification of features, the addition
              of illumination effects, and the application of procedural textures. Volume
              illustration will work on both presampled and procedurally defined volume
              models, enabling a range of image styles from practical technical illustrations
              to more abstract painterly effects. The project will develop a collection of
              volume illustration techniques, including novel volume illustration techniques
              and techniques that adapt and extend NPR techniques to volume objects.

