Title       : SGER: Gene Flow and Hybridization Between Introduced and Endemic Populations of
               Three Native Perennial Grass Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a0081024

Award Number: 0081024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22464              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Mazer mazer@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Omer J. Reichman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0081024
Mazer and Reichman

A fundamental problem in population biology is
              determining the extent of the spread of novel genes in natural populations and
              its effect on evolutionary and ecological processes.  In plants, the
              introduction of novel genetic material into indigenous populations is becoming
              more common due to the accidental spread of seeds and due to attempts to
              restore native vegetation.   While the introduction of new genetic material may
              benefit populations with little genetic diversity, there are also serious
              potential risks.  For example, when individuals representing genetically
              distinct populations mate and hybridize, the mixing of the genetic material
              from the two populations through sexual reproduction can result in hybrid
              offspring (or grandoffspring, two generations later) that are poorly adapted to
              local ecological conditions.  This phenomenon is known as "hybrid breakdown"
              and can result in an increased risk of extinction.  To date, the possibility
              that major restoration efforts may hold such a "poison pill" for future
              generations (i.e., hybrid breakdown) has just begun to be discussed by
              ecologists.  The collaboration to be initiated here will be the first study of
              this possibility in grassland species, which have been a major focus of
              restoration efforts.  The investigators will use molecular fingerprinting
              techniques to seek evidence for hybridization and hybrid breakdown between
              introduced and resident populations of three species of native California
              perennial grasses at an extensive grassland/oak woodland reserve managed by the
              University of California.  












