Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research in Novel Dynamic Scheduling Methods with Application
               to Computation of Quantum Trajectories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0081303

Award Number: 0081303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioana Banicescu ioana@cs.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jianping Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Weatherford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will discover novel scheduling techniques for large scale
              applications on parallel computers, and will develop new parallel algorithms
              using those scheduling techniques to calculate quantum trajectories for
              electron scattering problems. Such research is important to help enable
              theoretical models as close as possible to real events, so that simulations of
              physical phenomenal derive accurate predictions. Since many application
              problems in science and engineering are irregular, large and computationally
              intensive, finding their best solution in terms of numerical properties and
              parallel performance represents an important contribution to the development of
              advanced computational science. 

Technically, this project will develop new
              models for dynamic scheduling strategies used in scientific computing based on
              probabalistic and statistical analysis, and will evaluate their effectiveness
              on an analytical and experimental basis. The project specifcally addresses the
              following general issues: (1) to develop novel dynamic scheduling strategies
              that can accommodate applications with unpredictable behavior in load
              distribution, and evaluate their competitiveness with respect to existing
              technology; (2) to develop new parallel numerical algorithms using those
              strategies for the study of  scattering from an Eckart potential barrier in one
              dimension and electron scattering in three dimensions from the ground state
              hydrogen atom and one, two, three and four electrons bound to a hydrogen-like
              one and two dimensional multicharged ion; (3) to analyze the performance of
              this parallel application via new and predictive performance metrics. In
              addition, visualization methods will be applied to the calculation of quantum
              trajectories, leading to the possible identification of visual and quantified
              signatures of "quantum chaos." This is chaos in quantum mechanical systems
              defined in terms of the behavior of quantum trajectories.


