Title       : ITR: Design and Analysis of End-to-End Feedback Congestion Control Schemes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0081527

Award Number: 0081527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $472895             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shivendra S. Panwar panwar@catt.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhong-Ping Jiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The need to improve congestion control techniques for the Internet has grown
              recently.  Non real-time data traffic, which is currently transported on a
              "best effort" basis, will increasingly have more stringent delay and throughput
              requirements to meet critical scientific, corporate and e-commerce
              applications.  In order to meet this enhanced quality of service requirement,
              the existing feedback congestion control scheme incorporated in the
              Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) needs to be understood.  For this purpose,
              the PIs intend to:

1) Build an analytical model that can incorporate key
              features of TCP Reno and TCP enhancements under consideration by the IETF.  The
              model the PIs present here is interesting in that it can accommodate multiple
              TCP flows and possibly multiple network nodes.

2) Place TCP in a
              control-theoretic framework so that its stability and transient behavior is
              well understood.  The use of non-linear control techniques proposed here is
              novel, and should make available a new set of mathematical tools to study this
              problem.

3) The synthesis of these two activities will in turn suggest
              methods that ensure that any proposed TCP successor is stable, as well as
              improving throughput and fairness.  A more limited goal but with perhaps more
              immediate impact is a better understanding of the stability and performance of
              TCP Reno.

All of this work will be performed within the complementary
              congestion control efforts underway such as traffic engineering using the
              Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) protocol, traffic shaping and policing,
              service scheduling and buffer management.

In addition to a survey of the
              state of the art, the PIs present some preliminary results and ideas for future
              research.  The PIs demonstrate an analytical model of TCP Reno for the single
              node case, and some of the insights that even such a simple model provides. 
              The PIs also present a way of extending recent control theoretic work in flow
              control to a more realistic and general context, where boundary effects and
              unknown, time-varying propagation delays appear in networks.  Lyapunov theory,
              the theory of functional (retarded) differential equations and constructive
              design methods in modern nonlinear control will play a key role in the
              synthesis of new feedback congestion control schemes for the Internet.

The
              broader impacts of this research include the development of closer interaction
              between the control theory and networks research communities, curriculum
              enhancement at the graduate and undergraduate levels, applying some of the
              practical implications of this work through ongoing industry interactions, and
              inputs to IETF groups.

