Title       : ITR: Algorithms for Irregular Discrete Computations on SMPs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0081404

Award Number: 0081404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard M. Moret moret@cs.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Bader  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Parallel computing has promised very high performance, but has delivered it only
              in a narrow range of applications. Exploiting parallelism at the level of large
              distributed-memory systems is hampered by the cost of message-passing, while
              shared-memory systems remain mostly small-scale. With the advent of symmetric
              multiprocessors (SMPs), however, shared-memory on a modest scale is becoming
              the standard for desktop scientific and engineering applications. Yet very
              little has been done yet to support effective parallel computing on an SMP
              beyond basic linear algebra and fast Fourier transforms.  Fortunately,
              preliminary work by the investigators indicates that it is possible to design
              and implement algorithms for irregular (i.e. graph-based) computations that
              provide efficient, scalable performance on SMPs. This project will further
              develop, implement, assess, and refine those algorithms.

Technically, the
              project will focus on science-driven problems that are graph- or geometry-based
              (e.g. phylogeny tees and watershed modeling) and thus involve irregular
              computation. It will provide three main benefits for these problems. First, it
              will develop new algorithms and a library of basic routines to support graph
              and computational geometry algorithms, leveraging insights from nearly twenty
              years of theoretical work on Parallel Random Access Memory (PRAM). Second, it
              will produce an assessment methodology for SMP-based computations using both
              generated test instances and real-world data, extending recent developments in
              algorithmic engineering and experimental algorithmics. Finally, it will provide
              a practical demonstration of high performance computing on desktop SMPs for
              scientific problems.

