Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Landscape and Soil Evolution in Patterned Ground
               on a Recently Deglaciated Terrain in Jotunheimen, Norway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0081295

Award Number: 0081295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan W. Beatty susan.beatty@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5219,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The origin of landforms and soils along temporal landscape gradients long has
              been a topic of study and speculation in geomorphology, soil science, and
              related fields.  This is true for sub-Arctic areas that were covered by
              glaciers until very late in the Pleistocene.  While considerable attention has
              been given to analyzing the dates and processes that formed moraines and other
              landforms as well as soils, far less attention has been given to integrated
              examinations that link the development of micro-scale landform and soils with
              vegetational succession.  This doctoral dissertation research project will
              investigate the geoecological controls on micro-scale landscape evolution in
              the late-Holocene deglaciated terrain of Jotunheimen in south-central Norway. 
              The study will focus on local environmental parameters that were conducive for
              the formation of patterned ground initially after deglaciation, with attention
              also given to the processes that led to vegetation succession and soil
              development in the micro-scale (from 0.5 m to 3 m) patterned ground landforms. 
              The central hypotheses of this project are that significant micro-scale soil
              development differences occur within patterned ground and are positively
              correlated to vegetation succession.  Vegetation tends to establish itself on
              the periphery of patterned ground structures due to decreased frost activity. 
              The biotic effects interrelated with the physical environmental parameters will
              be increasingly detectable in terms of soil genesis within patterned ground
              along a chronosequence transect.  The project will include field work in two
              glacial forelands within the mountainous area of Jotunheimen.  Extensive data
              are available on postglacial surface ages in the terrains before the Storbreen
              and Slettmarkbreen glaciers.  This project will use these data in addition to
              data gathered through the excavation of soil pits.  Vegetation also will be
              sampled to obtain measures of species composition, diversity, and coverage
              (biomass indicator).  The results of this project will provide new insights
              into rapid landscape evolution induced by environmental change.  Specifically,
              this study will contribute to the understanding of factors controlling soil
              formation, particularly the vegetation factor, and it will elucidate the
              ecological process of succession as controlled by substrate.  This knowledge
              may then allow for predictions of future landscape changes in other mountainous
              areas.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
              will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

