Title       : Stochastic Dynamical Systems Analysis of Neural Information Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0081548

Award Number: 0081548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emery N. Brown brown@SRLB.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
Stochastic Dynamical Systems Analysis of Neural Information
              Representations


The nervous system is composed of specialized cells called
              neurons that transmit information through the pattern of electrical impulses
              known as action potentials or spikes. The sequence of spikes forms point
              process time-series, i.e. a series of ones and zeros. Neural systems use the
              firing patterns of spike trains to encode representations of relevant
              biological signals and external stimuli. An experimental system widely used to
              study neural information encoding is the rat hippocampus. The hippocampus is a
              brain region critical for the formation and storage of both short- and
              long-term memories. Within the hippocampus the rat uses neurons known as place
              cells to develop a spatial map of an environment. As an animal moves through
              its environment, a hippocampal place cell demarcates, within as few as 5
              minutes, its own region in the environment by firing spikes only when the
              animal is within that region. The region of the environment in which the cell
              fires is termed its place field. Large numbers of hippocampal place cells tile
              each environment with overlapping place fields and their ensemble-firing
              pattern gives a continuous representation (memory) of the animal's location in
              space. How ensembles of place cell neurons work together to represent spatial
              information is an important question. An active area of neuroscience research
              is the development of mathematical techniques to decipher this ensemble
              encoding.

Because neural spike trains are point processes, standard
              statistical signal processing techniques for continuous data have limited
              application in the analysis of neural systems. Accurate processing of neural
              system dynamics requires development of techniques to characterize correctly
              the point process nature of neural encoding. Martingale theory offers an
              efficient way to relate the current behavior of a point process stochastic
              dynamical system to the system's history and provides a prescription for
              finding the best estimate of signal encoded in a multidimensional point process
              time-series. While martingale theory has been applied in cancer survival
              studies, queuing theory and communication problems, it has yet to be adapted to
              signal processing in neural systems. Another signal processing discipline whose
              ideas have had limited application in neuroscience is adaptive estimation.
              Adaptive estimation offers a way to track the dynamics of how a neural system
              updates its encoding of a relevant biological stimulus.

This project will
              study two problems in neural signal processing: 1) development adaptive
              estimation algorithms to track instantaneously the dynamics of spatial
              information encoding by individual rat hippocampal place cell neurons; and 2)
              development of neural spike train decoding algorithms based on martingale
              theory to study information representation by ensembles of rat hippocampal
              place cell neurons. This work will provide a statistical framework for analysis
              of experimental studies on the role the hippocampus plays in memory formation.
              The adaptive estimation and martingale methods developed in this research will
              offer a new statistical paradigm for studying the dynamics of information
              representation and transmission in neural systems. 



