Title       : ITR: Geometric Algorithms and Analytical Models: the Case of Ray Shooting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0081964

Award Number: 0081964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Aronov aronov@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yi-Jen Chiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herve Bronnimann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of Computational Geometry is to provide provably efficient
              algorithms and data structures for applications of a geometric nature.
              Unfortunately, the commonly adopted attitude of studying worst-case behavior
              has disserved the field by building a gap between the theoretical research and
              the growing community that implements and uses geometric algorithms. This
              project will develop frameworks that model more closely the behavior of
              algorithms of practical importance on actual data. To do this, it will
              concentrate on ray shooting, which is the bottleneck operation in the
              fundamental ray tracing technique for producing photo-realistic images in
              graphics. Ray shooting also has numerous other applications.

Technically,
              the project will develop a new framework for predicting the "average" (rather
              than worst-case) performance of ray shooting on any decomposition- or
              hierarchy-based data structure on a given input. This would allow one to
              compare the expected performance of different approaches on a given data, with
              the eventual aim of being able to predict the cost of an operation, such as
              rendering a scene at a certain resolution, or optimizing the choice of a data
              structure to store a scene, prior to actual ray-shooting computation. It will
              also devise novel ray shooting/ray tracing algorithms that reduce the
              I/O-complexity for datasets too large to fit in main. In addition, It will
              attempt to extend the proposed performance-predicting framework to incorporate
              I/O-complexity as well, to cover the entire spectrum of the input sizes.
              Finally, the project will implement its algorithms, address the corresponding
              robustness issues, and investigate the accuracy of the predictive framework on
              practical data.

