Title       : ITR: An Active, Personalized, Adaptive, Multi-format Biological Information
               Delivery System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0081944

Award Number: 0081944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494297             (Estimated)
Investigator: Snehasis Mukhopadhyay   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajeev R. Raje  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon J. Rhodes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Javed Mostafa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mathew J. Palakal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The explosive growth of biological information sources, available over the
              Internet, has given rise to both opportunities and challenges for biological
              and medical researchers.  The opportunities they provide are both scientific
              (e.g., understanding the information encoded in elementary biological
              structures) as well as technological (e.g., new drug discovery).  The
              challenges, on the other hand, lie in how to efficiently discover, among  the
              vast volume of information, the items that are relevant or interesting to  a
              given researcher. The objective of the proposed research is to investigate
              related basic research problems and develop a biological information delivery
              system in a collaborative project between computer scientists, information
              scientists, and biological researchers.  The specific plans include developing
              methods to make the proposed system  pro-active (surveying evolving on-line
              sources for relevant information), personalized (cognizant of a particular
              researcher's interests),  adaptive (able to react to changes in the information
              sources  as well as user interests or objectives), and  capable of integrating
              multi-format data. The impact of this research  is  a significant enhancement
              in the ability of students and researchers in biological sciences to 
              efficiently utilize on-line resources, while generating methods for 
              computerized analysis of biological data and providing computerized support for
              new scientific discovery. 
