Title       : FRG: Modeling of Microstructure Evolution & Thermomechanical Fatigue in
               Lead-Free Solder Joints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0081796

Award Number: 0081796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $516001             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. N. Subramanian subraman@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Bieler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant focuses on characterizing the microstructural evolution and
              consequent changes in mechanical properties that result from thermomechanical
              fatigue for four Sn-Ag based solders.  The goal is to develop microstructurally
              based phenomenological models that can be used to predict the onset of failure.
               The experimental plan uses component-scale solder joint specimens that allow
              effective monitoring of microstructural and mechanical property changes as a
              function of the number of real-time thermomechanical cycles.  The
              thermomechanical cycling includes short times at elevated temperatures and long
              times at cold temperatures to allow the effects of low temperature creep to be
              evaluated, a condition not considered by the commonly used but non-conservative
              accelerated testing practice of the electronics industry. Specimens will also
              be cycled in industrial accelerated testing facilities to examine how different
              rates and magnitudes of heating and cooling affect structural damage
              accumulation.  Orientation imaging is used to evaluate structural changes in
              crystal orientation and misorientation.  The size distribution and shapes of
              second phases are also determined.  Mechanical properties are measured using
              nanoindentation and destructive testing techniques that include
              stress-relaxation, creep-rupture, and constant strain rate tests to evaluate
              corresponding failure strains.  Modeling is based upon a combination of the
              Dorn/Garafolo sinh equations for creep-plasticity coupled with threshold
              stresses based upon growth rate kinetics of particles and microstructure as
              modified by stress/strain history. 
%%%
Alternatives to leaded solders used
              in electronic applications are being sought to address environmental concerns
              and to accommodate the policies unfolding in several foreign countries that
              will affect the global marketing of US electronic products. Eutectic Sn-Ag
              solder is a recommended alternative solder, aimed at higher temperature service
              conditions.  Solders used in severe service environments, such as automotive,
              aerospace, and military environments, can experience thermal excursions that
              range between -50 to 180 degrees C. Such thermal cycles cause severe thermal
              stresses due to the thermal expansion mismatch between soldered components and
              the substrates. This thermomechanical fatigue process damages solder joints,
              and more than 70% of electronic system failures are due to failed solder
              joints. 
***

