Title       : Molecular and Macroscopic Modeling of Fluid Phase Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a0081138

Award Number: 0081138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando A. Escobedo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0081138
F. Escobedo/Cornell U.

In spite of the numerous recent
              methodological advances in simulation methodologies, an engineering-oriented
              framework has not been established.  If successful, the proposed work will
              provide general guidelines and specific algorithms to construct such an
              engineering-oriented framework.  In the short term, this work will provide
              efficient methods that scientists and engineers can use to generate any type of
              phase diagram for fluid mixtures that could be needed to understand and unveil
              a particular phenomena or to facilitate engineering calculations in the design
              of separation processes.  In the long term, the results of this work could pave
              the way to the development of process simulation software having a molecular
              simulation "module" for thermodynamic data generation.  Applications to the
              study relatively new systems and processes will unquestionable be explored in
              the future once better force-fields and faster computers become
              available.

The first step is the development of methods for the simulations
              of different classes of phase diagrams through single-stag simulations.  Novel
              Gibbs ensemble variants and novel pseudo-ensemble methods will be developed to
              accomplished this. Pseudo-ensembles provide a general framework to connect
              arbitrary phase equilibrium specifications with the parameters needed to
              simulate a selected ensemble; these methods thus provide a convenient tool to
              generate arbitrary projections (phase diagrams) of the thermodynamic phase
              space of the system.  The second step involves the development of new
              approaches to map out specific sub-domains of phase space that are relevant to
              the simulation of phase equilibria in multi-stage processes for systems with
              many components.  These approaches combine simulation data and engineering
              thermodynamic models in order to harness the predictive power of molecular
              simulation and the efficiency of engineering models.  Novel quasi-Gaussian
              analytical models will be investigated which, by design, synthesize more
              information about the underlying ensemble density distribution function
              (available from simulation output) than conventional engineering models.
              Several systems will be investigated to test the usefulness of the proposed
              methods, in particular, the separation of oligomeric mixtures by supercritical
              antisolvent fractionation.  
     

