Title       : ITR: Exploiting Remote Infrastructure for Mobile Information Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a0081396

Award Number: 0081396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahadev Satyanarayanan satya@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mor Harchol-Balter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The researchers propose to design, implement, analyze and evaluate
              mechanisms that will enable mobile clients to opportunistically exploit
              computing, data and communication resources in the fixed infrastructure to
              facilitate information access. A mobile client typically faces many resource
              challenges. These include unpredictable variation in wireless network quality;
              wide disparity in the availability of remote services; limitations imposed by
              weight and size constraints on CPU power, memory size and disk capacity; and
              concern for battery power consumption. The goal is to exploit remote
              infrastructure, such as transient caching sites or compute servers, to overcome
              these challenges. When such infrastructure is unavailable or would be too
              expensive or slow to access in terms of battery power or bandwidth, the
              researchers wish to be able to continue operation relying solely on local
              resources. The challenge is to come up with the adaptive mechanisms, algorithms
              and policies that can be effectively implemented on a resource-limited mobile
              client, yet function smoothly and seamlessly from a user's viewpoint. 
    
              The research will span both experimentation and analysis. On the one hand, the
              researchers plan to design, implement, and evaluate mobile computing systems
              embodying innovative solutions to the challenges described above. This will
              give the researchers the hands-on experience and insights needed to elucidate
              sound design principles for this domain. In parallel, the researchers plan to
              conduct an analytical and modelling effort to obtain a deeper understanding of
              fundamental tradeoffs in adaptation, and to explore a much broader region of
              the design space than feasible experimentally. 
     This effort will be
              organized into three major thrusts:
     1.Efficient file cache management for
              mobile clients
     2.Offloading computation for energy and bandwidth
              savings
     3.Modelling and analysis of adaptation tradeoffs
     In the
              first thrust, the researchers plan to explore the use of intermediate caching
              sites in the infrastructure to improve the efficiency of cache management in
              mobile file systems. The importance of caching for mobile information access is
              widely acknowledged, but what specific form it should take in the mobile
              systems of the future remains an open question. In the second thrust, the
              researchers will explore techniques for mobile clients to adaptatively offload
              computation on servers in the infrastructure. Such offloading may be useful for
              improved performance as well as enhanced battery life. In the third thrust, the
              researchers will analytically investigate a wide range of policies for the
              mechanisms developed in the other thrusts. The mobile computing systems of the
              future are likely to encounter considerable variability in environmental
              conditions, user preferences, and application characteristics. Characterizing
              this large multi-dimensional space analytically, and understanding its
              implications for alternative policies will be critical to the development of
              successful systems.
     If successful, the research will bring mobile
              computing one step closer to reality. Although commercial deployment of mobile
              computing systems is an enormous potential market for industry, many difficult
              technical problems remain to be solved. Incremental efforts by industry to
              extend today's widely-deployed commercial off-the-shelf systems to mobile
              environments will not solve these problems. The researchers proposed effort,
              combining experimentation and analysis on a key set of challenging problems,
              thus represents a high-risk, high-payoff venture.

