Title       : ITR: Mechanisms for Securing Emerging Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0081276

Award Number: 0081276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $483774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mustaque Ahamad mustaq@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irfan Essa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H Venkateswaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,1660,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As computers become pervasive in the home and community, new applications
will
              emerge that will make daily living easier by automating 
or assisting in a
              variety of human activities. Such
applications will be information rich and
              they will create and manipulate
sensitive information about the activities of
              their users, and 
the environment in which they live and work. At the Georgia
              
Institute of Technology, an information rich "Aware Home'' has
been built to
              explore many such applications. Clearly, it is important
that such
              applications be secured if they are to be deployed successfully.
This project
              will undertake a range of research activities to
secure future applications.
              These include new security policies 
for such applications, and intuitive and
              flexible access 
control models. A variety of automatic user identification
              
techniques will also  be investigated to authenticate sources
of requests
              without requiring burdensome participation from the users 
making the
              requests. New notions of integrity for information accessed from 
outside
              sources will be developed. The authorization, authentication and 
integrity
              mechanisms will be used to build security services
for emerging applications.
              The use of formal models 
will be explored to study important properties of
              the new security 
policies and access control models.

