Title       : ITR: Stochastic Summation of High-Order Feynman Graph Expansions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2002   
File        : a0081789

Award Number: 0081789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $486772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz-Bernd Schuttler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jem N. Corcoran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Lowenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The study of interacting fermions is fundamentally important to a wide range of
              physics research, including fields as diverse as electronic structure theory of
              solids, strongly correlated electron physics, quantum chemistry, and the theory
              of nuclear matter. Among other applications, the understanding of
              high-temperature superconductors depends on these interactions. This project
              will develop a new computational method for the controlled approximate solution
              of interacting fermion models. The method combines Monte Carlo (MC) summation
              techniques with self-consistent high-order Feynman diagram expansions. The
              implementation of the MC diagram summation method poses major algorithmic and
              computational challenges in several distinct areas of computational science
              and, by its very nature, requires a multi-disciplinary
              approach.

Technically, the project will develop novel computational graph
              theory algorithms and employ them to achieve a computationally efficient
              representation, generation and classification of Feynman graph topologies. New
              MC updating, scoring and variance minimization approaches will be implemented
              to carry out the simultaneous stochastic summation over diagram topologies and
              over internal momentum-energy variables. For the two-particle calculation, a
              novel combination of Lanczos matrix inversion and MC techniques is used to
              achieve efficient solutions of the Bethe-Salpeter equations with the full
              high-order irreducible interaction vertex. The efficient parallel
              implementation of the MC code is achieved by software pipelining and ring
              message passing approaches. These parallel applications are supported by novel
              parallel run-time systems that provide dynamic performance optimization.

