Title       : An Experimental Comparison of the Fairness and Learning Hypotheses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1997     
File        : a9617769

Award Number: 9617769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The provision of public goods has long been a important problem in
              microeconomics. Roughly, a public good is any item which can benefit a large
              number of individuals simultaneously and which it is difficult to exclude
              individuals from consuming. Examples of public goods might include public
              parks, clean air, or national defense.  The central difficulty with the
              provision of public goods is the free rider problem; if it is impossible to
              exclude an individual from the benefits of a public good, he/she has little
              incentive to pay for provision of the public good if others are willing to
              provide it.   Theorists have proposed a number of mechanisms designed to
              alleviate the free rider problem.  While all of these mechanisms work in
              theory, they are no better than their underlying assumptions about individuals'
              behavior. Experimental economics has played an invaluable role in the study of
              public goods by providing controlled empirical evidence on behavior in public
              goods problems.   It is well known that public goods and bargaining experiments
              yield results which are at odds with standard microeconomic theory. Two classes
              of theory, based on interpersonal utility functions (`fairness`) or on
              boundedly rational learning models, have been proposed to explain these
              results.  Neither explains all of the experimental data or clearly outperforms
              the other. Our experiments explore whether subjects' behavior in a public goods
              game can best be explained by the fairness hypothesis, the learning hypothesis,
              or a hybrid model which combines them.    Our experiments are based on the
              Minimum Contributing Set public goods game developed by van de Kragt, Orbell,
              and Dawes. We consider three basic variations.  One is designed to push
              inexperienced players towards the subgame perfect equilibrium, one is designed
              to push players toward the `fair` equilibrium, and one is designed with either
              outcome as a plausible outcome. By having subjects participate in one of the
              first two games before playing the third, we control the subjects' prior
              experience entering the third game.  Examining differences in subject behavior
              between sessions with differing prior experience allows us to clarify the roles
              of learning and fairness in generating subjects' behavior.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
