Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Design and Evaluation of Architectures,
               Programming Environments, and Applications for Shared-Memory Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9617383

Award Number: 9617383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82932              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarita V. Adve   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vikram S. Adve  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Behnaam Aazhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Baraniuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Adve, Sarita V.  Aazhang, Behnaam  Rice University    CISE Research
              Instrumentation: Design and Evaluation of Architectures, Programming
              Environments, and Applications for Shared-Memory Systems    This research
              instrumentation grant facilitates acquiring a shared-memory multiprocessor to
              support the following research projects:  -Design and Evaluation of ILP-Based
              Shared-Memory Multiprocessors -Parallelizing Compilers for Shared-Memory
              Systems- Interactive and Adaptive Techniques for Tuning the Performance of
              Shared-Memory Parallel Programs -Parallel Algorithms for Communications Systems
              -Signal and Image Processing.  The following research is thus enabled:-
              Architectural techniques to exploit instruction-level-parallelism in 
              shared-memory multiprocessors:  Fast simulation methods are the key enabling
              technology for this research.  The proposed multiprocessor enables the
              development and use of high-performance parallel simulators. - Compilation
              techniques for High Performance Fortran (HPF): The proposed  multiprocessor is
              a cost-effective platform for HPF compiler development  and an important target
              for evaluating the compiler-generated parallel code. - Runtime techniques to
              identify and remedy performance bottlenecks in  shared-memory programs: The
              multiprocessor is the desired platform to  develop and evaluate the techniques.
              - Algorithms for wireless and network communication systems: Most such
              algorithms must meet stringent real-time constraints. The multiprocessor 
              enables the development of parallel algorithms to meet these constraints.-
              Algorithms for signal and image processing for applications including
              geophysics, radar, and medical imaging diagnostics:  The multiprocessor  is
              needed to test and develop parallel and resource-intensive sequential 
              algorithms on real data sets. Overall, the proposed system enables the above
              research in three critical ways: enables parallelization of applications that
              cannot be run sequentially, provides a testbed for compiler and tools research,
              and provides cost-effective resources for sequential but resource-intensive
              tasks.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
