Title       : Aging, Inequality, and Welfare State Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9617901

Award Number: 9617901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38954              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred C. Pampel fred.pampel@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of aging, inequality, and welfare state regimes.  The project
              will use micro-level data with detailed income measures from the Luxembourg
              Income Study (LIS). The project selects five high income nations (Canada,
              Germany, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States) with data over a
              15-20 year period from the mid-1970s to about 1990. Analyzing income changes
              during old age for multiple nations then involves the following steps: 1)
              describing within-cohort changes in income levels and inequality for
              pre-retirement age men and women compared to post-retirement age men and women;
              2) estimating the changes in the effects of education and gender -- variables
              that generally remain stable during the age span studied -- on income outcomes
              for the same age groups; 3) estimating the effects of the stable background
              variables with controls for additional variables that change from middle-age to
              old age -- labor force status, hours worked, family status, and disability --
              to help identify the potential sources of changes in the effects of the stable
              background variables; 4) replicating the models separately for private and
              public income sources; and 5) comparing the differences for the five nations.  
                 Because cohorts come to depend increasingly on public transfers during old
              age, the analysis of  changes in income levels and inequality as cohorts age
              can address three theoretical issues. First, it can address arguments
              concerning the way one component of social inequality, old age, reshapes or
              fails to reshape the influence on economic outcomes of other ascribed and
              achieved characteristics such as gender and class. Disadvantages of old age may
              level, heighten, or maintain the gender and class advantages or disadvantages
              brought into old age. Second, by considering changes in the stratification
              processes as a shift occurs in the primary sources of income, it can addresses
              debates over the progressivity, regressivity, or continuity of public transfers
              relative to market income. Third,  with attention to multiple nations with
              distinct types of public programs and old age policies, it can address debates
              over the extent of national differences in the ability of welfare states to
              reduce, heighten, or maintain the gender and class-based market inequalities
              brought into old age.      The analysis will compare the determinants of the
              distribution of household and personal income in both absolute and relative
              terms. It will use regression techniques to analyze income variance, and it
              will use information-based inequality techniques to analyze relative income
              shares. The analysis can use the same techniques to further examine the
              contribution of different income sources to the changes in income levels and
              distribution over the later stages of the life-cycle. The extent to which the
              changes show declining inequality, increasing inequality, or stable inequality
              will provide support for debates over the impact of aging and public income
              support on the structure of stratification.      The project will thus
              contribute in several ways to the understanding of social stratification.
              First, it relates economic well-being in old age to stratification in middle
              age. With age viewed dynamically, sources of inequality structure the life
              course in ways that make the isolated study of cross-sectional age groups
              problematic. Second, the project recognizes that structural sources of gender
              inequality make for different economic experiences -- and require separate
              study -- of men and women during the aging process. The well-established
              vulnerability of older women to financial problems reflects more than
              individual risks; it also reflects the different and unequal legal,
              governmental, and institutional structures men and women face. Third, the
              project examines the structural sources of age and gender stratification with
              data on nations that have substantially different institutions of economic
              support for men and women in old age. In so doing, it supplements a huge
              comparative research tradition that  often focuses on class to the exclusion of
              gender and age.
