Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: CISE Research Instrumentation for an SMP Cluster
               Testbed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9617310

Award Number: 9617310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip K. McKinley mckinley@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil K. Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Betty H. Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                CDA-9617310  McKinley, Philip K.  Cheng, Betty H.C.  Michigan State University
                 CISE Research Instrumentation for an SMP Cluster Testbed     This award
              provides funds for the purchase of a cluster of symmetric multiprocessors
              (SMPs), interconnected by a high-speed switch, to be used in parallel and
              distributed data processing   research.  The SMP cluster will be connected to
              existing research facilities, creating a rich research infrastructure.  The
              primary purpose of the testbed is to support experimental studies in four  
              projects: large-scale parallel data clustering as applied to image processing;
              communication algorithms and libraries for distributed parallel computing;
              programming support tools for specification and design, visualization, and
              resource allocation; and design of parallel algorithms for feature extraction
              and matching in large-scale, distributed, fingerprint databases.  The results
              of this experimental research will provide a better understanding of the issues
              and problems that must be addressed in developing distributed parallel software
              for SMP clusters. Moreover, these projects will produce tangible results in the
              form of applications software, libraries, and tools for use by other
              researchers and developers.  The Department of Computer Science, College of
              Engineering, and Michigan State University are strongly committed to the
              success of this project, as evidenced by significant matching funds, leveraging
              of existing equipment, and commitments for maintenance and support of the
              testbed.
