Title       : Information Aggregation in Bayesian Games with many Players
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9617735

Award Number: 9617735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Pesendorfer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Project Abstract  In this project the principal investigator conducts
              theoretical research on the welfare and information aggregation properties of
              market institutions (exemplified by auctions and double auctions), elections,
              and related institutions. A common feature of these institutions is that they
              involve the interaction of a large number of agents.   Whether large markets
              effectively aggregate decentralized private information is one of the central
              questions in economic theory. This project analyzes this question for auctions,
              double auctions and related environments. The advantage of the auction setting
              is that it provides an explicit model of how individual actions and information
              translate into prices. This is in contrast to the price-taking model of a
              competitive market that is characterized by equilibrium conditions on prices,
              but provides no explanation of how prices satisfying those conditions are
              arrived at. The findings define conditions (necessary and sufficient) on the
              structure of the market that lead to `full information equivalence` . Full
              information equivalence is satisfied if the equilibrium price is the same
              whether or not buyers or sellers have private information about the quality of
              the objects for sale.   The question of whether elections effectively aggregate
              private information is central to political theory. A strong argument for
              elections is that society may be collectively better informed about the
              relative quality of a set of alternatives than any individual. Elections
              provide a mechanism for aggregating private information, ensuring a better
              collective decision. This idea inspired some of the earliest mathematical
              models of voting in elections and dates back at least to Condorcet. The set of
              environments in which elections might usefully aggregate private information
              about the relative quality of a pair of alternatives goes well beyond the Jury
              setting that was the focus of Condorcet's work. In most elections voters have
              private information about the relative quality of the alternatives. This
              project characterizes the voting environments that lead to full information
              equivalence, i.e., situations in which the alternative elected is the same
              whether or not the private information of voters about the quality of the
              alternatives is made public before the election.   Finally, this project
              develops an analytical framework that includes both elections and auctions as
              special cases. Analyzing this more abstract setting promises to provide a
              deeper understanding of the underlying characteristics that lead to
              institutions to have good information aggregation properties.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
