Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: A High-Performance Network for Distributed
               Computation and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1998  
File        : a9617541

Award Number: 9617541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Farrell farrell@cs.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arden G. Ruttan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve J. Chapin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617541  Farrell, Paul A  Ruttan, Arden G  Kent State University    CISE
              Research Instrumentation: A High Performance Network for   Distributed
              Computation and Visualization    The instrumentation grant enables the purchase
              of a high bandwidth, low latency Fibre Channel network connecting high
              performance to be used in the following research projects:   - Path Following,
              Visualization and Steering of Liquid Crystal Calculations    - Distributed
              Operating Systems Research   - Large Scalable Parallel Quantum Monte Carlo  The
              equipment will support several research projects, involving work in distributed
              large scale scientific computation, computational steering and visualization,
              together with work on distributed operating systems. In addition to the
              research projects themselves, it is planned to compare the effectiveness of the
              algorithms and methods on Fibre Channel to that on an ATM network.    The
              project on path following, visualization and steering of liquid crystal
              calculations involves the development of efficient algorithms to solve large
              scale liquid crystal problems in a distributed network environment and the
              tools to visualize and steer the resulting calculations.  The project on large
              scalable parallel quantum Monte Carlo methods involves investigation of
              communication and load balancing  in highly scalable implementations of
              electronic structure calculations.  The algorithms and performance will be
              compared on high-bandwidth networks and parallel machines. The project on
              distributed operating  systems is designed to enable the effective use of
              ensembles of workstations. This involves microkernel-based operating systems
              for networks of heterogeneous machines and heterogeneous distributed scheduling
              systems for WANs and LANs.
