Title       : Collaborative Research: Computer Software for Solution of Extensive Form Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1997     
File        : a9617854

Award Number: 9617854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74044              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. McKelvey rdm@hss.caltech.eedu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617854  McKelvey    Despite the widespread use of game theoretic models in the
              social  sciences, there is as yet no software available to solve
              computationally game theory problems.  This project completed the development
              and  testing of the first computer programs for analysis of extensive and
              normal form  games.  The computer code (both source and executable code) that 
              developed under this grant is made available free of  charge for use in
              research and teaching by individuals in the  academic community.  This new
              software is opening up the entire field of game theory and all of the social
              science applications  of game theory to computationally intensive research.    
                More specifically, the project develops a computer program for  interactively
              building and finding sample equilibria for  extensive form games.  It also
              implements new algorithms for  finding all equilibria (for a given refinement
              of Nash  equilibria) for any given extensive form game.  The main program  will
              allow for interactive construction of an arbitrary finite  extensive form game.
               It will be able to represent games of  incomplete information, as well as
              certain types of infinitely  repeated and stochastic games.  For any extensive
              form game, the  program will compute sample equilibria of the game, either on
              the  extensive or normal form, i.e., in behavioral or mixed  strategies.  In
              addition to Nash equilibria, the program will be  able to compute various
              refinements of Nash equilibria, such as  sequential equilibria, perfect
              equilibria, proper equilibria, and  simple stable sets.  One goal of the
              project is to develop a  capability for the program to calculate closed form
              analytical  formulas for an equilibrium as a function of a specified  parameter
              of the problem.         ??
