Title       : An Assessment of Energetic and Kinetic Properties of Surfaces and Interfaces in
               Alumina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a9617392

Award Number: 9617392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas M. Glaeser aglaeser@sapphire.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9617392  Glaeser    An experimental technique for determining the equilibrium 
              shape of pores in alumina has been developed and applied to  both undoped and
              Ti-doped sapphire.  Ti doping changes the  Wulff shape of alumina. 
              Concurrently, the use of pre-  perturbed pore channels has elevated studies of
              the Rayleigh  instabilities to a new level, allowing quantitative  measurement
              of key thermodynamic and kinetic parameters; a  framework for correcting for
              anisotropy effects in assessing  the surface diffusivity has been developed. 
              Ti doping  affects the morphological stability, but appears to have  only a
              mild effect on the surface diffusivity. Finally, Ti  doping has been shown to
              promote highly anisotropic grain  growth, leading to the formation of elongated
              grains, and to  substantially change the grain boundary mobility.  The 
              proposed work builds on and extends the first two components  of this prior
              work.  Specifically, by using lithographically  introduced pores and atomic
              force microscopy (AFM) to assess  the equilibrium pore shape, we propose to
              determine the  effect of Ti, Cr, Ca and Mg additions on the relative  energies
              and thermodynamic stabilities of a range of low  index surfaces in sapphire. 
              In addition, the instability of  lithographically introduced pore channels with
              pre-existent  finite perturbations of known but systematically varied 
              amplitude and wavelength will be examined.  The independent  effects of dopants
              and crystallographic orientation on the  thermodynamic and kinetic
              characteristics of perturbation  evolution will be determined.  This method of
              determining  the surface diffusivity, and more conventional scratch  smoothing
              methods will be used in tandem to compare apparent  surface diffusivities
              obtained under conditions where the  amplitude of the surface perturbation is
              increasing with  time, and decreasing with time, respectively. The 
              diffusivities determined using these two complementary  approaches will be
              compared to the diffusivities that can be  obtaine d from an analysis of
              pore-boundary separation  conditions.  The comparison may help to identify
              which (if  any) of the two approaches used to determine the surface 
              diffusivity provides data that is useful in predicting and  describing
              microstructural evolution in ceramics.  %%%  The proposed research will help
              improve our understanding of  surface diffusion in ceramics.   By studying the
              effect of  dopants and crystallographic orientation, the energetics of  surface
              diffusion can be determined, and thus, how the  changes in energetics and
              kinetic properties impact  microstructural evolution in ceramics.  These
              processes are  important in designing optimum microstructures for  properties. 
              ***
