Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: High Speed Cluster at the University of Wyoming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9617197

Award Number: 9617197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55755              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Haines mdh@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rex E. Gantenbein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shivakant Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617197  Haines, Matthew D.  Miser, Shivakant  University of Wyoming    CISE
              Research Instrumentation: High-Speed Cluster Computing at the University of
              Wyoming    This instrumentation grant enables research among the faculty in the
              Computer Science Department at the University of Wyoming, where distributed
              computing constitutes a focus area of research.  Most research today in the
              area of distributed computing centers around high-speed, high-bandwidth
              networks.  This funding   will enable research in at least three areas.-
              Runtime Support for Multidisciplinary Applications on Cluster Computers-
              Building Dependable Software using Group Communication Services - Real-time
              Distance Monitoring of Medical Information-The first is runtime support for
              multidisciplinary applications on cluster computers, in which several computing
              nodes are connected with a high-speed network to form a cluster computer.  This
              research area will focus on language and runtime support to enable efficient
              execution of multidisciplinary applications on this platform.-The second area
              of research involves building dependable thread-based communication services to
              enable reliable distributed software.  The goal of this research is to design
              reliable group communication services that can exploit a   high-speed network.-
              The third area of research supports real-time distance monitoring of medical
              information.  The goal of this research is to evaluate the abilities of a
              high-speed network to support real-time transmission and consumption of
              multimedia medical information.
