Title       : Development and Deployment of Atmospheric Pressure Ionization Mass Spectrometer
               for Determining SO2, DMS, DMSO, and DMSO2 on Aircraft and Ship Platforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9617362

Award Number: 9617362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Bandy bandyar@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9617362  Bandy     The objectives of this study are to develop and test
              instrumentation for determining dimethyl sulfide (DMS), dimethyl sulfoxide
              (DMSO), dimethyl sulfone (DMSO2), and sulfur dioxide (SO2) with a lower limit
              of detection of 1 part-per-trillion-by-volume (pptv) with a signal to noise
              ratio of 3 at a sample frequency of 1 per second.  The approach to be employed
              will be based on atmospheric pressure ionization quadrupole mass spectrometry
              (APIMS).  Positive ion APIMS for DMS, DMSO, and DMSO2 and negative ion APIMS
              for SO2 have been demonstrated in the laboratory.  The APIMS instruments will
              be based on Extrel Mass Spectrometry quadrupole systems, which have many years
              of field use in the investigator's previous projects.     The accuracy and
              precision of these APIMS instruments will be substantially enhanced by using
              isotopically labelled variants of the analytes as internal standards that have
              been deployed in the past using gas chromatography - mass spectrometry with
              isotopically labelled standards (GC/MS/ILS).  Using this approach the precision
              and accuracy of the instrument are independent of the instrument sensitivity
              and other factors, such as, analyte loss in sampling.  Furthermore, because the
              signal from the standard is available for each sample and the concentration of
              the standard is known, the instrument sensitivity and lower limit of detection
              can be precisely computed for each sample.     To validate this new
              instrumental approach for field measurements of these sulfur compounds in
              ambient air, the APIMS instruments will be intercompared to an existing
              GC/MS/ILS instrument, which was a part of the NASA-CITE-3 and NSF-GASIE
              evaluations.  To minimize the cost of the proposed work the mass spectrometers
              on hand will be used to build and deploy the APIMS for field tests.  This will
              require some modification to laboratory instruments to attain airworthiness
              standards in safety and operation.  The end goal is to achieve measurement
              times 200-4000 times faster than the curr ent GC/MS techniques for this suite
              of sulfur compounds.  These new instruments will be much smaller, lighter, and
              consume lower power for high altitude aircraft use.     If initial field tests
              with the single quad APIMS indicate that interferences are significant, a
              triple quadrupole mass spectrometer will be employed to further evaluate the
              ion chemistry for the required analyte specificity.  Successful tests of the
              APIMS for initial field measurements of these sulfur compounds will be followed
              by development of an APIMS for eddy correlation measurements of DMS fluxes in
              regions where significant DMS levels occur.
