Title       : Altruism and Spite in Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9617899

Award Number: 9617899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194960             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Levine dlevine@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Project Title: Altruism and Spite in Games Project Abstract  Altruism and
              spite are common both in everyday life and in experimental economic settings. 
              This research develops simple models of preferences that can give a
              quantitative explanation of altruism and spite, and explores the consequences
              of these preferences in economic theory and practice.  There are many models
              that can explain the qualitative features of altruism and spite in economics
              experiments; essentially what is observed is that there is heterogeneity, with
              some individuals acting altruistically and other spitefully.  Moreover, we
              observe more altruism and spite as their cost is diminished.  However, not all
              models can explain the quantitative features observed in experiments: in
              particular the simplest model of linear utility cannot explain the results from
              ultimatum game experiments, as the population receiving offers appears more
              spiteful than the population making offers. Our findings indicate that a simple
              linear model of signaling with heterogeneous players in which the degree of
              altruism depends on how altruistic other players are perceived to be can
              quantitatively explain a variety of experiments.  This research develops models
              that can explain experimental data, and uses these models to understand how
              altruism and spite impact on economic settings.  I consider issues such as
              welfare reform and charitable giving, discrimination, business organization and
              criminal behavior.   * One substitute that has been proposed for welfare is
              charitable giving with government matching funds.  If `warm glow` effects
              predominate, then donors may care little for the impact of their donations, and
              a privatized system need not be more efficient than a public welfare system.   
                * A key question in the study of discrimination is the type of institutional
              arrangements that may encourage or discourage spiteful behavior.        * The
              role of institutions in encouraging or discouraging spite and altruism is also
              key in the study of business organizations.  Historically this literature has
              focused largely on the exchange of information, and not questions of employee
              morale.  Which institutional arrangements make employee sabotage more or less
              likely?  Which arrangements encourage employees to internalize the goals of the
              firm?      * In the study of criminal behavior, the issue of respect for the
              law is important in explaining differences between countries.  The equilibrium
              degree of altruism and spite is potentially an important variable in explaining
              these differences.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
