Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Equipment for Real-Time Interaction with Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9617321

Award Number: 9617321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65934              (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Stockman stockman@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil K. Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juyang Weng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617321  Stockman, George C.  Jain, Anil K.  Michigan State University     CISE
              Research Instrumentation: Equipment for Real-Time Interaction with Images    
              This research instrumentation grant enables the purchase of equipment to be
              used in the following research projects: -Self Organization for Vision-Based
              Learning, Databases and Content-Based Retrieval, Modeling , Tracking, and
              Interpretation of Human Faces.  Research is being performed in vision-guided
              robotics, visual learning, organizing  and accessing databases of images and
              modeling and tracking human faces. Key elements of the research include -
              investigation of systematic methods for automatic learning over multiple tasks
              including navigation and object recognition, -organization of imagery for fast
              access using integrated features such as shape, texture, and color, and
              -modeling and storage of objects for fast recognition and real-time tracking.
              Advancement in the research projects depends critically on the new
              instrumentation which will provide the capability to interact in real-time with
              both sensed images from the environment and images stored in memory. A
              steerable camera system will be used for experiments in navigation, hand-eye
              coordination and tracking of hands and faces for gesture recognition. RAID disk
              memory connected to two powerful workstations will provide for large and fast
              storage for two simultaneous experiments which may be storing or searching
              video images or performing real-time   model-based tracking. We anticipate that
              our  research projects will yield several benefits, including improved
              man-machine interaction, better access to image databases, and better methods
              for learning automatic recognition procedures needed in many practical
              problems.
