Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Symmetric Multiprocessor for Research on Parallel
               Architecture, Compiler, Applications and On-demand Network-Computing Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9617348

Award Number: 9617348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie E. Taylor taylor@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617348  Taylor, Valerie E.  Northwestern University    CISE Research
              Instrumentation: Symmetric Multiprocessor for Research on Parallel
              Architecture, Compiler, Applications and On-demand Network-computing    This
              research instrumentation grant enables collaboration between two universities
              in four areas of research:-Hierarchical Processor-and-Memory Architecture for-
              High Performance Computing  - An Advanced Program Analysis and Compilation
              Infrastructure - Characterization of Large (Petaflop) Computational
              Applications - Metaprogramming and On-demand Metacomputing for Network-based
              Computational Hubs The focus of this project is on advancing the state of the
              art in high-performance computing on the four fronts:- the design of
              high-performance computers capable of 100 trillion  operations per second (i.e.
              100 TOPS),- advanced tools for analysis and compilation of programs for 
              execution on machines with multiple processors,- the characterization of
              applications that require computation rates of 100-1000 TOPS and- the design of
              a network-based software infrastructure that  allows the use of linked
              computers and linked programs (i.e.,metacomputers and metaprograms) through
              conventional network browsers.  The main ideas currently under investigation
              are being validated through extensive computational experiments and computer
              simulations. The equipment acquired with the funds provided by this grant
              provides the computational speed, memory, storage and communication demands of
              the experimental component of this project which would otherwise not be
              possible or take unacceptably long times to perform. The experimentation made
              possible by the availability of a symmetric multiprocessor is essential to the
              validation of research ideas and results pursued in this project. This work is
              being carried collaboratively by researchers at Northwestern University and
              Purdue University.
