Title       : Synthesis and Reactions of Strained Molecules and Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9617475

Award Number: 9617475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Shea kjshea@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Kenneth Shea, of the Department of Chemistry at the University   of
              California, Irvine, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for   his
              studies of the synthesis and reactions of strained molecules and   polymers. 
              Alkyl boranes initiate the polymerization of   dimethylsulfoxonium methylide,
              resulting in the formation of perfectly   linear polymethylene with an
              extremely narrow polydispersity index.    Adjustment of the initial ratio of
              ylide to alkyl borane permits control   of the molecular weight of the
              resulting polymethylene, while chemical   transformations of the carbon-boron
              bonds of polyhomologated alkyl   boranes allow the introduction of a variety of
              terminal functionalities.    Extension of this polyhomologation chemistry to
              more complex alkyl borane   initiators affords access to novel polymethylene
              architectures, including   star, comb, and hyperbranched polymers.  The
              chemistry may also be   adapted to the formation of block copolymers which
              covalently link   polymethylene with the incompatible polysiloxanes and
              polyethylene   glycols.  Development of control over the formation and
              structures of polymers,   macromolecules comprised of chemically-linked
              repeating units derived   from smaller molecules, is a central issue in the
              scientifically and   technologically vital area of polymer chemistry. 
              Professor Kenneth Shea   exploits an unusual class of polymer-forming chemical
              reactions, wherein   individual carbon atoms are added to a growing polymer
              chain one at a   time.  This chemistry affords synthetic access to a range of  
              three-dimensional polymer structures, including circular-, comb-, and  
              star-shaped materials, and will thereby permit the determination of the  
              effects of such unusual structural motifs on the intrinsic and bulk  
              properties of polymeric materials.  Additional studies address the   formation
              of block copolymers (two or more distinct polymers chemically   linked to
              one-another) in which the linked polymers display drastically   different
              properties.  Unusual physical and chemical properties are   expected to arise
              from such unions, including the formation of materials   which can change their
              shapes and/or properties as a function of their   environment.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
