Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Storage and I/O Devices for the Support of
               Research in Imaging Systems, Networks, and Video and Speech Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9617388

Award Number: 9617388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Coyle coyle@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Delp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary P. Harper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan P. Allebach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Bouman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617388  Coyle, Edward J.  Purdue University    CISE Research Instrumentation: 
              Storage and I/O Devices for the Support of Research in Imaging Systems,
              Networks, and Video and Speech Processing    This award enables the School of
              Electrical and Computer Engineering at Purdue University to purchase equipment
              for the support of research projects:- Quality Improvement in the Imaging
              Pipeline- Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Broadband Networks-Multiscale
              Search of Very Large Image and Video Databases- Scalable Video Compression,
              Video Servers, and Error Concealment - Speech Processing Algorithms. These
              areas of research  are critical to the success of future imaging and networked
              multimedia systems. The equipment to be purchased includes RAID arrays,
              real-time video codecs, a high-resolution digital still camera, digital video
              cameras, audio equipment, and networking hardware. This equipment is to be
              shared amongst the five research laboratories connected to our VIADuct
              ATM/HiPPI Networking Research Testbed: the Computer Vision and Image Processing
              Laboratory; the Electronic Imaging Systems Laboratory; the Multispectral
              Imaging Laboratory; the Parallel Processing Laboratory; and the Speech
              Processing Laboratory. This equipment will enable us to acquire, store and
              share the video, audio, and high-resolution images needed for our research
              projects in the following areas: quality improvement in the imaging pipeline;
              modeling, analysis and control of broadband networks carrying multimedia
              traffic; multiscale search of very large image and video databases; scalable
              video compression; architecture and management of video servers; and speech
              processing algorithms.
