Title       : Integrated Computer-Aided Mechanical Design with Configuration Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9617600

Award Number: 9617600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215516             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisha Sacks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An integrated computational environment for computer-aided  mechanical design
              will be developed and tested.  The environment  will support the key design
              tasks of function validation,  dynamical simulation, parametric design, and
              functional  tolerancing for a broad range of mechanical assemblies, such as 
              camera shutter mechanisms, part feeders, robotic arms, and  computer housings. 
              The research will address the fundamental  task of computing the effects of
              part contacts on function.  Contact analysis is difficult and time-consuming
              even for  experienced designers due to the quantity and complexity of the 
              contact constraints in modern assemblies.  The difficulty is  greatest in
              assemblies with multiple contacts, meaning that  different parts interact at
              various stages of the work cycle.  There is no general purpose software for
              contact analysis.  Contact analysis will be studied within the configuration
              space  representation of mechanical function.  Configuration space  computation
              algorithms will be extended to the full range of  planar assemblies and to
              selected spatial assemblies.  Algorithmic support will be developed for the
              design tasks via  configuration space manipulation.  The software will
              emphasize  breadth of coverage, depth of analysis, and robustness.
