Title       : The Organizational Determinants of Industrial Toxic Pollution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1997  
File        : a9617725

Award Number: 9617725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don S. Grant II grantd@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert Bergesen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of how the age and size of industrial organizations influence
              toxic pollution.  In asking what organizational factors explain why some
              manufacturing plants emit disproportionate amounts of toxins, this project
              draws upon the literature in the sociology of organizations to identify aspects
              of businesses that are theoretically relevant to possible polluting behavior.
              One strand of organizational research suggests that older and larger
              corporations are the least flexible and therefore the least inclined to adopt
              environmentally improved work practices. Size and age of plant may create
              "structural inertia" that limit plant responsiveness to changes in industrial
              technology and utilization of new information by management.  Another strand of
              organizational research challenges these predictions, suggesting that older and
              larger businesses are actually the most fluid and therefore the most capable of
              incorporating environmentally sound systems. This research suggests that many
              large and well established businesses have recently enhanced their fluidity by
              restructuring themselves to resemble networks. Through spinning off
              subsidiaries, selling off unprofitable divisions, subcontracting less essential
              activities, and participating in joint ventures, these firms have managed to
              create flexible mass production systems. By extension in today's "mean and
              lean" economy, the production systems of the large and more established
              companies may be most able to conform with environmental regulations.  This
              research will test these competing theoretical claims about the effects of
              organizational size and age on toxic emissions with data from the Toxic Release
               Inventory collected by the Environmental Protection Agency, focusing on
              information concerning the toxic releases of approximately 4500 chemical
              plants.      This research will provide new policy relevant information on
              organizational structure and polluting behavior. This is an important new
              departure in the sociological study of environmenta l issues, for it addresses
              the core organizational structure of a firm as the possible source of polluting
              behavior. Policy makers realize that "end-of-pipe" pollution control is an
              inadequate strategy for long term sustainable economic growth. By understanding
              the organizational dimensions of polluting behavior, scientific understanding
              of pollution will be moved up stream from "end-of-pipe" to basic core facts of
              organizational life.
