Title       : Expectations and Economic Fluctuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9617501

Award Number: 9617501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160701             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Evans gevans@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9617501  Evans    This project addresses the important and as yet unresolved
              issue whether expectations have power as independent variables to explain
              fluctuations in aggregate economic variables such as GDP or inflation.  A
              recurrent theme in macroeconomics has been the hypothesis that expectations do
              matter, and that their importance is of the same order of magnitude as
              monetary, productivity and fiscal shocks.  But standard dynamic macroeconomic
              models assume away the possibility of an independent role in explaining
              economic fluctuations and those models which allow for this possibility make
              unappealing assumptions.  This project constructs models in which expectations
              have an independent role and in which such solutions are stable under adaptive
              learning.  A new version of the seignorage model of inflation will be developed
              which includes a fiscal restriction (inspired in part by the European Union
              conditions for Monetary Union) on the maximum size of the deficit relative to
              GDP.  When this model is studied under adaptive learning a number of novel
              features emerge.  For example, this project shows that it my be possible to
              become trapped in a high inflation equilibrium, even when a low inflation
              equilibrium exists.  However, a policy which tightens the fiscal restriction
              can induce the economy to move to the low inflation equilibrium.  A second line
              of research will analyze the stability of the rational expectations equilibrium
              (REE) in a general dynamic multivariate linear model.  Many applied
              macroeconomic models can be approximated by this framework.  The project
              derives general conditions for REE to be stable under adaptive learning and
              apply the results to a range of examples.  A third line of research develops a
              version of an endogenous growth model which exhibits growth cycles, i.e.,
              equilibrium fluctuations in growth rates generated by self fulfilling shifts in
              business confidence and investment.  The underlying mechanisms are based on (1)
              complementarities between capital inputs and  (2) monopolistic competition in
              the development of new designs.  Related work includes (1) a comparison to the
              data of the statistical time series implications of the increasing returns
              growth model, (2) investigation of the implications for asset prices of
              modeling asset demands as guided by a genetic algorithm,, (3) the development
              of new technical tools for analyzing the convergence of adaptive learning in
              the presence of multiple equilibria (4) study of the implications for
              convergence of the presence of heterogeneous expectations.      ??
