Title       : Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Prehistoric Pastoralism in Southern
               Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1996   
File        : a9617070

Award Number: 9617070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Brandt sbrabdt@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Steven Brandt, Mr. Girma Hundie will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. In past fieldwork he has located a series of
              archaeological sites in the Yabello region of southern Ethiopia and in his NSF
              supported project will return to conduct extensive excavation as well as
              additional survey. Yabello is located north of the Kenyan border in a
              transition zone between the Southern Ethiopian highlands to the North and
              low-lying East African plains to the South. Preliminary data suggests that this
              area served as an entryway to the South and an understanding of its prehistory
              may shed important light on the introduction of both new peoples and new
              substance technologies into this latter region. In a series of rock overhangs
              Mr. Hundie has recovered from the surface and upper levels of in situ deposits
              ceramics as well as faunal remains and worked stone tools which may, based on
              preliminary tyupological analysis, span tens of millennia. The walls of one of
              these shelters contain rock paintings. Mr. Hundie will conduct test excavations
              in several shelters to determine the cultural sequence and depth of deposits.
              On this basis he will select one for more extensive excavation. Flotation will
              be employed to recover plant remains. Lithics, ceramics and fauna and
              radiocarbon samples will also be collected and a geological analysis performed.
              With these data it should be possible to trace the changes from a hunting and
              gathering to succeeding Neolithic way of life. One can thus determine when
              domestic animals first entered the region and the cultural mechanism
              responsible for this introduction. Mr. Hundie will also conduct a surface
              survey to locate early pastoral material which should provide insight into
              early pastoralist social organization.  Archaeological data demonstrate that
              animal domestication occurred in several centers in the Old World and that
              livestock such as cows, sheep and goats spread from these central sources.
              While it is clear that East Africa did not constitute one of these areas,
              domesticates may have been introduced as early as 6,000 years ago. However the
              date is not well established and neither the route nor mechanism known. It is
              not clear whether people were relatively sedentary and livestock alone spread
              from group to group or whether substantial human and livestock movement
              occurred together. Through analysis of such situations archaeologists can gain
              insight into the principles which underlie culture change and transmission.
              Several models have been postulated for East Africa yet solid data do not exist
              to verify or refute any of them.  Mr. Hundie' research will address this
              question. The work will be of interest to many archaeologists and provide basic
              data on a little known part of the world. The project will also assist in
              training a promising young scientist.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
