Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: File Server and Storage for Spoken Language
               Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1997   
File        : a9617484

Award Number: 9617484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Fanty fanty@cse.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald A. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yonghong Yan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617484  Fanty, Mark A.  Cole, Ron, A.  Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and
              Technology     CISE Research Instrumentation: File Server and Storage for
              Spoken Language Technologies    This research instrumentation grant enables the
              purchase of a new file server and storage to be used for several research
              projects:- Segment-Based Language Recognition;Speaker Identification; Improving
              the Connectionist Approach to Automatize Speech Recognition;Robust and Portable
              Design Systems.  Language recognition:  the automatic identification of which
              language is being spoken from an excerpt of speech.  A large 22 language
              telephone speech corpus is being collected.  Speaker identification: the
              identification of who is talking from an excerpt of speech.  A large corpus of
              realistic data collected over several channels across a large span of time is
              being collected.  Improving the connectionist approach to automatic speech
              recognition: the extension of CSLU's neural network technology to large
              vocabulary recognition, providing an efficient alternative to the well-studied
              HMM systems.  A large amount of data will be necessary.  Robust and portable
              dialogue systems: the technology needed to build practical spoken language
              systems for the telephone packaged in a toolkit to make it accessible to a wide
              community.  A large, regionally diverse cellular telephone corpus is being
              collected.  Collectively, these corpora provide a valuable resource for
              research nation-wide as well as for the research described here.  In each task
              domain, large amounts of annotated speech data are needed in order to study the
              sources of variability in speech, to train and evaluate recognition algorithms,
              and to compare research results across laboratories.
