Title       : Molecular and Isotopic Fate of Alkenones and Alkenes During Early Diagenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9617892

Award Number: 9617892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306974             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. R. Harvey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9617892  Harvey       The use of molecular organic markers has provided 
              valuable information on a wide range of inputs and processes  which occur in
              the worlds oceans and sediments.  What is  often absent from these
              observations, is quantitative  information on the relationship of biological
              processing in  the water column and sediments to the molecular signal which  is
              ultimately preserved in the geological record.  Such  information may be
              particularly important for the long chain  alkenones, a group of compounds
              present in several species  of oceanic and coastal prymnesiophyte algae which
              are now  being widely used to detail both recent and historical  records of sea
              surface temperature.  Recent disparities in  temperature predictions and
              isotopic signature have been  observed, yet no mechanistic information is
              available on the  alkenones and related lipids after initial cellular 
              biosynthesis to document diagenetic effects.  This work will  focus on the two
              major routes for the alteration of  alkenones, alkenes and alkyl alkenoates in
              marine systems:  zooplankton grazing and microbially mediated processes.  The 
              project will provide fundamental information on the  synthesis and fate of the
              alkenones and related lipids in  the marine water column and surface sediments
              and validate  the potential for these compounds or their degradation  products
              to provide a quantitative measure of sea surface  temperature in present and
              past oceans.  ***
