Title       : Testing Theories of International Cooperation in Regional Conflicts 1990 - 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1997    
File        : a9617157

Award Number: 9617157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70007              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua Goldstein jgoldst@american.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project test theories of international cooperation  and reciprocity,
              drawn from neoliberal institutionalism, against the major cases of regional
              conflict in the post-Cold War era.  Neoliberal theories emerged in the subfield
              of international political economy, therefore their extension to international
              security affairs is an important test.  Yet such efforts in the past focused
              primarily on Cold  War great power relations, while today the international
              security subfield has taken a much greater interest in questions of regional
              conflicts and great-power management of such conflicts.  This investigation
              tests whether neoliberal theories of cooperation apply to the behaviors and
              outcomes found in contemporary regional conflicts.  Time series statistical
              methods are used to test hypotheses about patterns of response among the
              various actors in regional conflicts (including great powers).  Such
              theoretical constructs as reciprocity, bullying, and triangular response
              translate into statistical tests on time series representing the fluctuating
              levels of cooperation/conflict among the different actors.  These time series
              are constructed by machine-coding the Reuters World Service to create events
              data for each regional conflict.  Analysis of the first conflict - - Bosnia - -
              has already been completed by the investigator.  The data construction methods
              produced time series of cooperation-conflict levels that appear to capture the
              main phases and events in the war; and the statistical analysis found several
              significant hypothesized relationships including bilateral reciprocity and
              triangular `bullying.`  This investigation should enhance our understanding of
              the topic and create a useful dataset for other scholars.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
