Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Earthquake Engineering Research on Steel, Composite and
               Hybrid Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a9617547

Award Number: 9617547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Mahin mahin@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the intellectual opportunity as well as the need for
              technical coordination of research efforts being undertaken simultaneously in
              the U. S. and Japan on two topics of national importance. They are: (1)
              U.S.-Japan Cooperative Earthquake Research Program: Composite and Hybrid
              Structures, NSF Initiative No. 94-154, and (2) U.S.- Japan Partnership for
              Advanced Steel Structures. While these are separate cooperative research
              elements, they focus on several similar technical issues and involve some of
              the same key individuals and institutions. As a result, they are coordinated
              within a single NSF activity.  The objectives of this project are to: (1)
              Facilitate exchange of basic information and concepts as well as personnel
              between the U.S. and Japan; (2) Coordinate research efforts on a cooperative
              basis on topics of mutual interest; (3) Facilitate the exchange of data and
              results of the specific projects undertaken; (4) Provide a focal point for
              diverse, independent research projects being conducted in the U.S. and abroad
              in order to more rapidly advance progress on issues of national importance; (5)
              Synthesize the results and identify overall observations and conclusions from
              the various projects undertaken; and (6) Identify areas of needed future
              research of pioneering nature, as well as areas where generated knowledge is
              sufficient for implementation. These objectives are being achieved by various
              means, including; (1) Convening annual joint meetings of researchers
              participating in the program; (2) Enabling a panel of senior technical advisors
              of nationally recognized experts to attend the meetings in order to provide
              input related to the needs of the professional and industrial communities, and
              facilitate dissemination of information generated in the project of these
              various groups; (3) Establishing work groups (or sub-committees) that focus on
              and accelerate the progress of research within narrower disciplinary areas; (4)
              Gathering summaries of technical reports and test data from each participating
              project and distributing the summaries through the World Wide Web and other
              means; and (5) Developing and distributing final documents summarizing the
              overall findings, observations and conclusions for each element. This project
              will bring the development and implementation of all current and future
              US-Japan Cooperative Research activities in these two important subject areas
              into a well balanced and coordinated program.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
