Title       : Chemistry of 1,n Cation Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9617264

Award Number: 9617264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua L. Goodman jlg@goodman.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Joshua Goodman of the Department of Chemistry at the University   of
              Rochester, with the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, studies   the
              chemistry of 1,n-cation radicals.  The solution structure,   reactivity, and
              thermochemistry of these highly reactive, short-lived   intermediates,
              representing oxidized analogs of the comparatively   well-known biradicals, are
              studied through a combination of product   analyses, time-resolved absorption
              spectroscopy, and photoacoustic   calorimetry.  These studies provide insights
              into the influence of   structure and thermodynamics on the reactivity of the
              1,n-cation radicals   and on the processes whereby they are converted into
              stable products.    Electron transfer reactions converting 1,n-cation radicals
              to the   corresponding 1,n-biradicals are also explored, allowing the
              comparison   of these biradicals with those formed through independent
              synthetic   routes in order to ascertain whether they display
              precursor-dependent   chemistry.  Study of the chemistry of reactive
              intermediates, compounds formed   transiently at intermediate stages of
              chemical reactions, sheds light on   the fundamental processes responsible for
              the chemical transformations of   molecules.  Professor Joshua Goodman, of the
              University of Rochester,   studies `1,n-cation radicals,` reactive compounds
              containing an atom   bearing a positive charge and an atom bearing a single
              electron,   separated from each other by n-1 atoms.  There is a mounting body
              of   evidence which suggests that such cation radicals play important roles as 
               reactive intermediates in organic reactions, some of which serve as  
              fundamental models for biochemical processes.  Development of an  
              understanding of their structure and chemistry promises greater insights   into
              the intricate details of these and related chemical and biochemical  
              processes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
