Title       : RUI: The Fusion of Liability and Damages in Negligence Cases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9617270

Award Number: 9617270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edith Greene egreen@mail.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Greene  9617270  The law assumes that jurors will determine liability for
              negligence reprehensibility of the defendant's actions and that they will
              determine damages by considering the severity of the plaintiff's injuries. This
              research examines whether jurors' decisions about liability and damages are
              interdependent or fused ant the conditions under which fusion may occur.  The
              research draws on theorizing about hindsight bias in heuristical reasoning.  In
              judging liability, jurors are assumed to evaluate the reasonableness of the
              defendant's behavior in light of the risk that was (or should have been)
              apparent at the time, and not by hindsight in light of consequences.  In
              determining compensation, jurors are assumed to decide upon a fair amount in
              damages in light of  the severity of plaintiff's injuries and not by hindsight
              in light of defendant's actions.  Hindsight bias suggests that outcome
              information is integrated into a person's knowledge of evens preceding the
              outcome.  Three cognitive mechanisms are proposed to describe this integration
              and are tested in this research.  The first two studies address these issues
              using jury simulation methodology.  The reprehensibility of the defendant's
              actions and severity of harm are manipulated.  All jurors watch a videotaped
              trial of a negligence case and make individual determination of liability or of
              damages.  They then deliberate in groups of six to reach a verdict and complete
              a post-deliberation questionnaire. In the third study, .the effectiveness of
              three classes of debiasing techniques: admonishing jurors to base their
              judgments on the evidence, requiring jurors to give a rationale prior to
              stating their liability determinations or damage awards, or bifurcation the
              liability and damages evidence and decision making are tested. These studies
              will contribute to knowledge of juror decision making and effective trial
              processes.  %%%  The law assumes that jurors will determine liability for
              negligence reprehensibility of the defendant's act ions and that they will
              determine damages by considering the severity of the plaintiff's injuries. This
              research examines whether jurors' decisions about liability and damages are
              interdependent or fused ant the conditions under which fusion may occur.  In
              judging liability, jurors are assumed to evaluate the reasonableness of the
              defendant's behavior in light of the risk that was (or qhould have been)
              apparent at the time, and not by hindsight in light of consequences.  In
              determining compensation, jurors are assumed to decide upon a fair amount in
              damages in light of  the severity of plaintiff's injuries and not by hindsight
              in light of defendant's actions.  Hindsight bias suggests that outcome
              information is integrated into a person's knowledge of evens preceding the
              outcome.  The studies address these issues using jury simulation methodology.
              In the first two experiments, the reprehensibility of the defendant's actions
              and severity of harm are manipulated.  All jurors watch a videotaped trial of a
              negligence case and make individual determination of liability or of damages. 
              They then deliberate in groups of six to reach a verdict and complete a
              post-deliberation questionnaire. In the third study, .the effectiveness of
              three classes of debiasing techniques: admonishing jurors to base their
              judgments on the evidence, requiring jurors to give a rationale prior to
              stating their liability determinations or damage awards, or bifurcation the
              liability and damages evidence and decision making are tested. These studies
              will contribute to knowledge of juror decision making and effective trial
              processes.  ***
