Title       : NSF/DARPA DDFRP: The Distributed Design and Fabrication of Metal Parts and
               Tooling by 3D Printing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9617750

Award Number: 9617750
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1350000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Emanuel M. Sachs sachs@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duane S. Boning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Cima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph L. Resnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Patrikalakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1464,4730,9148,9159,MANU,
Abstract    :
               The goal of this research is to provide a "clean interface" between design and
              fabrication for mechanical parts to be made by Solid Freeform Fabrication using
              Three Dimensional Printing as a prototypical process.  The "clean interface"
              will be modeled after the practice in the design of integrated circuits.  It is
              predicated upon the availability to the designer of representations capable of
              expressing a wide range of fabrication capability of Three Dimensional
              Printing, coupled with the ability to ensure that designs created with this
              representation are manufacturable.  This program will investigate:  (1) 
              representations for parts with local composition control, a capability not now
              addressed by existing representations;  (2) design rules which capture in
              simple terms the limitations of the fabrication technology, such as limitations
              on variation of local composition; (3)   simulations for aspects of process
              technology which cannot be captured as simple design rules, for example for the
              surface texture resulting from layering; and  (4) the derivation of
              instructions for a Three Dimensional Printing machine from comprehensive part
              representations, which include local variation in composition.  This program
              will also operate an interactive communication link to designers in order to
              test hypotheses about how designers use the tools provided to them.  Parts will
              be fabricated based on remote input from designers at sites in industry,
              academic research programs, and in an undergraduate course in manufacturing.  
              A successful "clean interface" between design and fabrication will allow the
              designer of parts to be made by Solid Freeform Fabrication to send information
              to the fabricator and to get back a good part without any discussion with the
              fabricator.  This clean separation between design and fabrication for
              mechanical parts will:  (1) facilitate distributed design and fabrication; (2)
              lower the barriers to entry for users of Solid Freeform Fabrication; and (3)
              empower designers to make more co mplete use of the flexibility of Solid
              Freeform Fabrication processes, while guaranteeing manufacturable designs.
