Title       : Community Structure and Activity of Ammonia-Oxidizing Bacteria In Aquatic
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9617690

Award Number: 9617690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bess B. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      9617690  Ward         Nitrifying bacteria play an essential role in the
              nitrogen  cycle of aquatic and terrestrial environments. Environmental 
              variables such as oxygen concentration and light intensity, which  control
              nitrification, therefore ultimately influence the chemical  nature and amount
              of nitrogen available. The rate and distribution  of nitrification in water and
              sediments can be related to and  predicted from these variables using
              reaction/diffusion models.  However, the mechanisms by which the influence of
              environmental  variables is translated into biogeochemical reaction rates
              depends  on the response of individual bacteria to physiological stimuli. 
              Advances continue to be made in sensitivity and precision in  isotopic methods
              used to measure transformation rates in the  nitrogen cycle. In parallel,
              recent advances in molecular ecology  make it possible to detect and partially
              characterize the genetic  diversity of naturally occurring nitrifying bacterial
              assemblages.  Dr. Ward will investigate the composition and activity of 
              nitrifying bacterial assemblages in two aquatic environments which  differ in
              the degree and scale of environmental variability: a  pelagic oceanic realm and
              an intertidal sediment ecosystem. Species  and group-specific PCR
              amplification, followed by DGGE screening  and sequencing of amplified
              ribosomal and functional gene  (ammonia-mono-oxygenase, AMO) DNA fragments will
              be used to 1)  describe qualitatively the composition and activity
              distributions  of nitrifying bacteria in different environments; 2) determine
              the  physical and temporal scales over which species composition and AMO 
              activity vary in relation to environmental variables such as depth  (with light
              and oxygen as important co-variables) and nutrient  distributions; 3)
              investigate the relationship between species  composition, AMO expression and
              nitrification rates. These two  environments represent important ones for
              nitrogen transformations  and include a wide range of environmental 
              variability, so that the  relationships among species diversity, habitat
              characteristics and  biogeochemical transformation rates can be elucidated.
