Title       : The Hawaii Ocean Time-Series Program: JGOFS Component
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a9617409

Award Number: 9617409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2850000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Karl dkarl@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Dore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale V. Hebel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis M. Tupas  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal supports the continuation of the JGOFS core measurement component
              of the Hawaii Ocean Time series (HOT) program for an additional three years.
              This HOT JGOFS proposal includes 4 separate, but fully integrated proposals:
              core measurement component (D. Karl, L. Tupas and D. Hebel, co P.I.s), pigment
              and phytoplankton component (R. Bidigare, P.I.), inorganic carbon (C.' Winn,
              P.I.) and zooplankton (M. Landry, P.I.). Since Oct 1988, a comprehensive suite
              of ocean measurements and results of in situ experiments have been obtained at
              the oligotrophic Station ALOHA (22'45N, 158'00'W) in the subtropical North
              Pacific Ocean. The core measurements were selected to provide a data set to
              validate existing C-N P biogeochemical models and, if necessary, to improve
              them. Foremost in importance among the various ecosystem processes under
              investigation are: the flux of carbon at the air sea interface, the rates and
              control mechanisms of primary production and particle export, and the pathways
              and intensities of inorganic nutrient (N and P) fluxes. Equally important are
              the observed time dependent changes in microbial biomass and biodiversity, and
              the relationships of these observed ecosystem changes to the broader
              extratropical climate forcing such as El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and
              other large scale ocean atmosphere interactions. The emergent data set from the
              HOT program is unique, robust and rich with previously undocumented phenomena.
              The HOT program data base is fully accessible with unrestricted use by anyone
              through the worldwide Internet system (ftp) and, more recently, via the world
              wide web with only an approximately 6 12 month processing delay. The scientific
              results of the HOT research program have provided an unprecedented view of
              biogeochemical cycles in a previously undersampled region of the world ocean.
              Numerous HOT related publications and reports have already appeared based on
              the research results obtained by a broad spectrum of HOT program associated and
              independent scientists. At the same time, this ocean research program has
              provided an unique educational opportunity for undergraduate and graduate
              students from Hawaii and around the world, both in terms of at sea field
              experience and in the classroom working with the computer accessible HOT
              program environmental data sets. Funding will be used to continue this
              successful ocean time series core measurement program for the period Aug 1998
              to July 2001 and supplement these measurements with an additional mooring.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
