Title       : Quantile Regression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9617206

Award Number: 9617206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211202             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Koenker Rkoenker@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9617206  Koenker    Quantile regression is gradually evolving into a
              comprehensive approach to the statistical analysis of linear and nonlinear
              response models.  Although the application of quantile regression in empirical
              economics has grown rapidly in recent years in part because of the many past
              contributions by this project's investigator, applications of quantile methods
              to large problems have been limited because the computational burden increases
              rapidly as the problem size grows.  This project pursues two lines of research
              which preliminary work by the investigator suggests should yield dramatic
              improvements in this direction.  One is the use of recently developed interior
              point methods for linear programming; the other is a form of preprocessing
              which can drastically reduce the effective dimension of most quantile
              regression problems.  Together, these ideas, based on preliminary testing,
              appear capable of bringing the computational effort of quantile regression down
              to the level of the standard least squares approach for problems with sample
              sizes up to several million observations, and perhaps larger.  This project
              will refine these new methods and extend them to nonparametric and nonlinear
              response models.  The project also addresses the problem of the bewildering
              array of methods of inference based on discrete quantiles by developing a
              method that appears especially attractive for a wide variety of quantile
              regression inference problems including the construction of confidence
              intervals for individual quantile regression parameter estimates.  Finally the
              project uses quantile methods for economic applications in time-series,
              duration, and multivariate analysis.
