Title       : Types and Tokens in Dynamic Object Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9617274

Award Number: 9617274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209993             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Henderson john@eyelab.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9617274  HENDERSON  Visual perception is a dynamic process:  The two-dimensional
               image of the world projected onto the receptor surface at the  back of the
              eyeball (the retina) is in a constant state of change  due to eye, head, body,
              and object movements.  These changes lead  to two-dimensional geometric
              transformations of the retinal image  (e.g., a rectangular door projects a
              trapezoidal image when it is  seen at an angle), size transformations of the
              image (e.g., an  object projects a smaller image when farther away), and
              temporal  gaps in the image (e.g., an object disappears from the image when  it
              moves behind another object).  In addition, because our eyes  move in rapid,
              discrete jerks (called saccades), and because the  visual system is effectively
              blind during those movements  (information is acquired only during fixational
              pauses between  the movements), the entire image disappears about three times 
              every second.  Yet, in spite of all of this change and variation,  we
              experience a constant, stable visual world.  This research is  concerned with
              the way we are able to experience visual object  constancy, particularly across
              saccadic eye movements, in the  face of the highly fluctuating visual image
              with which we are  presented.  The theoretical framework guiding the research
              holds  that the visual system maintains visual constancy for objects  using two
              sorts of internal representations, a relatively  abstract description of the
              object (i.e., an object type), and a  more veridical representation that is
              tied to the object's  spatial location and that includes more specific visual
              details  about the object (i.e., an object token).  Experiments will use  the
              preview paradigm, in which participants will see one image  during a first
              fixation, and a second image during a subsequent  fixation.  Since the ahange
              from the first to the second image  will take place during a saccade, it will
              not be directly  perceived.  Manipulation of the similarity of the first image
              to  the second will ma ke it possible to determine the nature of the 
              information that the visual system acquires and retains across a  saccade.  The
              research will then be able to address five  questions:  (1) What kind of
              information is preserved across  saccadic eye movements during dynamic
              identification of real-  world objects?  (2) How is the information about an
              object  preserved across a saccade related to its spatial position?    (3) Do
              object types and object tokens represent the same sorts of  information?  (4)
              What is the nature of the spatial reference  frame(s) used to represent object
              position across a saccade?   (5) Does object constancy operate similarly across
              saccadic eye  movements and within a single eye fixation?  An understanding of 
              the processes involved in maintaining visual constancy across  saccadic eye
              movements should allow for improved design of  graphical display systems,
              including virtual reality systems, as  well as for the development of improved
              artificial vision  systems, particularly those that attempt to integrate visual
               information dynamically over time.  Finally, this research should  contribute
              toward understanding of visual impairments that lead  to an inability to
              recognize objects and scenes (visual agnosia).  ***
