Title       : The Political Economy of Social Security and Entitlements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9617396

Award Number: 9617396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177195             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Cooley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1041,1092,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the United States, as in many other countries, the economic burden of public
              entitlement programs has become a serious fiscal issue.  Most notable is the
              Social Security system which has been the focus of much recent attention
              because of the current demographic makeup of the population. The prospect of
              the retirement of the baby boom generation and the demands that will place on
              the next generation of workers has caused many to question the basic idea that
              the provision of retirement benefits should be based on a pay-as-you-go system
              and regarded as an `entitlement`. This project will study the system of
              transfers that are regarded as entitlements.  It will treat these as problems
              in political economy.  The approach taken is to ask how a social security
              system and a publicly funded education system can emerge as both a political
              and an economic equilibrium in a competitive economy.  Very little research has
              been done that simultaneously analyses the general equilibrium economic
              consequences and the political economy of social security.  Understanding the
              interaction between political economy of social choices and their general
              equilibrium effects is important for understanding their welfare implications,
              for evaluating proposals for transforming social security from a pay-as-you-go
              system to a fully-funded system, and for evaluating efforts to decrease the
              public funding of education.  A dynamic general equilibrium model will be
              constructed  with multiple generations of agents, that capture the essence of
              the intertemporal choice problem involved in saving for retirement.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
