Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: High Performance Computing and Application
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9617375

Award Number: 9617375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasant Mohapatra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Liang-Fang Chao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sachin S. Sapatnekar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Srini Tridandapani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617375  Mohapatra, Prasant  Sapatnekar, Sachin S.  Iowa State University   
              CISE Research Instrumentation: High Performance Computing and Application
              Laboratory     This research instrumentation grant enables the  Department of
              Electrical and Computer Engineering at Iowa State University to purchase
              equipment for developing a high-performance computing and applications
              laboratory dedicated to supporting research in computer and information science
              and engineering. The facility will be used for the following research projects
              funded by the CISE division of the NSF:    - Integrated Processor Management
              Schemes for Parallel Computers,    - Utilizing Idle/Spare Capacity Efficiently
              on a Network of Workstations,    - Hardware Multicast Routing Technique for
              Scalable Parallel Computers,    - Design Optimizations for High-Performance
              Circuits,    - Optimizing Synthesis for Periodic Real-Time Applications.    The
              investigators propose to acquire eight workstations and integrate them with the
              four existing ones (purchased through prior NSF and other funding) to build a
              cluster of twelve workstations. These workstations will be connected through a
              high-speed ethernet backbone. The time-consuming simulations that are required
              for the listed projects can be parallelized and run efficiently on the
              workstation cluster. Currently, the Computer Engineering program at Iowa State
              University does not have a computing laboratory dedicated to support graduate
              research activities. The University and the Department are highly supportive of
              building such a facility and are committed to the development of the computer
              engineering research program.
