Title       : Design and Rapid Prototyping of Customized Micro and Macro Compliant Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9617997

Award Number: 9617997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318686             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Ostrowski jpo@grip.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Vijay Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suresh G. K. Ananthasuresh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruzena K. Bajcsy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4710      DESIGN AUTOMATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on design and fabrication for a novel class of mechanical 
              system known as compliant mechanisms.  Compliant devices replace elements 
              traditionally assembled using joints and springs with compliant flexible
              members  that use elastic deformations to transmit motions and forces.  This
              allows the  research to concentrate more on representation, translation, and
              interface issues  of design and fabrication, and less on issues such as
              assemble and  manufacturability.  The domain of compliant mechanisms allows
              design and  optimization to be performed on devices at both the macro and micro
              level (e.g.,  SFF and MEMS-type fabrication processes, respectively), and so
              will afford a  unique opportunity to study the clean separation of design and
              fabrication  analogous to the VLSI paradigm.    This research targets three
              primary areas of compliant mechanism design and  fabrication.  Fundamental to
              this study is the optimal synthesis of compliant  devices, both macro and
              micro.  This includes the design and analysis of 3-D  structures and the
              nonlinearities associated with large deformations.  The  ability to form more
              complex objects based on a library of standardized  parametric components will
              also be explored.  As the processes are generally not  the same, the issue of
              designing and refining translation tools to move between  representations is a
              critical component in this research.  The choice of  intermediate
              representations will be critically examined, and the appropriate  translation
              tools will be developed.  The goal here will be to push towards  intermediate
              formats that are suitable to multiple fabrication processes, at both  the micro
              and macro scales.  Finally, the ability to test and refine designs for  micro
              structures by the use of macro prototypes fabricated from the same initial 
              model will be developed, and its utility in the design of MEMS devices will be 
              carefully examined.
