Title       : Methyl Bromide Cycling by Marine Phytoplankton and Associated Bacterioplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9617680

Award Number: 9617680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Matrai pmatrai@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9618533        9617680  MATRAI    ABSTRACT    Concern about declining ozone
              concentrations in the atmosphere in the last two decades has led researchers to
              look for compounds that destroy ozone, other than chlorofluorocarbons.  One
              such compound is methyl bromide (CH3Br) which is presently believed to be the
              largest source of Br in the stratosphere.  Methyl bromide and derived radicals
              can destroy 5-10% of stratospheric ozone on a global basis and more on a
              regional basis.  The major natural source of CH3Br to the troposphere appears
              to be marine, biogenic production and subsequent sea-air exchange; the output
              from biomass burning due to wildfires is unknown.  Anthropogenic sources
              include biomass burning, automobile exhaust, and, mainly, fumigation.  Models
              predict a global anthropogenic contribution of 25-54% of total emissions, the
              remainder being the natural contribution.  This clearly indicates the
              importance of natural sources.  The principal losses for atmospheric CH3Br are
              photolysis, air-sea exchange, surface losses to soils and plants, and
              biological degradation in soils.  atmospheric concentrations of methyl bromide
              appear to be increasing at a rate of 3% (+1%) per year.  Due to its
              anthropogenic sources, a proposal currently exists to drastically curtail its
              use as a fumigant and thus reduce its input to the atmosphere.  This reduction
              would affect the balance between natural and anthropogenic effects on the
              atmosphere.  This reduction would affect the balance between natural and
              anthropogenic effects on the atmospheric concentration of CH3Br.     The oceans
              play an important and complex part in controlling the tropospheric burden of
              methyl bromide.  Sea surface can act both as a source and a sink to the
              atmosphere.  To determine the net availability of dissolved CH3Br for air-sea
              exchange, the various compartments and mechanisms involved must be understood. 
              This study will assess the extent and rate of CH3Br production by marine
              phytoplankton in the laboratory and in the field in o rder to determine the
              relative importance of the mechanisms by which methyl bromide cycles in the
              oceans.
