Title       : Scaling in Molecular Electronic Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9617418

Award Number: 9617418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Field rwfield@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robert W. Field of The Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported   by
              the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program  to further develop and   exploit
              molecular quantum defect theory (MQDT) in an ongoing effort to   investigate
              scaling (with n*, l and ml) in molecular electronic   spectroscopy. 
              Specifically, he will use Stark switching spectroscopy to   study core
              non-penetrating molecular Rydberg states or two-color   resonance-enhanced
              multiphoton ionization to study the core-penetrating   Rydberg series of
              alkaline earth monohalides. Initially, he will focus on   relatively simple
              systems such as the alkaline earth monohalides, then   gravitate to more
              complex systems including larger polyatomic molecules.    His overall objective
              is to exploit, uncover, and test unconventional   models which might eventually
              describe the electronic structure and   dynamics of entire families of
              molecules:  all properties, all states,   all dynamical processes.    A few
              comments about the practical significance of these experiments are   warranted.
               Why should we care about the electric multipole moments of   cations?  All +1
              cations have the same monopole, so this dominant aspect   of the interaction of
              the cation with the outside world is independent of   the molecule. 
              Ion-specific long-range interactions, on the other hand,   derive from the
              higher multipoles (and their normal coordinate   displacement derivatives). 
              These multipoles and derivatives control the   mechanisms and rates of resonant
              long-range ion-molecule, ion-electron,   and possibly ion-surface energy and
              angular momentum exchange.  The   information obtainable from systematic
              studies of core-nonpenetrating   Rydberg states would yield valuable insights
              into a wide variety of   processes occurring in plasmas.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
