Title       : Scientific Management of the National Ice Core Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a9617009

Award Number: 9617009
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Twickler mark.twickler@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Mayewski  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Cooperative Agreement provides support for the formation  of  a  Scientific
              Management Office (SMO) for the National  Ice  Core  Laboratory  (NICL),  a 
              facility in  Denver,  Colorado  which  is  jointly  managed and operated by the
              National Science  Foundation  (NSF)  and the United States Geological Survey
              (USGS), and  which  provides  a state-of-the-art, safe and controlled
              environment  to  preserve   ice  cores  and  an  ice  core  processing  area  
              for  investigators  to  conduct research .  The Scientific  Management  Office
              (SMO) will be housed in the Climate Change Research Center  (CCRC) of the
              Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans and  Space  (EOS)  at  the University
              of New Hampshire (UNH).  The Scientific  Management  Office  for NICL (NICL
              SMO) will serve  as  a  direct  point of contact for principal investigators
              interested in access  to  ice cores.  It will also facilitate the formulation
              of a  new  Ice  Core  Working  Group  (ICWG) that will  represent  ice  core 
              researchers  and  those  in  related disciplines  whose  research  utilizes  or
               applies  to  ice  core  research.   The  ICWG  will  investigate  a wide range
              of topics related to ice core  research  including   NICL  oversight,  sample 
              access  and   distribution,  inventory, policy issues and the development of a
              plan for future  activities.   Through yearly meetings and reports the  ICWG 
              will  provide  leadership  and  direction to the  ice  core  community. 
              Members  of the ICWG will be elected by the scientific  community  and  will
              serve on a rotating basis.  The first Chair for the new  ICWG will be the
              Director of the NICL SMO and will serve for  one  year  until  ICWG  members
              elect a Chair.   A  Sample  Allocation  Committee  (SAC)  developed from
              members  of  ICWG  will  provide  timely  recommendations to NSF and USGS on
              sample allocation  and  core  access  for  qualified investigators.   A  data 
              management  coordination system with existing data centers will be  organized 
              by the ICWG through  the NICL SMO.
