Title       : Private vs. Public Expressions of Prejudice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9617710

Award Number: 9617710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Lambert alambert@artsci.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Description.  A great deal of research conducted over the past 50 years
              has demonstrated that stereotypes can have a powerful influence on peoples'
              behavior toward, and memory for, individual group members. In almost all of
              this work, however, participants are placed in relatively private settings,
              such that their responses are either confidential or completely anonymous.
              Although such methodological approaches have been used with considerable
              success in the development of precise models of stereotyping, this focus
              potentially leads to the development of theoretical models that may not
              necessarily generalize to other kinds of judgmental contexts. A central goal of
              the proposed research is to articulate the different processes that potentially
              guide stereotype use, depending on whether these stereotypes are activated in
              relatively private vs. public settings. The proposed research employs a number
              of methodological tools, such as response time measures, judgment, and recall.
              The proposed research also manipulates judgmental context: participants are
              informed that their impressions are confidential (private context), or that
              they will be discussing their judgments of the target person with one or more
              other people (anticipated public contexts). This program of research is
              expected yield a greater understanding of when, why, and how people express or
              suppress their stereotypes and gain insight into the automatic and controlled
              processes that mediate such effects.  %%%  Project Justification. 
              Psychologists have long been interested in how members of privileged, dominant
              groups (e.g. Whites) use their stereotypes about racial minorities or other
              disadvantaged groups (e.g., Blacks) as a basis for reacting to a single member
              of the group.  Although previous research has generated many valuable insights,
              most of this past work has studied stereotyping in relatively artificial
              settings. In particular, participants in this research are nearly always placed
              in private (anonymous) situations in which other people will not know how they
              respond to the minority person. Although such situations have the advantage of
              carefully controlling the nature of the judgmental setting, these kinds of
              studies are not able to address how people might use their stereotypes in more
              `social` (i.e., public) settings.   The goal of the present research,
              therefore, was to better understand how people go about using their stereotypes
              in different ways, depending on the nature of the situational context at the
              time of judgment. This program of research is expected to yield greater
              insights into when, why, and how people go about using their stereotypes in
              relatively naturalistic contexts.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
