Title       : The Reconstitution of Early Complex Society in Pacific Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1996  
File        : a9617123

Award Number: 9617123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Love   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Love will conduct one
              field season of excavation and an additional period of analysis at the
              archaeological site of Ujuxte, located near the Pacific coast of Guatemala.
              Currently supported NSF investigations indicate that Ujuxte began as a planned
              city at approximately 600 BC and grew to reach considerable proportions. Survey
              has shown that at its peak, it covered over 4 sq kilometers and dominated a
              number of secondary centers which contained smaller copies of its ceremonial
              architecture. Through his work, Dr. Love wishes to understand the history of
              the site and how its social, economic and political organization developed and
              changed over time. To accomplish this goal, Dr. Love and collaborators will
              excavate four residential mounds to increase the sample to a sufficient size to
              capture the full range of variation. Additional test units will be placed in
              mounds already tested to expand ceramic and other material culture collections.
              The group will also excavate a central plaza area and test selected non-mound
              locations. Through the analysis of the materials collected it will be possible
              to reconstruct a social profile, determine the extent of economic
              differentiation and determine if a hierarchical form of organization existed. 
              Early complex societies are now recognized as fragile and subject to cycles of
              integration and decomposition. Dr. Love will investigate one such cycle in a
              region which has remains of the earliest complex societies presently known for
              Mesoamerica. The evolution of those societies has basic importance for the
              understanding of Mesoamerican culture history and can shed light on the
              mechanisms of the development of complex society. During the Middle Preclassic
              period, from ca. 900-600 BC, the region's first large regional polity, centered
              on the site of La Blanca, was constituted and collapsed. Soon after that
              collapse the nearly site of Ujuxte first developed. Dr. Love's research
              examines the transition from the La Blanca polity to that dominated by Ujuxte.
              It will compare the two entities in terms of social organization, economic
              structures and ideological basis of power. The research seeks to understand the
              extent to which the structures of the Ujxute polity recreated those of La
              Blanca. To the extent that the structures are distinct, the research will then
              ask what conditions enabled Ujuxte to endure and grow where La Blanca did not. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
