Title       : Early Agriculture in the Gulf Coast Lowlands of Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a9617389

Award Number: 9617389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary D. Pohl MPOHL@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin O. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Mary Pohl and her collaborators
              will conduct three seasons of archaeological and paleoecological research in
              the state of Tabasco, Mexico. The earliest Middle American civilization, the
              Olmec, appeared in the lowland tropical Gulf Coast region of Tabasco and the
              team wishes to understand the process which underlies this development. It is
              very likely that, contrary to common archaeological belief, domestication of
              several important new world food plants occurred in a lowland rather than
              highland context and the group will search for indications of early agriculture
              associated with Olmec precursors. Prior work by Pohl and her colleagues in
              lowland Belize suggests that environmental changes related to shifts and sea
              level and availability of fresh water provided a context which fostered
              agriculture and the present project is designed to test and further develop
              this idea. The project has two major components. The first involves an
              intensive program of core transects along the past and present river channels
              in the vicinity of the Olmec site of La Venta. With the sedimentological,
              pollen and phytolith data thus obtained it should be possible to reconstruct
              environment and determine how it changed over the relevant interval of time.
              Analysis of cores often provides information on the presence and importance of
              agriculture both through the presence of pollen from domestic species and the
              amount of charcoal which is indicative of forest clearing. The group will also
              conduct archaeological excavations to recover cultural data. Faunal remains,
              lithics and ceramics should provide insight into both diet and group
              organization.       The `Neolithic Revolution` marked by the domestication of
              plants and animals constitutes a central turning point in human prehistory. The
              process occurred independently in many parts of the world and provided the
              basis for the rise of complex societies. In Middle America archaeologists do
              not know when or where such important crops as corn and beans were
              domesticated. They also do not understand why after thousands of years as
              hunters and gatherers people altered their subsistence practices in such a
              basic way. Several hypotheses have been proposed and the data that Dr. Pohl and
              her colleagues will collect will allow selection among several.        This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide insight into the
              processes which gave rise to complex Middle American societies. The
              environmental and archaeological data which will result will be of interest to
              a wide range of scientists.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
