Title       : The Effects of Electoral Systems on Legislator-Constituency Relations: A Five
               Country Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9617532

Award Number: 9617532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100988             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Wood   (Principal Investigator current)
              Garry Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie Heitshusen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research systematically examines five nations to determine the influence
              of electoral arrangements on legislators' constituency-oriented activity/. 
              Legislator involvement in constituency-oriented actions constitutes a key
              element of representation separate from more commonly studied policy-based
              representation.  Evidence suggests that members of all legislatures engage in
              some form of constituency-oriented activity.  Unfortunately, analyses of such
              activities, and their causes, are sparse for legislatures other than the U.S.
              Congress. Rarer still are studies that examine legislator-constituent relations
              comparatively across nations.  Consequently, a causal-based, theoretically rich
              understanding of legislator-constituent relations does not exist.  By comparing
              five nations with markedly different electoral systems, this investigation
              produces a database making advancement towards such an understanding possible. 
              The project contributes to a greater understanding of the nature of
              representation and the role electoral arrangements play beyond influencing seat
              and vote distributions.  The study involves personal interviews with national
              legislators in Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom.
               Interviewed are 50-60 legislators in each of the lower houses of the four
              bicameral parliaments and in the only chamber of New Zealand's unicameral
              Parliament.  Samples are drawn in order to approximate the features of the
              population of legislators in each legislative body.  Additionally, surveys are
              mailed to each district represented in each legislature.  These surveys are
              directed at senior staff who deal with constituent issues and supplement the
              interview data.  Other types of supplementary data (mainly electoral) are also
              gathered.  This study yields a rich dataset useful for scholars interested in
              addressing a number of potential explanations for variation in legislator's
              constituency-oriented actions.  Additionally, the dataset is useful for
              analyzing the linkage between constituency activity and incumbent electoral
              fortunes (e.g., personal vote totals).                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
