Title       : Experimental Testing of a Theory of Group Solidarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9617490

Award Number: 9617490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31605              (Estimated)
Investigator: Satoshi Kanazawa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project has two elements. First, it proposes to test propositions derived
              from a recognized rational choice theory of group cooperation. Second, as a
              side benefit, it will help establish a small, computer-controlled experimental
              laboratory usable for future rational choice experiments.

Rational choice
              theories explain behavior as a consequence of individuals' attempts to maximize
              rewards and minimize costs. Thus "free riding" on public goods-in which
              individuals can benefit even if they do not contribute-is an important
              theoretical (and practical) problem. Michael Hechter has proposed a theory in
              which social control to prevent free riding is a function of visibility and
              extensiveness of norms governing cooperation. The theoretical contribution of
              this project states Hechter's theory formally, permitting deriving testable
              propositions on control. Kanazawa's theory treats visibility as the cost to
              gain information on cooperation or selfish behavior. Normative extensiveness is
              inversely related to an individual's dependence on the group. One theorem from
              the explicit theory is that group solidarity, which is produced by high levels
              of cooperation among members, is high when visibility and dependence on the
              group both are high. 

Experimental theory tests will be conducted with
              volunteer subjects playing a game in which they decide how to allocate points
              between themselves and the group. A mixed-motive game structure developed by
              other investigators will be adapted for the theory tests here. The game and
              point allocations will be controlled and recorded by a local network of
              computers purchased with funds from this project. Because the game structure in
              which points are given and taken is quite general, that network will be usable
              for additional experiments testing rational choice theories having different
              payoffs, amounts of information, and communication structures. 

