Title       : Agricultural Innovation and Resource Management in Ghana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9617694

Award Number: 9617694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Udry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project entails an intensive program of field research in Ghana.  The goal
              of the research is to formally model the incentives individuals face with
              respect to land resource management in an area faced with ecological stress. 
              The farming system in the study area is undergoing a remarkable transformation
              from an established system of maize and cassava intercropping to intensive
              vegetable production.  The primary challenge in this transition is finding
              techniques which will maintain soil fertility under the new cropping system. 
              Three central economic issues arise.  First, the development of innovative
              methods of fertility maintenance is characterized by social learning i.e.
              farmers know of each other's experiments.  Second, there is a close
              relationship between property rights (vested critically in the individuals
              within the household) and incentives to apply techniques for soil fertility
              maintenance.  Finally, decision-making with respect to soil fertility
              maintenance depends critically upon characteristics of the markets, and in
              particular the capital markets available to farmers.   The fieldwork consists
              of  three simultaneous and interactive components.  One is a multi-round survey
              to collect the basic data required for econometric analysis.  The first rounds
              of the survey will use questionnaires that have already developed.  These
              questionnaires will be modified or dropped, and new survey instruments added,
              as the theoretical framework that seems most appropriate changes.  A second
              component, therefore, is continued theoretical work in response to the incoming
              questionnaires and to observations from less formal conversations between
              myself and survey participants.  These less formal interactions are the third
              component of the fieldwork, one that is aimed at developing a descriptive
              characterization of the institutions in the study area which are most relevant
              for decision making with respect to land resource management.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
