Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Application and Evaluation of a Low Cost Parallel
               Processing Platform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9617271

Award Number: 9617271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh Chalasani suresh@ece.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617271  Chalasani, Suresh  Agrawal, Rajeev  University of Wisconsin-Madison   
              CISE Research Instrumentation: Application and Evaluation of a Low Cost
              Parallel Processing Platform    This research instrumentation grant enables the
              Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of
              Wisconsin-Madison to purchase three 12-port Asynchronous Transfer Mode   (ATM)
              switches and nine personal computers to support distinct research projects on
              real-time, multimedia and parallel computing applications.  The following
              research projects will benefit from this instrumentation:   - Traffic
              Management in ATM Networks   - Parallel Computing on ATM Networks   -
              Distributed Multi-media Computing on a Desktop ATM Network   - Quality of
              Service Guarantees to Real-Time Message Streams  For these applications,
              several traffic management strategies to provide quality of service guarantees
              will be evaluated using this equipment.  These strategies combine mechanisms
              such as admission control, policing, scheduling, and feedback-based flow
              control.  ATM-based networks of workstations may cause performance degradation
              for parallel applications, if different virtual circuits have unequal
              bandwidths.  The research projects on parallel computing use the equipment to
              develop techniques for studying and alleviating this performance degradation in
              large parallel applications.  For multimedia applications such as video
              conferencing, current video coding schemes often cause abrupt, frequent
              fluctuation of network traffic rendering inefficient use of network resources. 
              A low cost video conferencing application will be developed to evaluate the
              effectiveness of present and emerging video coding algorithms.    The equipment
              is crucial for investigating all aspects of competing strategies developed in
              the above research projects including performance, complexity, and ease of
              implementation.  The results from the experimental validation will demonstrate
              whether or not ATM-based networks are viable platforms for su pporting diverse
              applications.
