Title       : Collaborative Research: Practical Ethical Instruction with Expert-Analyzed Cases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9617071

Award Number: 9617071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Ashley ashley+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 7915,9152,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project undertakes a systematic study of cognitive processes that support
              students in learning important concepts and skills concerning practical ethical
              reasoning in a professional domain. The investigators will build a corpus of
              cases, strategies, and analyses from three general sources: (1) the case
              examples and exercises taken from leading textbooks in engineering ethics (2)
              the knowledge, reasoning skills and case examples provided by engineering
              ethicists and professional engineers as revealed in protocols which the
              investigators will acquire and analyze, and (3) the findings of the
              investigators' previous empirical study of different strategies for analyzing
              practical ethical dilemmas employed by novice and more experienced ethical
              reasoners. As a result of that study, the investigators found that experienced
              ethical reasoners are careful to identify issues and to specify conditions
              under which specific professional role obligations recommend particular
              actions, that they elaborate conditions which would affect the moral analysis
              of a problem, in part through posing hypothetical variations of the problem,
              and that they justify resolutions in terms of those conditions which they
              conclude apply in the problem.  The investigators will develop techniques for
              using the corpus to challenge and instruct novices in a manual tutoring
              intervention and assess the pedagogical value of those techniques.  They will
              present an experimental group of novices aspects of the experienced analyses
              and invite them to compare those conclusions with their own reasoning. The goal
              will be to assess how novices understand the use of hypothetical variations and
              their moral significance for the analysis of the problem.  A control group will
              not be exposed to the experts' reasoning and conclusions, and their conclusions
              will be compared with the experimental analysis of the same problems. The
              experimental design will also allow investigators to contrast the protocols of
              novices analyzing problems from the corpus and compare them to the experienced
              or expert analyses of the same problems.  Results will be reported in journals
              and at meetings and can form the basis for developing a computational model and
              designing an interactive tutoring system.  The significance lies in the
              development of a better understanding of a pedagogical strategy widely used in
              practical ethical instruction. The study will shed light on how experts'
              analyses comparing problems to variations can assist students in learning the
              process of ethical reasoning.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
