Title       : Electronic Dissemination and Support of the Integrated Public Use Microdata
               Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1997      
File        : a9617820

Award Number: 9617820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209762             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Ruggles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports electronic dissemination of the Integrated Public Use
              Microdata Series (IPUMS).  The project is partially funded by NICHD.  The IPUMS
              is the world's largest public-use demographic database, containing
              approximately 69 million records for the U.S. census over a period of 140
              years.  The development of the World Wide Web (WWW) is transforming the nature
              of electronic data dissemination just as the proliferation of fast personal
              computers and UNIX workstations has revolutionized data analysis.  This project
              capitalizes on both of these developments by making the largest and most
              powerful population database readily available for analysis on desktop
              machines.  The project is composed of two complementary elements.  The first
              entails the development of a data extraction system for use on the WWW.  The
              interactive Java-based extract system will incorporate a variety of advanced
              features enabling researchers to customize their data extracts.  The second
              element of the project involves the translation of the IPUMS documentation into
              hypertext format to facilitate navigation.  The system will be designed in
              coordination with leading data archives and population centers at the
              Universities of Michigan and Wisconsin.  The population centers of both of
              these universities have agreed to support the extraction system indefinitely. 
              Moreover, these institutions, together with the Inter-University Consortium for
              Political and Social Research, will provide advice on the design and
              implementation of the system.  This project will be a key multi-disciplinary
              resource in the research infrastructure of the social sciences.  The
              significance of the proposed project is not limited to the support and
              dissemination of the IPUMS; it can serve as a model for the distribution of
              microdata more generally.                                                 Dß   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
