Title       : Dynamics of Electronically Excited States. Models for Chemical Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9617208

Award Number: 9617208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407983             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Pratt pratt+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports David Pratt from the  
              University of Pittsburgh in his continuing studies of the electronic  
              spectroscopy of van der Waals complexes using rotationally-resolved  
              fluorescence excitation spectroscopy in molecular beams.  The goals are   to a)
              determine the intermolecular potential energy surfaces of the   benzene-water
              complex in the lowest two singlet electronic states, b)   determine the
              solvent-induced changes in the structure of the peptide   bond in the
              formanilide-water complex, c) study the influence of complex   formation on
              intramolecular relaxation processes, and 4) study   conformational control of
              chemical reaction dynamics.  Force field and ab   initio calculations will also
              be carried out.  The more global objective   of these studies is to investigate
              the point at which one goes from the   quantum mechanical to the classical
              limit, by studying larger asymmetric   rotors with smaller energy level
              spacings via excitation deep into the   ultraviolet.    Matter exhibits a
              hierarchy of structures at many length scales, with   `assemblies` at one scale
              becoming `component parts` at the next.  In   this hierarchy, van der Waals
              interactions and hydrogen bonding play   particularly prominent roles, leading
              to the aggregation of isolated   molecules into assemblies that become the
              characteristic component parts   of macroscopic liquid and solid phases. 
              Hydrogen bonding also appears as   a ubiquitous feature in the complex
              three-dimensional structures of   proteins, genes, membranes, and other
              macromolecular constituents of   living systems.  It is therefore important to
              identify and characterize   the basic `supramolecular` units that form the
              bridge between the   microscopic and macroscopic domains.  This is the purpose
              of these   studies.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
