Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Symmetric Multiprocessor for Research on Parallel
               Architecture, Compiler, Applications and On-Demand Network-Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1997   
File        : a9617372

Award Number: 9617372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose A. Fortes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Lundstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolf Eigenmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9617372  Fortes, Jose A.  Eigenmann, Rudolf  Purdue University    CISE
              Research Instrumentation: Symmetric Multiprocessor for Research on Parallel
              Architecture, Compiler, Applications and On-demand Network-computing    This
              research instrumentation grant enables collaboration between two universities
              in four areas of research:-Hierarchical Processor-and-Memory Architecture
              for-High Performance Computing - An Advanced Program Analysis and Compilation
              Infrastructure- Characterization of Large (Petaflop) Computational Applications
              - Metaprogramming and On-demand Metacomputing for Network-based Computational
              Hubs. The focus of this project is on advancing the state of the art in
              high-performance computing on the four fronts:- the design of high-performance
              computers capable of 100 trillion operations per second (i.e. 100 TOPS),-
              advanced tools for analysis and compilation of programs for execution on
              machines with multiple processors,- the characterization of applications that
              require computation rates of 100-1000 TOPS and- the design of a network-based
              software infrastructure that allows the use of linked computers and linked
              programs (i.e., metacomputers and metaprograms) through conventional network
              browsers. The main ideas currently under investigation are being validated
              through extensive computational experiments and computer simulations. The
              equipment acquired with the funds provided by this grant provides the
              computational speed, memory, storage and communication demands of the
              experimental component of this project which would otherwise not be possible or
              take unacceptably long times to perform. The experimentation made possible by
              the availability of a symmetric multiprocessor is essential to the validation
              of research ideas and results pursued in this project. This work is being
              carried collaboratively by researchers at Purdue University and Northwestern
              University.
