Title       : Accurate and Efficient Atomic-Scale Simulation of Structural Evolution in
               Materials: Metal Thin-Film Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9617122

Award Number: 9617122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristen A. Fichthorn fichthorn@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9617122  Fichthorn  This theoretical research will advance the current 
              capabilities for long-time, atomic-scale, dynamical  simulations of materials
              by developing a family of new  dynamical methods, based on Smart Monte Carlo. 
              These  methods are applicable to systems whose evolution is  governed by
              rare-event dynamics.  The inherent advantages of  these methods are their
              accuracy, which is comparable to  molecular dynamics simulations, and
              computational  efficiency, which allows for simulation of long time scales  on
              the order of minutes to hours.  The new and extended  capabilities of Smart
              Monte Carlo could have applications in  the design and processing of many
              different kinds of  materials, in catalysis, and in separations, where atomic- 
              scale kinetics dictate macroscopic structure and function.    These methods
              will be used to probe the relationship between  kinetics and morphology in
              metal thin film epitaxy.  Specifically, we will study cluster diffusion and its
              role  in submonolayer metal thin film epitaxy for three model  systems:
              Rh/Rh(001), Rh/Rh(111), and Pt/Rh(111).  Recent  studies indicate that
              complicated, many-atom mechanisms may  mediate cluster diffusion in these
              systems and lead to  unexpectedly high mobilities for large clusters.  These 
              findings have ramifications for thin film morphology, as  well as for the
              development of theories for cluster  diffusion and island growth, since current
              theories do not  account for multiple-atom diffusion mechnaisms and large 
              cluster mobilities.  %%%  This research is comprised of both the development of
              new  computational techniques and the application of these  techniques to the
              study of the deposition and movement of  metal atoms on metal surfaces.  These
              simulations, and  associated theory, will help us understand how material 
              films grow and form particular structures.  The results of  this work will
              advance computational methods and provide an  important design tool for
              understanding the growth of  materials.  ***
