Title       : Individual and Collective Conflict in an Honor Society: Corsica, 1850 - 1930
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9617880

Award Number: 9617880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger V. Gould   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of individual and collective conflict.  Social scientists have
              long noted a connection between the notion of honor and the various forms of
              violence that human beings use to defend their social positions. This
              connection is especially clear in feuding, a type of conflict in which
              well-defined groups in the same community engage in hostile competition over
              extended periods. But existing scholarship in this area tends to offer either
              universal, idealized models that disregard the context and intentionality of
              social behavior, or richly textured, particularistic accounts of cultural and
              discursive practices (conceptions of honor, social standing, masculinity and
              femininity, loyalty, and so on). This research adopts a perspective that takes
              seriously the intentional, interpretive aspects of feuding, but which
              nonetheless works with concepts that can be translated across cultural
              contexts. The approach connects what scholars already know about feuding with
              sociological research on the network context of collective action.     This is
              an historical study of individual and collective violence in Corsica from 1850
              to 1890, but the aim is to develop general theories that will apply today in
              many societies.  The advantages of the chosen geographical and temporal setting
              are a broad time span, a clearly defined and stable study population, and
              access to information that is often confidential in contemporary court
              documents.  Transcripts of roughly five hundred violent incidents will be
              subjected to textual and statistical analysis to illuminate the process by
              which individual conflicts become (or do not become) collective conflicts.    
              Feuding is a significant cause of violence, injury, and loss of life within
              traditional communities.  Insights gained by studying feuding can help us
              understand similar phenomena, such as clan-based political conflict, civil war
              based putatively on ethnic difference, and urban gang warfare. The most vexing
              feature of violence in such contexts is the tendency  of individual disputes to
              become collective, vastly expanding the number of potential victims. This
              research will be guided by the premise that escalation is not automatic but
              depends on social processes that can be specified, understood and, in
              principle, circumvented.
