Title       : Quenched Disorder and the Consolute Point
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9617943

Award Number: 9617943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Cannell david@alice.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9617943  Cannell    This is a renewal project in which laser light scattering
              will be  used to study the length scale and dynamics of order parameter 
              fluctuations near the critical point of a model system involving  isobutyric
              acid/water mixtures containing a dilute silica  network.  The critical point of
              this system lies below (in  temperature) a region of metastable domain
              formation, much as the  critical point of a random-field magnet lies below the
              metastable  "frozen-domain" state.  Unlike the case with magnets, a simple 
              method of reaching the equilibrium state exists for the fluid  mixture. 
              (Leaving the gel containing the mixture in contact with  a reservoir of the
              fluid mixture allows it to reach equilibrium.)  This happy coincidence will
              permit experiments to be carried out  on the equilibrium system near the
              critical point, something  which is not feasible for random-field magnets.  %%%
               This is a renewal project in which experiments will be done to  study how very
              dilute porous materials affect certain phase  transitions.  The phase
              transition to be studied is the demixing  of two liquids, and the porous
              material will be tenuous network  of synthetic quartz (silica).  The
              experiments will try to relate  this system to what is already known about
              magnetic systems  containing impurities that are fixed in position.  For the
              fluid  system, the silica network plays the role of the fixed  impurities, and
              with no impurities it is already well known that  the magnets and fluids are
              closely related.  Although this is a  very basic research project, a deeper
              understanding of how porous  materials affect the demixing transition might
              prove helpful in  situations such as contamination of ground water by organic 
              liquids.  ***
