Title       : Femtosecond Nonlinear Spectroscopic Studies of Chemical Reactions in Condensed
               Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9617210

Award Number: 9617210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310767             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Jonas jonasd@stripe.colorado  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program   of
              the Chemistry Division, Jonas will study the elementary steps of   chemical
              reactions in solution.  Two new types of multiple-pulse   femtosecond nonlinear
              spectroscopy will be developed in order to resolve   the dynamics beneath the
              featureless spectra of molecules in liquids.    One technique will use a
              three-pulse sequence to prepare and study   transition states for thermally
              activated chemical reactions with a time   resolution on the order of 20
              femtoseconds.  The second method will   obtain the complete electric field
              information from four-wave mixing   signals such as the photon echo by
              heterodyne detection using spectral   interferometry.  Experiments will study
              the role of the solvent in the   unimolecular ionic dissociation of alkyl
              iodides with the aim of   determining whether unimolecular ionic dissociation
              is activated by   solvent fluctuations or intramolecular vibrational
              excitation.  Solvents have dramatic effects on the rates of chemical reactions.
               They   do this by altering the internal energy structure of solute molecules, 
               changing the reaction mechanisms, or allowing new reaction paths.  In   this
              project two new experimental techniques will be used in experiments   which are
              designed to probe the effect of solvents on a few different   types of
              reactions, such as those which are expedited by increasing   temperature.  The
              results of these studies should help us understand how   important solvent
              effects are in these different reactions.  Such   knowledge can help determine
              the conditions under which reactions in   solution should be run for optimal
              desired results.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
