Title       : Workshop on Plant Dispersal and Migration in Response to Climate Change: An
               IGBP-GCTE Focus 2 Workshop, October 16-22, 1996, Canberra, Australia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1996  
File        : a9617778

Award Number: 9617778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman H. Shugart hhs@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                A critical set of issues confronting researchers examining the causes and
              consequences of global change is the dynamics through which plants might
              migrate in response to changes in climatic and other conditions.  Although the
              general tendency of plants to migrate is readily evident in the long-term
              historical record, more focused studies of the dynamics of plant community
              change have only begun to address many important questions.  As a result,
              considerable uncertainty, contradictory evidence, and divergent opinion exists
              among researchers.  In order to better coordinate the activities of leading
              researchers from many different nations in dealing with this and related
              topics, the Global Change and Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) project has been
              established as a core project of the International Geosphere-Biosphere
              Programme (IGBP).  CGTE leaders have identifies four major research foci.  One
              of these areas (Focus 2) emphasizes Ecosystem Structure, including ecosystem
              changes like plant migrations.  GCTE leaders have chosen to identify areas of
              agreement, disagreement, and uncertainty related to plant dispersal and
              migration related to global change by convening a workshop in Batemans Bay,
              N.S.W., Australia, in October 1996.  In addition to bringing together more than
              three dozen leading researchers from ecology and related sciences, the workshop
              will result in a major scholarly paper synthesizing the current state of
              knowledge related to plant dispersal and migration in response to changing
              climatic conditions.  Summaries of the major conclusions and recommendations of
              the workshop also will be reported in a number of newsletters and posted on the
              GCTE site on the WWW.  This award will provide support to enable more
              scientists from the U.S. and other nations to participate in the workshop. 
              Support for the workshop also is being provided from other sources, including
              the Electrical Power Research Institute (EPRI), the U.S. Forest Service, and
              local sources in Australia.  Through this award, agencies that participate
              through the Subcommittee on Global Change Research in the coordinated
              management of the U.S. Global Change Research Program will provide support for
              this important research activity.  The funds for this award have been provided
              by NSF and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
