Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Instrumentation to Support Image Analysis and
               Control System Software Research at Vanderbilt University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9617519

Award Number: 9617519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Peters II rap2@vuse.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benoit M. Dawant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Mitchell Wilkes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617519  Peters, Richard Alan   Vanderbilt Univesity    CISE Research
              Instrumentation: Instrumentation to Support Image Analysis and Control System
              Software Research at Vanderbilt University    This award supports the purchase
              of equipment to be used in five projects which depend heavily on high
              performance computing: -A New Software Framework for the Development of Control
              Systems for Distributed Robots- Active Stereo Vision for Robotic Visual
              Servoing- Mathematical Morphology for Color Images-Morphometric Analysis of the
              Brain-Image Guided Surgery.     The first will break a robotic control system
              into groups of behavior producing agents and provide arbitration mechanisms to
              control the resources used by agents.  The second will implement a new
              algorithm for (robot) visual control of robot arm motion. The third project
              will port a software system for research in mathematical morphology (a branch
              of non-linear image processing) from Unix to NT and  incorporate new hue-based
              morphological image operators recently developed by one of the investigators.
              The fourth will develop and rigorously evaluate algorithms to detect subtle
              changes in the morphology of brain structures through the computer analysis of
              3D imagery.  The fifth project will assist, through computed imagery,
              neurosurgeons performing tumor resection.    All five of the projects are
              computationally intensive and will make heavy use of computer graphics and
              image processing (both 2D and 3D). Two of six computers and an embedded Pentium
              system will be dedicated the first project. One computer each will be used by
              the other four. Projects 1 and 5 will use graphics accelerators and 3D glasses.
              Project 2 will use a frame grabber.  Projects 4 and 5 will use the CD-ROM
              recorder.  Projects 1 and 2 will use MSN developer's licenses.  All 5 will need
              C++ and will be serviced by the remaining hardware and software.
