Title       : Molecular Dissection of a Heme Regulatory Complex in the Yeast Saccharomyces
               Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2000  
File        : a9617472

Award Number: 9617472
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Li Zhang li.zhang@med.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6974

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9617472  Zhang  Eukaryotic cells require heme to use and sense oxygen, to
              generate cellular energy by respiration, and to synthesize and degrade lipids,
              steroids and related compounds.  In addition to its role as a prosthetic group
              in enzymes, cytochromes and globins, heme acts directly as a regulator of
              cellular and molecular systems that use or sense oxygen, and controls the
              growth and differentiation of a wide array of cells in mammals.  The goal of
              this research is the molecular dissection of  the heme regulatory complex in
              yeast.  The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the only eukaryote in which a
              master regulator of heme signaling, heme activating protein-1 (HAP1), has been
              identified and cloned.  In response to heme, HAP1 activates transcription of
              genes encoding respiratory functions and functions required for controlling
              oxidative damage.  In the absence of heme, HAP1 is sequestered in a high
              molecular weight complex with certain other cellular factors.  This research
              will test the hypothesis that the binding of heme to HAP1 changes the
              conformation of HAP1 causing it to dissociate from the high molecular weight
              complex and subsequently bind to DNA with high affinity and activate
              transcription.  Both mutational and biochemical analyses, including the
              development of a heme-responsive in vitro transcription system, will be used to
              characterize the specific interaction of heme with HAP1, the interaction of
              HAP1 with other cellular factors in the high molecular weight complex, and the
              mechanism by which HAP1 dissociation from the high molecular weight complex
              mediates heme regulation of transcription.  By unraveling the mechanism
              governing the heme-HAP1 induction pathway in yeast, this research will provide
              the first molecular description of how a regulatory complex mediates heme
              action in eukaryotic cells, and will lay the basis for understanding heme
              regulation of fundamental molecular and cellular processes in higher eukaryotic
              cells.    Eukaryotic cells require heme to use and sense oxy gen, to generate
              cellular energy by respiration, and to synthesize and degrade lipids, steroids
              and related compounds.  In addition to its role as a prosthetic group in
              enzymes, cytochromes and globins, heme acts directly as a regulator of cellular
              and molecular systems that use or sense oxygen, and controls the growth and
              differentiation of a wide array of cells in mammals. By unraveling the heme
              induction pathway in yeast, this research will provide the first molecular
              description of how a heme regulatory complex mediates heme action in eukaryotic
              cells, and will lay the basis for understanding heme regulation of fundamental
              molecular and cellular processes in higher eukaryotic cells.
