Title       : Empirical Studies of Bidding and Entry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9617599

Award Number: 9617599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Porter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This is a project of empirical research in industrial organization.  It
              consists of three components.  The first and third are joint with Ken Hendricks
              of the University of British Columbia.  We analyze a data set that we have
              assembled for the federal offshore oil and gas lease sales in the Gulf of
              Mexico from 1954 through 1990.  We also develop and analyze a new data set on
              small business entry and evolution in Canada.  The second component is joint
              with Doug Zona of National Economic Research Associates;  we analyze bid
              rigging in procurement auctions.  The first component consists of a study of
              joint bidding for federal offshore wildcat tracts.  More than half of the bids
              submitted are joint, and in 1975 Congress banned joint bids involving two or
              more of eight large oil companies.  The goal of our research is to determine
              the role played by joint bids, and whether the ban should have been more or
              less extensive. Joint bids may foster entry and competition, by pooling capital
              or information or by spreading risk, but they may have anti-competitive effects
              by allowing firms to agree to bid less aggressively.  This research presents
              models and results designed to discriminate between these alternative
              explanations, in order to inform policy decisions.  This component is
              potentially informative for public policy towards research and development,
              because joint bids are similar to research joint ventures.  The second
              component is joint with Doug Zona.  We have obtained an extensive panel data
              set on annual school milk procurement auctions in Ohio. There is an ongoing
              antitrust investigation alleging collusion among some of the potential bidders.
               The purpose of our research is to determine whether these allegations have any
              empirical validity, and, if so, what the consequences were in terms of excess
              prices paid by the school districts. The proposed work describes the incidence
              and characteristics of bid rigging.  We study the effect of mergers and plant
              closings on the patterns of bid submissions, as well as the level of submitted
              bids.  The empirical techniques employed differ from those used for different
              auctions, as bid rigging schemes depend on the auction rules and the nature of
              the goods being sold, and because more detailed data on the contracts and on
              the bidders are available.  The general research issue is whether bid rigging
              schemes can be detected from publicly available data.    The third component is
              also joint with Ken Hendricks.  Together with a research team at U.B.C. headed
              by Raffi Amit, we assemble a longitudinal data base at Statistics Canada that
              merges employment and tax records for all small business start-ups between 1983
              and 1993.  The data set allows us to analyze the determinants of small business
              entry, growth and exit in some detail; this research complements and extends
              recent analysis of U.S. data sets.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
