Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Application and Evaluation of a Low Cost Parallel
               Processing Platform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9617384

Award Number: 9617384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47619              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy W. Apon   (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Pickens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  9617384  Apon, Amy W.  Pickens III, David R.   Vanderbilt University    
              CISE Research Instrumentation: Low Cost Parallel Processing Platform    An
              instrumentation grant will fund an assembly of a network of low-cost computers
              linked by high-speed interconnections. Our low-cost, high-speed network will
              serve as a test-bed for three projects, which will simultaneously advance
              research in the application areas and demonstrate the cost-effectiveness of the
              network as a parallel processing platform.    One project will focus on
              functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which indicates areas of the
              brain that are actively processing information. Current processing techniques
              can take hours on large data sets.  Software will be reimplemented on the
              parallel system with the goal of reducing processing time so that fMRI is more
              practical for research into brain function.  A second project will focus on
              data mining, which discovers `meaningful' patterns in data. Data is being
              amassed at a rate that far exceeds our ability to analyze it.  The network will
              allow parallelism to be exploited for analyzing scientific and industrial data.
               The third project will focus on techniques such as thread and data placement
              and communication strategies that improve the performance of parallel
              applications on the high-speed network.  The experimental platform will allow
              various techniques to be developed and evaluated.  Analytic models will be used
              to generalize the results across comparable architectures.
