Title       : Chemolytic Analysis of Macromolecular Organic Matter--A Proof of Concept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1997  
File        : a9617411

Award Number: 9617411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart G. Wakeham stuart@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda L. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 One of the most challenging problems in the field of organic geochemistry is
              the determination of the chemical and physical structure of fossil organic
              macromolecules -- that is, macromolecules originating from living organisms but
              no longer contained in them.  These 'geopolymers' are often of exceedingly
              high-molecular weight and so highly cross-linked that they are difficult to
              work with in the laboratory.  Coal, peat, and kerogen are important examples. 
              While technological developments in chemical instrumentation over past three
              decades have allowed us to penetrate the structures of a great many
              macromolecules in living organisms (e.g., proteins, nucleic acids), the
              intractable nature of geopolymers has severely limited extension of the same
              technology to the study of coal, peat, kerogen, and other high molecular weight
              geopolymeric substances.   In this study, the principal investigators will
              attempt to make inroads into this problem by studying the fossil organic matter
              in two sediments:  a relatively young marine sediment from the Peru continental
              margin, and a Miocene shale from the Monterey Formation.  To keep this
              difficult task manageable, their approach will concentrate primarily on just
              one class of organic constituents that make up the organic matrix in these
              sediments - lipids.  Using a series of chemical degradation and solvent
              extraction steps (chemolysis), the macromolecular structure will be broken
              apart and the pieces, especially lipid fragments, will be indentified and
              quantified.  By carrying out the chemolysis in a methodological, stepwise
              fashion, the investigators hope to be able to draw inferences about the overall
              polymeric structure, the processes involved in its formative history, and its
              reactivity.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
