Title       : The Exact Measurement of Productivity, Outsourcing, and its Effects on Wages: An
               Agenda for Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9617578

Award Number: 9617578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Feenstra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The recent economic performance of less-skilled Americans is an important policy
              topic and the subject of intense academic attention.  Over the last two
              decades, the wages of low-skilled workers have fallen dramatically, both in
              absolute terms and relative to those of high-skilled workers.  The two most
              widely cited explanations for the rise in wage inequality are skill-biased
              technical change and trade with low-wage countries.  Despite the vast
              literature, there is little agreement among researchers on the relative
              contributions of trade, technology, and other factors to the recent wage
              changes.  This project will develop an empirical framework that identifies how
              trade and technology affect factor prices and apply the framework to data from
              developed and developing countries.   The literature on trade and wages focuses
              overwhelmingly on trade in final goods.  A substantial portion of U.S. trade,
              however, is the result of outsourcing -- the import of intermediate inputs by
              domestic firms.  Outsourcing by U.S. firms moves labor-intensive tasks, such as
              the production of components or the assembly of final goods, to low-wage
              countries.  This changes the range of production activities that U.S. firms
              perform at home without necessarily changing the final goods that they produce.
               In this way, the effects of trade can look like the effects of technical
              change.  This project will develop an empirical methodology that can
              distinguish these.   It will be demonstrate that estimating the effects of
              trade and technology on factor prices depends crucially on using the correct
              measure of productivity.  The framework that will be developed makes it
              possible to decompose changes in productivity into the portion attributable to
              innovation, measured using industry data on R&D spending and investments in
              information technology and new capital equipment, and the portion attributable
              to outsourcing, measured using industry data on the import of intermediate
              inputs from abroad.  The  framework will first be applied to data on
              manufacturing industries in the United States.  This will allow estimates of
              the relative contributions of technological change and globalization to recent
              U.S. wage changes.  In addition, several complementary lines of research we
              will be pursued which  will:  (1) extend the analytical framework to examine
              the effects of foreign outsourcing and imports of capital and technology on
              labor markets in Mexico,  (2) examine whether outsourcing by U.S. firms is
              contributing to the integration of labor markets in low-wage countries in the
              Western Hemisphere, and  (3) measure the extent of outsourcing between
              developed and developing nations in Asia and estimate the effect of outsourcing
              on labor markets in the region.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
