Title       : Ultra-Low Rate Progressive Coding of Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9617366

Award Number: 9617366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela C. Cosman pcosman@uscd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Zeger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Algorithms for progressive image compression seek to represent an image in such 
              a way that a small fraction of the data file can allow a displayed image to be 
              recognizable, and a larger portion of the data allows improved image quality.  
              The main applications of progressive image compression are for browsing of
              remote  databases, Internet image hopping, and fast remote decision-making
              tasks where  many images must be scanned.  The goal is to compress images to
              rates so low as  to yield "just-recognizable" quality.  The user can then
              exploit just-  recognizable images while progressively scanning an image
              database by "quitting"  each image as soon as it is determined not to be the
              one sought.  This research  involves theoretical understanding of ultra-low
              rate progressive image coding  both with and without channel noise, as well as
              the development and evaluation  of practical algorithms for applications such
              as low-bandwidth video compression  and packet network image transmission.   
              One portion of this research focuses on algorithm development, including 
              optimization of wavelet zerotree coding for ultra-low rates, and coding using 
              regions or line caricatures.  The investigators are studying the effect of 
              channel noise on progressive coding systems, and are developing both grayscale 
              and color bit progressive image coding algorithms that do not exhibit 
              catastrophic breakdown in the presence of channel noise.  One promising
              approach  uses rate compatible punctured convolution codes applied to images
              compressed  with a wavelet zerotree method.  Experimental studies of response
              times for human  observers of progressive image coders will allow the
              researchers to  quantitatively compare one progressive image coder against
              another, and yield  insight into human perceptual responses to
              just-recognizable imagery.
