Title       : Acquisition of High Resolution Magnetometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1997      
File        : a9617897

Award Number: 9617897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161248             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Channell jetc@nersp.nerdc.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil D. Opdyke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9617897  Channell    This grant provides $161,248 as one-half support of the
              costs of  acquiring a high resolution cryogenic magnetometer for marine and 
              lacustrine paleomagnetic investigations of regional and global  climate change
              and studies of the secular variation of the  relative paleointensity of the
              Earth's geomagnetic field.  Specifically, the University of Florida will
              acquire a new  generation 2-G Enterprises model 755 u-channel cryogenic 
              magnetometer.  This instrument provides the capability to rapidly  measure the
              magnetic properties of 1.5 m sections of u-channels  taken from piston or
              gravity cores with high-resolution and high  sensitivity using sophisticated DC
              SQUIDS that afford over an  order of magnitude greater sensitivity than the
              last generation  of machines equipped with radio frequency (Rf) SQUIDS.  In 
              addition, the Model 755 is equipped with in-line alternating  field
              demagnetization coils and a pulse magnetizer such that  measurement of several
              magnetic properties of the core can be  conducted in a single operation,
              eliminating possible positioning  errors during sample transfer to different
              instruments and  allowing long periods of unattended operation.  Paleomagnetic 
              analyses of long records of sediment cores collected during ODP  cruises to the
              North and South Atlantic will be conducted in an  attempt to better correlate
              the paleoclimatic signals recorded in  these sediments through both grain size,
              textural and lithologic  variations and to better understand the secular
              variability in  the Earth's geomagnetic field as recorded by the relative 
              paleointensity of magnetic minerals within these cores.  The  recent decision
              of ODP to allow u-channel sampling of the archive  half of piston and gravity
              cores represents a veritable flood of  marine sediment samples waiting to be
              analyzed and is sure to  keep the paleomagnetic community busy for the
              foreseeable future.  Acquisition of a 2-G Model 755 u-channel magnetometer by
              the  University of Florida will be only the  second of its kind within  the
              United States (the other is at UC-Davis under the direction  of Dr. Ken
              Verosub) and thus will represent a valuable regional  and national facility for
              the study of environmental  paleomagnetism.  ***
