Title       : Local Population Dynamics of Temperate and Tropical Reef Fishes at Multiple
               Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9617483

Award Number: 9617483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Hixon hixonm@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9617483  Hixon         There is considerable debate regarding the major
              processes  that determine population sizes of organisms inhabiting rocky and 
              coral reefs. Most of these organisms have complex life cycles that  include
              widely dispersive propagules and relatively sedentary  juveniles and adults,
              such that the "birth rate" at a particular  reef is equivalent to the rate of
              settlement of propagules. The  controversy focuses on the extent to which
              supply of propagules vs.  post-settlement processes determine local population
              size and  dynamics. To resolve this issue we must know whether, and how, the 
              demographic rates that determine population size at a particular  site
              (settlement, immigration, mortality, and emigration) change  with population
              density (i.e., are the changes in these rates  density-dependent).  Answering
              this question is of more than  academic interest because, first, it provides
              the basis for  understanding how local population size is regulated naturally, 
              which is essential for effective management of fisheries and other  natural
              populations, and second, it has seldom been answered  adequately for any
              organism.         This collaborative research is designed to answer the
              question  of what drives local population dynamics in a comprehensive manner 
              for four species of marine fish inhabiting two very different  environments:
              temperate and tropical reefs. This multi-species,  multi-system approach will
              provide some generality which can  perhaps be applied to other marine systems,
              including demersal and  bottom fisheries. Using well-proven methods, the
              combined  experimental and observational design of this study will examine  the
              roles of larval supply, settlement, recruitment, immigration,  emigration,
              competition, and especially predation and its  mechanisms, in driving local
              population dynamics. Results of the  field work will be incorporated into
              mathematical models of  population dynamics to provide conceptual generality
              applicable to  other similarly organized system s.
