Title       : Continental Run-Off as a Source of Osmium in Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9617448

Award Number: 9617448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernhard Peucker-Ehrenbrink behrenbrink@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 In recent years, geochemists and a wide variety of earth scientists have
              searched for reliable tools to apply to the rock record in order to understand
              how the climate of earth has changed in the geologic past.  To a great extent
              the subject of climatic change is also intertwined with changes in the rate of
              weathering of continental land masses and the transport and deposition of the
              weathering products to the world ocean.  Of particular interest in recent years
              is the changing isotopic composition of strontium preserved in the marine
              sedimentary record and what that change tells us about the rate of continental
              weathering.  One of the problems with strontium, however, is that its
              geochemical association with calcium means that its response to weathering is
              buffered by (calcium) carbonate - water interactions.   In this project the
              principal investigator will carry out basic studies of the chemistry of a more
              reliable (or, at least, what is believed to be more reliable) weathering
              paleoindicator - the trace metal osmium..  Osmium is geochemically associated
              with silicate rock and, because its geochemistry is not buffered by carbonate,
              its runoff and preservation in the marine sedimentary record should more
              accurately reflect paleoclimatic change and paleoweathering than does
              strontium.  These studies will attempt, for the first time, to determine the
              concentrations and isotopic compositions of osmium in river waters and
              seawater.  This will be an exceedingly challenging analytical task; however, it
              is one that must be undertaken before we can further explore the value of this
              trace metal as a tool for understanding global environmental change.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
