Title       : Dissertation Research: Regional Community Integration During the Maya
               "Collapse", Ivestigations at Chaa Creek, Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1996  
File        : a9617566

Award Number: 9617566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11618              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Leventhal rml@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Leventhal Mr. Samuel Connell will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue a program of mapping and
              excavation at the archaeological site of Chaa Creek which is located in Belize
              near Xunantunich, a large and long-lived Mayan site. Extensive research at this
              latter indicates that it prospered until well after 900 AD, a significant fact
              because across much of lowland Middle America Mayan civilization began to
              collapse about 100 years before that. In his research Mr. Connell will focus on
              the relationship between Chaa Creek and Xunantunich to understand how
              interactions between the larger and smaller entity changed over this period and
              what light they may shed on Xunantunich's continuing viability. Chaa Creek
              forms a spatially bounded community with small house mounds as well as larger
              counterparts which contain stelae, large plazas and five meter high temple
              mounds. Mr. Connell will completely mapping surface features at the site to
              obtain an indication of overall size and density and to determine how these
              changed over time. He will also conduct extensive excavation on a sample of 30%
              of the Chaa Creek community sites. This will provide a strong representative
              sample and allow for excavations of multiple instances of each house type.
              Horizontal exposures will be large enough to trace the shape of individual
              units. Past work has indicated, the most commonly collected artifacts are
              pottery, lithics and spindle whorls and on the basis of these as well as house
              forms one can gain insight into the social and ideological organization of the
              community. It will also be possible to determine how these changed over time. 
              Mr. Connell has utilized a sociological model which distinguishes between
              `mechanical` and `organic` forms of social organization. Because of the
              complementary nature of the constituent units, the latter form binds societies
              more tightly together and Mr. Connell argues that because of stresses imposed
              from the outside, the nature of ties between the larger and smaller sites
              changed from mechanical to organic during the Mayan collapse. This is a new and
              original way to view such archaeological data and the research is important not
              only because of the valuable information about Chaa Creek which will be
              provided but also because it will help to establish and evaluate a new and
              potentially useful analytical framework. It will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
