Title       : Electronic Data Documentation: Complementary SGML and Image Capture Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a9617813

Award Number: 9617813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Featherman feathrmn@isr.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Rockwell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR)
              archives the world's largest collection of quantitative data for social and
              behavioral science research and teaching.  Complete, well-structured
              documentation is essential to effective use of these data; today, that
              documentation must be electronic and must be search-able on the World Wide Web.
               This award will assist ICPSR to complete a major program of research and
              development that is intended to produce the next generation of electronic
              documentation of social and behavioral science data.  Employing the Standard
              Generalized Markup Language (SGML), ICPSR is developing a new methodology for
              producing structured documentation.  This Data Documentation Initiative
              involves documentation experts from data archives around the world,
              representatives of U.S. statistical agencies, and experts in SGML.  During the
              term of this award, ICPSR will beta-test this methodology at several locations,
              develop guidelines and reference manuals, and integrate the SGML methodology
              with existing methodologies.  The product of this effort will be a
              publicly-available Document Type Definition that may be widely adopted by
              social science researchers and statistical agencies around the world.  It will
              materially assist researchers in preparing their data for public release and
              will improve the standard of archived data sets.  This award will, in addition,
              aid ICPSR in producing the electronic text that underlies structured
              documentation.  As much of ICPSR's archive is currently documented solely by
              paper records, ICPSR is investing considerable resources in the preparation of
              electronic documentation, to which NSF is contributing an increment in order to
              accelerate the conversation of documentation from paper to electronic forms.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
