Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Making of a Regime: United States Foreign
               Economic Policy, Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1997   
File        : a9617474

Award Number: 9617474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7300               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Cingranelli davidc@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                For nearly fifteen years the United States led the way in advocating a global
              regime for the protection of intellectual property rights (IPR).  With the
              signing of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in
              December, 1995, that goal was achieved.  The Agreement on Trade Related Aspects
              of Intellectual Property, Including Trade in Counterfeit Goods commits all
              signatory nations to the strong Western-style IPR system that the United States
              has advocated.  However the United States' interest in securing a strong IPR
              regime is a very recent phenomena.  Initial research suggests that early in its
              infancy, the United States did not favor strong IPR, particularly in terms of
              protecting foreign intellectual property from duplication in the US.  This
              Doctoral Dissertation Research grant allows an analysis of IPR as a global
              policy.  The two specific questions addressed are:  1) how did the United
              States' position on IPR evolve from one of advocating weak IPR protection to
              one of favoring strong global protection of IPR?  2) What is the potential
              impact of imposing such a strong global IPR regime on developing countries,
              given the United States' early experience with the IPR issue?  To this end, the
              research answers how the global IPR issue evolved, who were the primary actors
              in forming the policy, and what are the potential effects of the new policy. 
              Both qualitative and quantitative empirical methods of analysis are employed to
              address these questions.  Qualitative research is used to trace the US
              historical experience with IPR, demonstrating the pivotal role that domestic
              institutions such as the Congress and interest groups played in elevating IPR
              to a global issue.  Quantitative research is utilized to test the effects of
              IPR on the development process which the US and other countries have argued
              will be enhanced by following a Western-style IPR system.  This Doctoral
              Dissertation Research project promises to enhance substantially our
              understanding of this interesting and important  problem.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
