Title       : Use of Plants to Control Parasites by Dusky-Footed Woodrats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9617404

Award Number: 9617404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin L. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9617404  Hart  This project will test the hypothesis that dusky-footed  woodrats
              use the  fresh leaves of particular plants to control nest-borne 
              ectoparasites.  If  this proves to be true,  it would be the first known case
              of  a mammal using  the biocidal substances of a plant as a means of combating 
              nest infestation  by blood-sucking ectoparasites such as fleas.  In the study 
              population,  woodrats place sprigs of freshly gathered bay leaves near  the rim
              of their  sleeping nests, and pilot observations suggest that bay  leaves are
              effective  in preventing the hatching of flea eggs.  They may be  effective
              against flea  larvae and adult fleas and against mites and ticks as well. 
              Perhaps stickhouses in  areas with bay trees harbor woodrats with fewer fleas
              and  ticks than those  in areas devoid of bay or other plants with biocidal 
              properties.  These questions  will be addressed with a series of observational
              and  experimental studies,  including remote monitoring of nest activities with
               "videostick" cameras, tests  of the biocidal properties of plant materials
              against  ectoparasitic insects,  experimental manipulation of parasiteload, and
              measurement  of the impact of  nest material collection on survival and
              fitness. Improved  understanding of the  interactions between woodrats and
              their ectoparasites is of  considerable  theoretical interest theoretical
              interest because of  implications for the use of  medicinal plants by animals
              other than humans, and has  public health  implications as well. This study is
              also of interest because  the relationship  between behavior and the
              exploitation of plants as nest  protectants may   represent another step in the
              co-evolution of woodrats and  their ectoparasites.  Additionally, the ticks of
              woodrats are an important  reservoir of Lyme  disease and their fleas are
              potential vectors of plague.  Since woodrats occur  in or near many public
              parks as well as in rural areas, and  their large houses  attract human
              attention, they constitute a risk.
