Title       : Control of Nucleolar Dominance in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1999   
File        : a9617471

Award Number: 9617471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig S. Pikaard pikaard@biodec.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9617471  Pikaard  There is growing realization that gene silencing is probably
              as important as activation in the carefully orchestrated expression of genes
              essential for proper development of complex organisms.  Relevant phenomena
              include X-chromosome inactivation, gametic imprinting, provirus inactivation,
              co-supression and transposable element inactivation.  It is not yet clear how
              biased gene repression is first established in any of these epigenetic
              phenomena; however, DNA methylation and alterations in chromatin structure are
              strongly implicated in gene silencing in both animals and plants.  Nucleolar
              dominance is an epigenetic phenomenon which is widespread in both plants and
              animals.  Nuclear dominance is the selective formation of nucleoli on
              chromosomes inherited from only one parent in an interspecific hybrid or
              allopolyploid.  Nucleoli form at nucleolus organizer regions, chromosomal sites
              where tandemly arrayed rRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase I.  The
              cytological manifestation of nucleolar dominance is the transcription of only
              one parental set of rRNA genes.  The molecular mechanisms responsible for
              nucleolar dominance are not clear. This research will test two hypotheses
              involving biased gene repression mechanisms:  First, that one set of rRNA genes
              is selectively silenced by DNA methylation, and second that nucleolar organizer
              regions are indirectly controlled as a single locus or chromosomal domain whose
              chromatin state determines gene activity.  These models are not necessarily
              mutually exclusive at a mechanistic level.  This laboratory has developed the
              biochemical and genetic tools necessary to test these hypotheses in the model
              plant Arabidopsis.  In the allotetraploid Arabidopsis suecica, rRNA genes
              derived from Arabidopsis arenosa are transcriptionally active whereas rRNA
              genes derived from Arabidopsis thaliana are repressed.  Since the A. arenosa
              and A. thaliana genomes can be combined by a genetic cross, an arenosa x
              thaliana  genetic cross using an A. thalian a DNA hypomethylation mutant will
              be used to determine if a causal relationship exists between DNA methylation
              and nucleolar dominance.  A. thaliana cell lines with stable integrated rRNA
              transgenes will be used to determine if  location within a nucleolar organizer
              region is required for nucleolar dominance.  Progress in understanding the
              mechanisms responsible for nucleolar dominance will provide important new
              insights into chromosomal controls of gene expression.    Gene silencing is
              probably as important as activation in the carefully orchestrated expression of
              genes essential for proper development of complex organisms. It is not yet
              clear how biased gene repression is first established; however, DNA methylation
              and alterations in chromatin structure are strongly implicated in gene
              silencing in both animals and plants.  Nucleolar dominance is the selective
              formation of nucleoli on chromosomes inherited from one parent. The
              manifestation of nucleolar dominance is the expression of only one parental set
              of rRNA genes. This research will investigate whether nuclear dominance occurs
              by gene silencing mechanisms involving selective DNA methylation and/or
              locus-specific chromosomal structure.  Progress in understanding the mechanisms
              responsible for nucleolar dominance will provide important new insights into
              chromosomal controls of gene expression.
