Title       : Diagnostic and Process-Oriented Modeling Studies of the Tropospheric Cycles of
               S, N and Ozone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9617378

Award Number: 9617378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Chameides   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas D. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9617378  Chameides     This project consists of two separate but related
              investigations which focus on changes in the oxidative capacity of the
              atmosphere and to chemically-induced climate change. The first research
              activity will be the diagnostic analysis and modeling of datasets collected in
              sixteen flights over the Southern Ocean during the Southern Hemisphere Marine
              Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-1). This experiment was carried out to
              better understand the chemical and physical processes that control the
              formation and climate-changing properties of atmospheric aerosols. Specific
              investigations planned using this portion of the ACE-1 dataset include: (i)
              testing of HxOy photochemical theory, (ii) assessment of tropospheric ozone
              photochemistry, (iii) estimates of ammonia oxidation and its role as a source
              of NOx, and (iv) investigations of gas phase sulfur chemistry and speciation
              and its gas-to-particle conversion.  An added benefit of this study will be the
              development of a merged dataset of the relevant airborne measurements from
              ACE-1 as well as the modeling products, which will be made available to the
              international scientific community.   The second major investigation will be a
              process-oriented modeling study designed to assess the coupled gas- and
              aqueous-phase chemistry of deliquescent mineral aerosols within the continental
              boundary layer. Specifically, the viability of aqueous phase oxidation within
              these particles as a sink of atmospheric sulfur dioxide and a source of
              particulate sulfate will be investigated. Initially, a generalized description
              for an internally-mixed coarse aerosol of crustal origin, based on data from
              the southern United States and from northern China, will be adopted. These
              descriptions will then be used to characterize the deliquescent characteristics
              of mineral aerosols at high relative humidity. An existing multi-phase
              atmospheric photochemical model will be used to elucidate the coupled gas- and
              aqueous-phase chemistry of these systems. Results  from this study will be used
              to assess the role of mineral aerosols in the atmospheric sulfur budget within
              a global context using a 3-dimensional Chemical Transport Model developed at
              the Pacific Northwest Laboratory.
