Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Computation Engines and Mobile Computing Testbed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9617355

Award Number: 9617355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dhananjay Phatak   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vipul Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9617355  Phatak, Dhananjay S.   Gupta, Vipul  State University of New York,
              Binghamton     CISE Research Instrumentation:  Computation Engines and Mobile
              Computing Testbed    This research instrumentation grant enables research in
              the following projects: -Fault Tolerance of Feedforward Artificial Neural
              Networks (ANNs) and Synthesis of Robust Nets-Constructive Algorithms to
              Incrementally Build Feedforward ANNs that Lead to Efficient Hardware
              Implementations-Novel Number Representations for High Speed and Low Power
              Arithmetic Circuits- Mobile and High Performance Networking-Network
              Reconfiguration and Processor Scheduling in Parallel Systems  The project
              supports collaborative research in multiple areas of Electrical Engineering and
              Computer Science. The equipment consists of computation engines supporting a
              small wireless Local Area Network and peripherals. It is envisaged to serve a
              dual purpose: - providing the computational power and graphical environment
              required by CPU/memory intensive projects in Neural Networks, Signal
              Processing, and VLSI CAD, and -providing a test-bed for mobile computing
              research. Neural net research includes synthesis of fault tolerant networks,
              and constructive algorithms for efficient hardware implementations. VLSI CAD
              focuses on low power designs crucial for today's laptops and portables.
              Ultrafast algorithms and VLSI architectures are also being developed for
              real-time arithmetic processing. As the computing paradigm continues to shift
              from institutional to personal to mobile/ubiquitous, supporting nomadic users
              becomes an interesting research challenge. The proposed instrumentation
              supports exploration of mobility supporting protocols, security and privacy for
              mobile users, specialized protocols for wireless media and adaptive
              applications.  In addition to these state-of-the-art research projects, the
              proposed setup also enables novel experiments in integrating conventional
              server functions (CPU/memory/data-storage/retrieval) with mobility support
              services.
