Title       : SGER: Williams Syndrome and Music Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1996  
File        : a9617078

Award Number: 9617078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41193              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Lenhoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda J. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Hickok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9617078  LENHOFF    A group of mentally disabled people having the condition
              called   Williams syndrome may offer clues to the complex steps by which   the
              brain processes musical information in a distinctive manner.   Although people
              born with Williams syndrome are like the majority  of mentally disabled people
              in being weak in most cognitive  processes, such as in arithmetic and in
              solving simple problems,  many with the syndrome have enhanced language skills
              and uncanny  musical abilities.  To date, however, most of the observations of 
              their musical abilities come from reports of teachers and  parents.  Hence, one
              of the goals of this research is to document  and measure those abilities in
              order to help researchers get at  an understanding of how the brain is able to
              handle music  information, such as recognizing pitch, learning melodies and 
              lyrics, keeping rhythm, and retaining such information for  periods of years.  
               People with Williams syndrome constitute a unique population,  each lacking a
              piece of the same chromosome and sharing many  behavioral traits.  Among those
              shared traits appear to be the  way they hear and process musical information. 
              Mounting  anecdotal evidence regarding the innate musical abilities of  those
              with Williams syndrome is becoming quite compelling:    (1)  While Williams
              children are thought to have short attention  spans, their attention span for
              listening to and participating in  musical activities appears to be
              surprisingly long.  (2) Although  most can not read musical notation, many have
              absolute and  relative pitch.  (3) A number have uncanny rhythm, being able to 
              learn complex drum beats, such as 7/4, in a short session.  (4)  Many  are able
              to retain complex music (some in a variety of  languages), including both the
              words of many verses of long   ballads and the melodies, for periods of years. 
              (5) Those who   learn and sing in foreign languages have near-perfect accents. 
               (6) Experienced Williams musicians have a facility with harmony.   (7) A n
              umber can improvise and compose lyrics with great  facility.  (8) Virtually all
              lack stage fright, which often   plagues professionally trained musicians.   
              More recently, the part of the brain, the planum temporale,   shown to be
              enlarged in professional musicians with perfect   pitch, was also shown to be
              enlarged in a random population of   Williams people.  Another goal of this
              project, thus, is to   determine if there is a link between that part of the
              brain and   the processing of musical information.    The mechanism by which
              the brain processes musical information is  one of life's great mysteries. 
              Studies of music in Williams  people, in whom musical abilities are not
              generally confounded  with any general cognitive capabilities, may offer clues
              to  understanding those mysteries of musical cognition in the general 
              population.  ***
