Title       : Collaborative Research: Factors Affecting Ethnic Differences in Adult Mortality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9617760

Award Number: 9617760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Hummer rhummer@prc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W.Parker Frisbie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of ethnic differences in adult mortality.  It will employ
              demographic conceptual and methodological approaches to accomplish three main
              research goals both for cause-specific and multiple-cause mortality.  First, it
              will develop a more comprehensive model relating risk factors to ethnic
              mortality differentials than has heretofore been presented.  Second, the work
              will broaden the range of ethnic categories typically found in mortality
              studies.  Third, it will employ a unique data base that links detailed
              demographic, socioeconomic, family structure, health, and behavioral factors to
              mortality of ethnic groups.     The specific aims of the project are to: (1)
              Assemble and adapt an integral, prospective database that will permit
              simultaneous examination of demographic and socioeconomic background factors,
              family structure, health behaviors, and health history factors in an analysis
              of ethnic variations in adult mortality by cause of death. (2) Broaden the
              range of ethnic categories typically found in mortality studies to include
              Mexican, Native, African, Asian, and Caucasian Americans. (3) Uncover why some
              ethnic groups, notably African Americans, experience relatively high mortality
              risk from circulatory diseases. (4) Reveal why African Americans suffer
              disproportionately high rates of cancer mortality. (5) Show why respiratory
              disease mortality is disproportionately high among Caucasian Americans. (6)
              Illuminate why Mexican, Native, and African Americans exhibit relatively high
              rates of diabetes mortality. (7) Illustrate why Mexican, Native, and African
              Americans die at relatively high rates from social pathologies. (8) Extend the
              cause of death analysis to include both underlying and multiple causes of
              death. (9) Account for variations in ethnic mortality patterns by sex and age
              groupings. (10) Use continuous-time hazard rate models, which allow a
              multivariate examination of the risk of death by ethnic group.     The ethnic
              differences in mortality that have so long persisted i n the U.S. represent a
              troubling and challenging question. While mortality differences between groups
              are continually better-documented, particularly between African and Caucasian
              Americans, the explanation of differences has been weak, particularly when
              numerous ethnic groups are compared. For example, so little is known about
              Mexican American mortality that their favorable mortality rates are often
              termed an "epidemiological paradox." Even less is known about the differing
              cause patterns of death exhibited by Asian and Native Americans. Thus, the
              principal purpose of this research is to explain ethnic differences in
              cause-specific mortality, using a model that relates demographic,
              socioeconomic, family structure, behavioral, and health history factors to both
              underlying and multiple cause mortality differentials.  A more comprehensive
              and more specific model will make it easier to identify key areas where social
              programs, public policy, medical treatment, and future research can have the
              most beneficial effects.
