Title       : Experimental Studies of Strategic Sophistication and Cognition in Normal-Form
               Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9617358

Award Number: 9617358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237089             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent Crawford vcrawfor@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project investigates the extent to which peoples' behavior in games
              reflects their attempts to predict others' decisions by taking their incentives
              into account.   (These games are interactive decision problems in which each
              person's rewards may depend on others' decisions as well as his own, so that a
              person's best decision may depend on his predictions of others' decisions.) 
              This notion, called `strategic sophistication`, is of primary importance in
              predicting the outcomes of economic, political, and social interactions.   Not
              surprisingly, it is also a central issue in theoretical analyses of strategic
              behavior.  The leading theoretical frameworks treat it very differently:
              Noncooperative and cooperative game theory take the degree of strategic
              sophistication to be unlimited, while evolutionary game theory and adaptive
              learning models take it to be nonexistent or severely limited. The persistence
              of such disparate theoretical treatments suggests that questions about
              strategic sophistication are unlikely to be resolved by theory alone. 
              Empirical analysis requires tight control of preferences and information, which
              seldom occurs naturally in the field but which can be achieved in laboratory
              experiments. Experiments have an additional advantage for studying
              sophistication, which has not yet been fully exploited.  Sophistication is an
              aspect of cognition, which usually must be studied indirectly, by drawing
              inferences from the model that best describes observed behavior.  However,
              Camerer, Johnson, and their collaborators have developed methods to study
              cognition via subjects' information search patterns in `extensive-form`
              games--games in which peoples' decisions are represented in sequence, as in a
              decision tree.  Their results suggest that appropriately designed experiments
              make it possible to study sophistication more directly. Camerer and Johnson's
              designs exploit special features of the extensive-form games they studied, but
              the Mouselab software they developed also makes it possible to present games in
              `normal form` -- as payoff matrices or tables in which subjects can look up
              their own and others' payoffs for the different possible combinations of
              decisions as frequently as desired, one at a time.    The experiments in this
              project use Mouselab to study strategic sophistication in normal-form games.
              There are close connections between game-theoretic analyses of behavior in
              extensive- and normal-form games, but their cognitive foundations are very
              different. The different presentation and processing of payoff information in
              normal-form games make it possible to explore aspects of sophistication that do
              not come into play in extensive- form games.  The main goals are to test
              noncooperative game theory's cognitive implications, and to learn whether
              deviations from them help to predict the occurrence and nature of deviations
              from the theory's behavioral implications.  The experiments should yield
              cognitive insights complementary to those of  Camerer and Johnson, and shed new
              light on strategic behavior.  The proposal concerns experiments to be designed
              and conducted in collaboration with Miguel Costa Gomes, a graduate student at
              the University of California, San Diego, and Bruno Broseta of the University of
              Arizona.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
