Title       : Log Multiplicative Association Models for Multivariate Categorical Data with
               Latent Continuous Variable Interpretations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9617510

Award Number: 9617510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn J. Anderson cja@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator makes connections between some recently developed models for
              categorical data and various existing models used in educational and
              psychological measurement.  The observed relationships between variables is
              often postulated to be due to a small number of unobserved or latent variables.
               Frequently, the observed variables are discrete or are measured discretely
              (e.g., the response option selected on a multiple choice question or survey
              item, occupation, religion, highest degree earned).  The investigator
              identifies equivalences between some more recently developed models for
              categorical data and existing latent variable models.  The implications of
              these connections for the application and integration of these different models
              in social and behavioral science research, especially psychometric, will be
              examined.  A second line of research that the investigator will undertake is in
              developing models that allow a researcher to incorporate (continuous and/or
              discretely measured) covariates into the models.  This innovation will allow
              the association between categorical variables to be analyzed at the level of
              the individual, which permits tests of theories and hypotheses about underlying
              processes or mechanisms that give rise to observed relationships between
              discretely measured variables.  The developments and innovations resulting from
              this work will expand the statistical tools available to social and behavioral
              science researchers in their investigations of the relationships between
              observed variables and theorized latent variables.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
