Title       : Estimating Models with Product Differentiation and Endogenous Product
               Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9617887

Award Number: 9617887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Berry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Proposal Summary  In many markets, products are not homogeneous, but
              differentiated. Recently, there has been much progress in analyzing and
              estimating models of product differentiation. A complete model of a
              differentiated products industry would include (i) consumers' valuation of the
              differing characteristics of products, (ii) a description of the costs of
              producing different products, (iii) an examination of how, conditional on
              product characteristics, producers make production and pricing decisions and
              (iv) a model of how product characteristics are chosen over time.  This
              proposal contains a number of projects that extend existing work to better
              model and estimate production costs, the product space and the endogeneity of
              product characteristics. The first project develops a simple model that relates
              plant-level cost data to the characteristics of products produced at the plant,
              thereby uncovering the `hedonic cost function`. The model is to be estimated on
              Census data for the automobile industry.  We explore how, after adjusting for
              differences in product characteristics, production costs have changed in the
              face of a changing economic and regulatory environment. The project also
              focuses on the fundamentals of the production process, such as economies of
              scale and learning-by-doing. Finally, the new cost-side estimates are
              incorporated into existing demand-side studies.  The second project focuses on
              the correct nature of the product space in a differentiated products model.
              Existing econometric models implicitly assume that the dimensionality of the
              product space changes with the number of products. This contrasts with many
              theoretical models that hold the dimension of the product space fixed. The
              proposed research develops methods for estimating models of product
              differentiation with fixed dimensional product spaces and examines the
              performance of these estimators.  Modeling the choice of product
              characteristics is much more difficult. This project begins with very simple
              product spaces and simple models of entry into those spaces.  One empirical
              example here is the radio industry. It has long been alleged that there is
              excess entry into the radio industry, because new stations often duplicate the
              programming of existing stations and therefore steal customers. A series of
              increasingly realistic models of the product space are combined with entry
              models as a first step toward endogenizing the set of existing products. The
              empirical applications examine different policy regimes toward broadcasting
              entry.  The simplest entry models use cross-sectional data and are really
              one-shot `static` models of entry. The last set of projects examines fully
              dynamic models of entry into differentiated product markets. These dynamic
              models are especially important in the presence of sunk costs.  There have been
              important recent advances in the theory and computation of dynamic models.
              These advances make it possible to compute and estimate the model for
              relatively realistic state spaces, such as a list of radio formats and
              different station quality levels. This research completes one of the first
              empirical studies using the newly possible dynamic industry frameworks;. The
              proposed empirical applications are, again, to a variety of industries
              including radio.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
