Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: A Distributed Biomedical Computing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9617349

Award Number: 9617349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lubomir F. Bic bic@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Pazzani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Lathrop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Shankle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Dillencourt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9617349  Bic, Lubomir, F.  Michael Dillencourt  University of California, Irvine
                 CISE Research Instrumentation: A Distributed Biomedical Computing Laboratory
                 Many important problem areas of biomedical computing have the ability to
              generate large volumes of relatively coarse-grain computations and thus can
              benefit greatly from a LAN-based network of workstations. This project will
              provide such an infrastructure, based on a cluster of Sun workstations, which
              will be shared by the following four projects: -Knowledge Discovery in Clinical
              Databases-Brain Network Models-Toxicology simulations-Distributed Protein
              Structure Prediction.  The goal of this project is to discover new knowledge in
              clinical databases that will be useful for diagnosis and treatment.  It uses
              novel machine learning methods that are particularly suited to medical
              databases.  The second project attempts to understand the functions of specific
              brain regions.  It will develop parallel versions of neural-net-based
              algorithms to solve difficult signal-processing tasks.  The third project
              develops a distributed simulation environment that supports the construction
              and interactive use of simulation models for predicting concentrations of
              chemicals (drugs or toxins) in the human body to assess health risks.  The last
              project will parallelize a novel protein structure prediction algorithm
              developed by our research group, and, subsequently, will validate a novel
              Bayes-optimal Prediction theory.
