Title       : Amphi-Atlantic Phylogeography of the Clam Genus Lasaea: A Test of Transoceanic
               Dispersal Hypotheses for a Direct-Developing Clonal Taxon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9617689

Award Number: 9617689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diarmaid O'Foighil diarmaid@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Amphi-Atlantic Phylogeography of the Calm genus Lasaea:  a Test of
              Transoceanic Dispersal Hypotheses for a Direct-Developing Clonal Taxon  A
              prevailing paradigm in marine biology is that an extended pelagic larval phase
              is a prerequisite to long-distance dispersal of sedentary benthic invertebrate
              taxa.  Three hypotheses have been proposed to explain how taxa lacking extended
              pelagic larval development have effected transoceanic range extensions. 
              Hypothesis A attributes a key role to ancestral dispersal via planktotrophic
              larvae followed by evolutionary loss of this developmental mode, and long
              distance dispersal capabilities, in descendent populations.  Hypothesis B
              states that transoceanic geographic ranges are very recent in origin and stem
              from undocumented human-mediated transport within historical time frames. 
              Contemporary anthropogenic transoceanic exchange on a massive scale is
              occurring among global shallow-water faunas, primarily via the ballast water of
              ocean going vessels.  Hypothesis C assumes that spontaneous rafting events,
              which involve the passive transport of sedentary or sessile life-history stages
              on drifting objects, have acted as the primary dispersal mechanism for species
              having life-history traits that enhance both rafting ability and colonization
              ability.  These traits are characteristic of many clonal taxa with extended
              geographic ranges, including sponges, ascidians, scleractinian corals,
              cheilostome bryozoans and hydroids.  However, there has been no test of these
              competing hypotheses.  The proposed research will investigate phylogenetic
              relationships among direct-developing populations of the primarily asexual,
              polyploid clam genus Lasaea along a transoceanic dispersive pathway: the North
              Atlantic Gulf Stream System.  The biogeography of Lasaea is remarkable in that
              it is the exact opposite of predicted patterns based on the assumed linkage of
              extended pelagic larval development and enhanced geographic range.  Species
              with planktotrophic larvae are restricted to the continental margins of the
              western Pacific (Australia and Japan) whereas genetically divergent direct
              developers have collectively attained a truly global distribution, including
              large numbers of oceanic islands.  Asexual, direct-developing Lasaea fit the
              putative profile of an effective rafting colonizer and the proposed work will
              test the three competing dispersal hypotheses for North Atlantic continental
              margin and oceanic island populations which are exclusively composed of direct
              developers.  A distinctive phylogenetic tree topology has been predicted for
              each hypothesis that seeks to explain how direct developing Lasaea have
              successfully colonized Bermuda and The Azores from putative continental source
              populations.  These predicted phylogenetic distinctions stem from
              evolutionarily significant differences in the temporal parameters of the
              competing hypotheses, together with a dispersal polarity imposed by North
              Atlantic surface circulation patterns.  Genetic variation among the study
              populations will be assessed using mitochondrial gene sequences, in addition to
              allozyme analyses and ploidy determination by cell flow cytometry.  Results
              will reveal evolutionary relationships and gene flow patterns among the North
              Atlantic study populations and the derived phylogenetic tree topologies will be
              tested for congruence with those predicted by each of the competing dispersal
              hypotheses.  Preliminary results demonstrate the technical and scientific
              feasibility of the study system and provide provisional support for both
              Hypotheses B and C.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
