Title       : CyberCut: A Networked Manufacturing Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9617995

Award Number: 9617995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1380458            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Wright pwright@robocop.me.Berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Sheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlo H. Sequin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Dornfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Shankar Sastry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K J. Pister  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              John F. Canny  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Kenneth Y. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 1463,4730,9148,9159,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Getting leading-edge products to market faster than one's competition, is a key 
              concern of the Nation's manufacturing enterprises.  Correspondingly, many 
              designers "out there on the Interned" quickly want "one-of-a-kind" mechanical 
              prototypes or small batches of parts, to visualize and experiment with during
              the  early conceptual stages of a new "high-tech" product.    This grant will
              be used to build "an experimental fabrication testbed" for an 
              Internet-accessible, computerized machining service called "CyberCut".  Client-
               designers will be able to create mechanical components, beginning with a CAD 
              system of their choice, and submit appropriate files to the server at Berkeley 
              for process planning.  "CyberCut" will utilize an existing open-architecture, 
              computerized machining tool at Berkeley for fabrication.  Rapid tool-path 
              planning, novel fixturing techniques, and sensor-based precision machining 
              techniques will allow the original designer to take delivery of a component
              with  a high-strength and tight-tolerance {e.g., +/- 0.00 inch (0.05mm)}. 
              "CyberCut"  will first be used by University collaborators at Carnegie Mellon,
              Stanford and  the MTAMRI at Illinois.    There will also be some instances
              where the design has a complex shape that  cannot be prototyped by machining. 
              Other "Solid Free Form" technologies will  then need to be evaluated for the
              downstream prototype realization.  A  "Manufacturing Analysis Service" will be
              developed that will evaluate the design  for fabrication by Stereolithography
              or Selective Laser Sintering.  Industrial  collaborators, Metalcast Engineering
              and Plynetics will be used for these  extended services.
