Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Modeling and Image Analysis of Biofilm Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1997     
File        : a9617579

Award Number: 9617579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24069              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Hamilton marty_h@erc.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Harkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gill G. Geesey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas S. Cairns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CDA-96-17579  Hamilton, Martin A..Harkin, Gary J.  Montana State University -
              Bozeman CISE Research Instrumentation: Modeling and Image Analysis of Biofilm
              Systems The instrumentation grant will support a high-powered workstation
              requested for use in modeling and image analyses of biofilm processes.  A
              biofilm is a gelatinous mass, consisting of microbes and the slime they
              secrete, attached to a substratum. Many natural and engineered systems
              involving liquids are profoundly influenced by biofilms. Observations of
              biofilms are mainly via digitized images from sophisticated microscopes and
              surface science instruments.  It is important to quantify the images and to
              model biofilm processes.  The requested workstation is necessary to support
              three interrelated, complex computational projects:   analyzing biofilm images,
              simulating transport phenomena in biofilms, and constructing a 3-dimensional
              cellular automata model of biofilm development. Quantitative image analysis is
              required to estimate parameters for fundamental biological and physico-
              chemical mechanisms.  Many biofilms contain channels that provide a rudimentary
              circulatory system around cell clusters.  Any realistic model of nutrient
              concentration profiles and associated microbial growth in the biofilm must
              account for advective transport in the channels, as well as diffusion.  A
              3-dimensional model is required to represent key processes such as interactions
              among microbes, interactions of microbes with the environment, and microbial
              attachment to and detachment from the biofilm.  Cellular automata modeling is
              the most feasible initial strategy for constructing a plausible 3-dimensional
              model.
