Title       : GOALI: Synthesis, Characterization, and Reaction Studies of Metal Pentadienyl
               Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9617268

Award Number: 9617268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Ernst ernst@chemistry.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)   award
              in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program   and the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary   Activities
              (MPS/OMA) supports research by Professor Richard D. Ernst of   the Department
              of Chemistry of the University of Utah to investigate the   catalytic
              properties of pentadienyl and cyclopentadienyl compounds of   titanium and
              zirconium.  Fundamental chemical structures, such as agostic   interactions,
              which may lead to selective C-C bond formation and   cleavage, will be studied.
               Edged bridged pentadienyl complexes, which   will be prepared, are seen as
              precursors for metal film depositions,   material syntheses and complexes with
              the metals in higher oxidation   states.  Studies will also be done on the
              configurational stability of   chiral complexes.  Complexes with
              cyclopentadienyl and edge-bridged   pentadienyl ligands will be investigated in
              collaboration with the Dow   Chemical Co. as catalysts for olefin
              polymerization.            Under the GOALI program this academic/industrial
              collaboration will   provide graduate students with experience in moving new
              catalysts they   have developed into an industrial trial.  Organometallic
              complexes of   titanium and zirconium will be investigated as catalysts,
              coupling   reagents and materials precursors.   Complexes with cyclopentadienyl
              and   edge-bridged pentadienyl ligands will be investigated in collaboration  
              with the Dow Chemical Co. as catalysts for lengthening hydrocarbon   chains. 
              As part of its committment under the GOALI program, Dow will   provide
              materials, facilities, and personnel to adapt the process to   industrial
              reactor conditions.  Dow will also cover travel costs for Dr.   Ernst and his
              students involved in the project as well as stipend   expenses for the visiting
              graduate students.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
