Title       : Biogeochemical Consequences of Metal Partitioning in Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9617675

Award Number: 9617675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David C. Kadko                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas S. Fisher nfisher@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergio A. Sanudo-Wilhelmy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9617675  Fisher          The biogeochemical cycling of many trace elements in 
              ocean surface waters is strongly influenced by biological  process.  Despite
              this fact, relatively little is known  about what controls the fate of elements
              once they are  incorporated into biomass.  For example, metals can be 
              assimilated into the food web, or regenerated to the  dissolved phase or
              exported on sinking particles.  Given our  lack of understanding in this area,
              it is difficult at  present to predict the fate and relative importance of 
              different pathways in metal cycling throughout the wide  range of oceanic
              settings.         The principal investigators propose here to advance our 
              understanding of trace metal cycling by quantifying for the  first time the
              effects of subcellular partitioning and metal  stoichiometires on metal
              biogeochemistry in natural systems.  There are two main approaches, consisting
              of laboratory and  field work.  The lab studies use controlled measurements and
               labeled metal radionuclides to examine carbon:metal ratios  and the
              partitioning and the fate of metals incorporated  into biomass.  A novel dual
              labeling technique allows the  principle investigators to separate between
              intercellular  and cell surface pools of metals.  In the field, natural 
              assemblages of phytoplankton will be examined for the  cellular partitioning of
              the various metals, and ship board  incubation experiments will be conducted to
              examine the  rates of metal turnover.  The results of this study will 
              significantly increase our understanding of the role of  biological processes
              in chemical cycling and transport in  the oceans.
