Title       : Exploration of Pad++ for Plant Biology Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1996 
File        : a9617288

Award Number: 9617288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Benfey philip.benfey@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Perlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9617288  Benfey    This proposal for a small grant for exploratory research
              focuses on the use of the research  package Pad++ to explore the use of
              multi-level interactive simulations for the teaching of fundamental biological
              concepts. The proposed work is intended to address concerns of the panel that
              reviewed a proposal entitled "From Genes to Rainforests" and will be performed
              in preparation for a resubmission of a larger proposal that integrates
              simulations and virtual research environments.    Pad++ is a new approach to
              presenting and navigating information which could yield significant advances in
              teaching and discovering science. The fundamental metaphor of this new approach
              is the intuitive notion of 'zooming.' Pad++has several advantages over existing
              software for the teaching of fundamental biological concepts. First, zooming
              can be used to comprehend three-dimensional organization and to teach the
              relationship between levels of organization. Second, Pad's connectivity tools
              such as lenses can be used to simulate biological procedures. Third, relevant
              databases can be organized spatially on the Pad surface and accessed using Pad
              tools such as portals.    Our ultimate goal is to use this technology to allow
              students to explore cutting-edge issues in plant biology by presenting real
              scientific problems faced by three plant biology disciplines: economic botany,
              plant systematic and plant molecular biology. This larger application would
              serve as a paradigm for using the technology to explore and integrate other
              fields of science education.    The goal of this SGER proposal is to explore
              the use of Pad for the instruction of two basic biological concepts. For this
              prototype the focus will be on the role of regulated cell division in
              generating organ shape and function and the relationship between genotype and 
              phenotype. The zooming capacity of Pad++will be used as a tool to demonstrate
              relationships between different levels of organization. In particular,
              multi-level zoomable simulations  will be developed basedon molecular genetic
              insights into rot developmental  biology. These simulations will be interactive
              among layers so that changing a parameter at  one level of organization will
              cause the appropriate change at other levels. At each level of organization,
              Pad's connectivity tools will be available to simulate experimental procedures
              and to access relevant databases. The application will be tested on high school
              and undergraduate students in an iterative fashion. Using constructivist
              principles, students will be guided through the steps of generating
              experimental data in the virtual laboratory, hypotheses.
