Title       : Theoretical Studies of Relaxation, Energy Transfer and Non-linear Spectroscopy
               in Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9617013

Award Number: 9617013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Silbey silbey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting   Professor
              Silbey at MIT.   During the next three years theoretical models   will be
              developed for the study of several distinct areas.  The first   involves low
              temperature optical properties of molecules in condensed   phases, in
              particular glassy solids.  Spectral hole burning, photon   echoes, and single
              molecule spectroscopy have all shown that the so   called homogeneous line
              shape of a molecule is time dependent because of   slow fluctuations in the
              condensed phase. These methods have different   but often overlapping time
              scales, so that a complete picture of the time   dependence from picoseconds to
              weeks can be found.  The theoretical   interpretations of these experiments
              based on a quantum statistical   mechanical approach is the goal of the first
              area of research.  The   second involves optical and electronic properties of
              molecular aggregates   in solutions.  Molecular aggregates, such as the light
              harvesting   complexes of the photosynthetic apparatus, have been under intense
                experimental study over the past decade.  The advent of femtosecond   lasers
              in the correct spectral range has led to new experiments studying   the time
              dependence of excitation energy transfer and vibrational   relaxation in these
              aggregates.  The theoretical understanding of the   electronic and vibronic
              states and the dynamics of energy flow of these   aggregates is the central
              problem of this phase of the supported   research.  Because of experimental
              advances, second harmonic light   scattering from molecules in solution has
              reemerged as an important tool   to measure the non-linear optical properties
              of molecules.  However, the   interpretation of these experiments in terms of
              the molecular and solvent   properties requires a modern theoretical basis,
              which is the goal of the   third part of this grant.  In particular, the
              description of the   fluctuations of the solvent field at the solute molecule
              is essential to   a correct interpretation of the experimental results.  The
              optical spectrum of a molecule is a signature of its electronic   structure and
              the environment in which the molecule finds itself.  The   effects of the
              environment can be profound and can make the   identification and understanding
              of the optical properties of the   molecule difficult.  Thus, a study of these
              effects provides information   not only on the molecular spectrum, but also on
              the environment.  The   purpose of this research is to understand theoretically
              the effects of   the environment (solvent) on the optical properties of a
              molecule.  The   molecules that will be studied are organic molecules that have
              a large   linear and non-linear optical response; these include: dye molecules
              used   in laser research, chlorophyll and aggregates of chlorophyl (antenna  
              complexes and reaction centers), and conjugated molecules that are   candidates
              for use in optical switching and communication devices.  The   solvents or
              environments that the molecules are in include normal   liquids, solids and
              glasses. The theoretical research will be carried out   in collaboration with
              experimentalists who are measuring these optical   properties.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
