Title       : SGER: Popularizing Neural Processes: A Project to Place anOptoelectronic Neural
               System in every Wallet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1997  
File        : a9617121

Award Number: 9617121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bahram Javidi bahram@eng2.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9617121  Javidi  Artificial neural networks mimic biological neural systems and
              are characterized by massively interconnected processing elements called
              neurons. The processing is performed by training and adjusting the strength of
              the interconnection between neurons. Neural network systems are ideal for
              solving problems that are difficult to describe mathematically. Even though
              neural networks hold a great promise for solving complex computational
              problems, they have not been utilized extensively in day-to-day applications,
              and their application has been limited mainly to military projects. Widespread
              commercialization of neural network would greatly benefit the field and would
              make available more funds for R&D. Development of a practical, low-cost
              optoelectronic neural system that would take advantage of the computational
              potential of neural networks would facilitate further commercialization of both
              neural network and optoelectronic technology. Recent research has discovered
              new hardware and software for an application for face recognition and other
              biometrics that is both uniquely suited to exploit the characteristics of
              neural processing and has the potential for widespread commercialization.   
              This proposal aims to develop a compact, low-cost optoelectronic processor to
              implement a neural system for face recognition. Face recognition and
              classification is a difficult task because the facial appearance is constantly
              changing due to different head perspectives, facial expressions, different
              illuminations, hair styles, etc. The face recognition problem requires storing
              a large data base of facial features to successfully implement the massive
              interconnection between the neurons required to classify facial images. The
              proposed system can use optical recording materials such as photopolymers to
              store the large facial data base for an individual on an ID card, such as a
              driver's license. For inspection, a live image of the person carrying the card
              is displayed on an optoelectronic device and is  compared to the facial
              features stored in the photopolymer film on the card. This comparison is
              performed by an optoelectronic neural chip which carries out the computation
              necessary for an accurate classification. For additional security, the facial
              features can be optically encrypted by phase encoding to prevent reproduction
              of the ID cards by unauthorized people  5 . One of the advantages of the
              proposed system is that using optical materials, large amounts of facial
              information can be stored on a relatively small area, fitting easily on the
              card. Also, the facial information is read out in parallel by light beams which
              can perform parallel computation on large arrays of data, and therefore the
              recognition can be performed in a short period of time. Neural algorithms will
              be developed to provide reliable face recognition methods. Challenges are in
              the area of producing very low probability of error algorithms, low-cost
              input-output devices to display the information, and compact optical systems
              architectures and designs.    We propose to use a nonlinear filter based
              optoelectronics neural networks associated with a supervised perception
              learning algorithm for real-time face recognition. The first layer is
              implemented optically using a nonlinear joint transform correlator (JTC)  2-4 
              and the second layer is implemented electronically because of the small number
              of the hidden layer neurons. The system is trained with a sequence of input
              facial images and is able to classify an input face in real-time. Based on the
              characteristics of the nonlinear JTC, the proposed system has the following
              features: it is easy to implement optically and is robust in terms of system
              alignment; the system can be integrated into a low-cost compact prototype; the
              system is trained by updating the reference images (weights)in the input which
              can be stored in electronic or optical memories and no filters or holograms
              need to be produced; using nonlinear transformation in the Fourier plane, the
              system is robust to ill umination variations of the input image, has a good
              discrimination sensitivity and is robust to noise; and the system is shift
              invariant. The processor may use commercially available opto-electronics
              devices and can be built as a low cost compact system. Computer simulations and
              optical experimental results will be performed to determine the probability of
              error of the system in identifying input facial images. By using time
              multiplexing of the input image under investigation, we hope that using more
              than one input image, the probability of error for classification can be
              reduced to zero.  ***
