Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Three Projects in Applications and Programming
               Environments for Cache- Coherent Distributed Memory Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9617530

Award Number: 9617530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaswinder P. Singh jps@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremiah P. Ostriker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                96-17530  Singh, Jaswinder   Ostriker, Jeremiah P   Princeton University   
              CISE Research Instrumentation: Applications and Programming Environments for
              Cache-Coherent Distributed Memory Machines    The instrumentation grant will
              fund a cache-coherent distributed shared memory multiprocessor.  The equipment
              will be used for several research projects in computer science and engineering,
              including: Parallel Applications and Programming Environments for Computational
               Astrophysics.  2. Parallel Applications and Programming Environments for
              Protein  Structure Determination.3. Parallel Workloads for System Evaluation,
              and Their Implications for Software and Hardware Systems. The first
              interdisciplinary project is focused on developing parallel algorithms and
              implementations for computational cosmology on this new, important class of
              architectures, and on developing integrated programming environments-with real
              user feedback-to facilitate their use.  The environments include programming
              language extensions, run-time systems, and performance feedback tools.  The
              second project, a collaboration with Professors Altman and Levitt at the
              Stanford University School of Medicine, has a similar focus in a different
              application domain.  The last project includes broadening the SPLASH benchmark
              suites, the most widely used suite for such systems, into emerging application
              areas and server workloads.    The method of work will be to develop
              applications and environments locally on this machine, and perform production
              simulations and scalibility studies on larger machines at NSF supercomputer
              centers. Local, dedicated access to the equipment is clearly critical to all
              aspects of the research.
