Title       : Gas Tracers of Net Biological Oxygen Production in the Subtropical Pacific Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9617487

Award Number: 9617487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Emerson emerson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9617487  Emerson       Organic carbon export from the euphotic zone of the 
              ocean regulates the CO2 content of the atmosphere and  controls the redox
              balance in ocean chemistry on millenial  time scales.  One of the fundamental
              goals of oceanography  is to evaluate the organic carbon flux and determine the
               controlling mechanisms so that system can be modeled well  enough to predict
              responses to changes in forcing.  Recent  estimates of carbon export by a
              variety of methods at the  U.S. JGOFS time-series stations indicate that the 
              subtropical oceans are responsible for 25-50 percent of the  global ocean new
              production.  Progress in estimating the  rate of new carbon export from the
              euphotic zone in the  subtropical north Pacific Ocean now require knowledge of
              the  mechanisms(s) controlling the supply rate of nutrients.  Suggestions of
              diapycnal mixing, horizontal transport of  dissolved organic matter, and
              various biological processes  are currently being advanced.  The implications
              of the  different mechanisms regarding the coupling of the  biological pump and
              ocean circulation are obvious and hold  extremely important consequences for
              our understanding of  the response of the ocean's "biological pump" to physical
               forcing.        This study is designed to test the hypothesis that the 
              mechanism supplying nutrients to the euphotic zone in the  subtropical north
              Pacific is diapycnal transport.  Focus  will be on two main problems:  (1) the
              role of intermittent  transport in supplying nutrients necessary to create the 
              shallow oxygen maximum, and (2) the utility of inert gases  as tracers of
              diapycnal transport in the upper ocean.  A  fully instrumented deep-sea mooring
              will soon be deployed at  the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) and can be used to
              make  continuous measurements of oxygen and total gas pressure on  the mooring
              to determine whether formation of the shallow O2  maximum is correlated to
              short-term intermittent supply of  nutrients from below.  ***
