Title       : SSC: Young Engineering and Science Scholars-Summer Science Camp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9553282

Award Number: 9553282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine J. Faltz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Young Engineering and Science Scholars (YESS) Summer Science  Camp, Jointly
              sponsored by the Marquette University College of  Engineering and the
              Educational Opportunity Program (EOP), provides  enrichment experiences in
              science, engineering and mathematics.   The program offers a 4-week camp on
              Marquette's campus for 48  middle school students, plus academic-year
              activities at Marquette  and in four area middle schools.  The summer science
              camp students  explore "The Wonderful World of Robotics" through hands-on 
              discovery activities and demonstrations in a curriculum designed to  provide
              students with an integrated view of engineering with  emphasis on the
              underlying fundamentals shared by all engineering  disciplines.  Students
              culminate their summer experience by  constructing a LEGO/TC logo robot to
              accomplish a specified task  based on their research and learning activities. 
              Academic year  follow-up activities include the monthly "Saturday Science 
              Colloquia" at the MU College of Engineering and biweekly "School  Science
              Clubs" at each of the four middle schools from which the  summer science
              campers are recruited.  Students who attend either  or both of these follow-up
              activities may also receive assistance  with individual science projects of
              their choice and participate in  a mini science fair during Open House at
              Marquette's College of  Engineering.  Both summer and academic year programming
              provide  career exploration, college planning, and personal development 
              components designed to inform and motivate middle school students  regarding
              careers in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics.  ***
