Title       : A Co-Laboratory for ATM Network Research and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9553368

Award Number: 9553368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard E. Hastings                     
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470833             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Perrizo wiliam_perrizo@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Vetter  (Principal Investigator former)
              Paul L. Juell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Ewert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valery Soloviev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9553368  Vetter  This project proposes to acquire a local area asynchronous
              transfer mode (ATM) network testbed for the  purpose of creating a
              state-of-the-art co-laboratory where researchers can work on new, high-speed 
              network approaches to problems in distributed database management, network
              protocols, multimedia  systems, and remote distance education.    Another
              objective is to enable and support collaborative research efforts among
              investigators in North  Dakota's research universities. The proposed computing
              and network infrastructure should enable  additional research opportunities and
              increase external grant competitiveness.     Finally, the various research and
              development aspects of this project will be integrated into the existing 
              undergraduate and graduate courses. In particular, improved educational
              opportunities for students will  result from the virtual laboratory application
              developed as part of this effort. Long-term project  sustainability will be
              achieve (l) by future investigator grants, (2) existing and newly formed 
              industry/university partnerships, and (3) by a commitment by North Dakota's
              Information Technology  Services to maintain and service this infrastructure
              when the grant period expires.    Significance of Activity: The diversity of
              traffic generated by newly emerging multimedia applications is  currently very
              difficult to support with existing communication networks. Existing networks
              simply do not  provide the transport facilities necessary to efficiently
              support these increasingly important user applications.      The major outcome
              of this project will be an improved basic science and technology networking
              infrastructure  in North Dakota.
