Title       : Foundation Skills for Advanced Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9553689

Award Number: 9553689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Rodi srodi@austin.cc.tx.us                   rodi@tenet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Austin Community College
	      5930 Middle Fiskville Road
	      Austin, TX  78752    512/223-7000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The vision of Texas CREATE is to dramatically change the  perception of
              advanced technology careers in Texas by establishing  a Center of Excellence at
              Austin Community College.  From this  Center, CREATE will coordinate a strategy
              to affect its vision.   CREATE will achieve four goals:  core curriculum
              development in  three areas, implementation of the core curriculum in both 
              secondary schools and community colleges, establishing the  sophisticated
              infrastructure which supports curriculum development  and implementation, and
              finally evaluating its activities both  formatively and summatively.       At
              the heart of CREATE's curriculum development is a new  foundation course,
              Introduction to Advanced Technology, built  around a carefully selected set of
              instruments as a medium for  hands-on experiential learning.  This course
              simultaneously exposes  students to a wide range of technological activities
              and skills and  develops their abilities in math and science in an integrated, 
              holistic fashion.  CREATE believes all technicians should be  trained in the
              fundamentals of environmental science and provides  a mechanism for doing so in
              its course, Fundamentals of  Environmental Science Technology.  CREATE's third
              course,  Fundamentals of Electronics Technology, is a radically new and 
              exciting way of teaching students introductory electronics by using  Mobile
              Robot technology developed at Texas A&M University.       The implementation of
              CREATE's curricula at the high school  level is achieved by a three-year
              program of summer camps which  reach 135 secondary schools and bring both
              teachers and students  together as learning partners.  CREATE also plans an
              intensive year  of exposure to advanced technology for community college 
              administrators, faculty and students.       CREATE will support its curriculum
              by validating skills, by  student recruitment with emphasis on women and
              minorities, and by  establishing sophisticated electronics links and a central 
              clearinghouse for articulation agree ments among institutions of all  kinds. 
              CREATE will work cooperatively with organizations like the  American Chemical
              Society and the American Society of Mechanical  Engineers to enhance the
              professional status of technicians.       Noteworthy among CREATE's
              dissemination activities will be use  of a World-Wide Web Home Page, state-wide
              teleconferencing,  materials production on CD-ROM, and development of packaged 
              educational materials commercially distributed.  CREATE's  evaluation efforts
              will be both formative and summative and will  benefit from advice from
              outstanding external evaluators like those  at Texas A&M University's Public
              Policy Research Institute.
