Title       : Turning Information into Knowledge: Hypermodels for Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9553438

Award Number: 9553438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1060953            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Horwitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Neumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bolt Beranek & Newman Inc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553438  Horwitz    This 36 month project assesses the educational effectiveness
              of a  new paradigm for science education software, the hypermodel. This 
              includes multimedia and animation relating computer representations  to
              corresponding objects and processes in nature.  GenScope, a  prototype
              hypermodel for investigating genetics, is currently under  development.  It
              supports open-ended exploration at five levels:   DNA, chromosomes, organism,
              pedigree and population thus having  applications in molecular biology,
              cellular biology, physiology,  Mendelian inheritance, and population genetics. 
              The GenScope  models.  The goal of this project is to demonstrate the
              educational  effectiveness of the hypermodel technology as a complement to the 
              traditional textbook and lecture approach and to implement the  tools,
              protocols, and standards necessary to facilitate the  creation of others by
              researchers, teachers, curriculum developers,  and students.  The project
              provides networking support to share  data, parts of models and full models.   
              In addition to some technical gains in multimedia and networked  models, the
              project will examine the impact of the multi-level  hypermodel on individual
              student's understanding.  The "seamless"  levels allow students to delve into
              why something happens on more  and more fundamental levels, ultimately down to
              the molecular.   Conversely, students can look at the impacts and generalize
              from  the specific to more general cases by moving up levels from the 
              molecular to the most general, populations.  This project will  define which
              content and reasoning skills are pertinent and should  be studied in the
              research.  It will determine which of these  "elicit which components of
              understanding."  ***
