Title       : Recruitment, Training and Retention of Oklahoma Science and Mathematics Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a9553790

Award Number: 9553790
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Howard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Oklahoma Teacher Education Collaborative (O-TEC), a consortium  composed of
              K-12 schools, two-year, and four-year institutions from  across the state,
              proposes a program that addresses concerns in the  teacher preparation system
              from recruitment, through pre-service  training, into early years of teaching. 
              A series of Summer  Academies, in which potential teachers work under the
              direction of  classroom teachers to present model lessons in science and 
              mathematics, will recruit talented youth and particularly focus on  underserved
              populations.  Entry points at two-year institutions of  higher education will
              be strengthened by development of appropriate  courses and formulation of a
              curriculum for para-teachers.      O-TEC institutions will revise their general
              education courses in  science and mathematics to meet the needs of pre-service
              teachers.   Engineering faculty will also participate in development of general
               education offerings appropriate for teachers.  Instruction in  professional
              education will have a field orientation and use  cooperating teachers who are
              confident and accomplished in hands-on  methods.      To address retention and
              professional growth during early years of  teaching, O-TEC will train
              experienced teachers and building  administrators to provide support in science
              and mathematics  teaching through state entry-year committees.  A summer
              in-service  program will bring new teachers together after their first year to 
              share experiences and respond to concerns about content and  pedagogy.  O-TEC
              will sponsor sessions for entry-year teachers at  meetings of the Oklahoma
              science (OSTA) and mathematics (OCTM)  associations to encourage professional
              participation.  O-TEC  institutions will also provide consulting for entry-year
              teachers  who experience difficulty and will provide equipment load to new 
              teachers.  Use of technology will be a component of all activities,  and
              several modes of evaluation will provide feedback for guidance.
