Title       : Digital Imaging Laboratory Development Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1996   
File        : a9553741

Award Number: 9553741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley P. Hobbs   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bobby Hoyle  (Principal Investigator former)
              Joel Solis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Knott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Al Montemayor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Serrano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Austin Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas St Tec Inst Harlinge
	      P.O.Box 2628
	      Harlingen, TX  785512628    512/425-4922

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Texas State Technical College at Harlingen proposes the  development of a
              Digital Imaging Technology Program to provide  specialized skills and training
              to students in the emerging field  of digital imaging technology.  Explosive
              new digital imaging  technologies are dramatically changing the graphic
              arts/electronic  imaging industry.  Although the technology is here today, the 
              ability of work sites across the country to keep up with newly  emerging
              methods has been impeded by lack of knowledge and  inadequate training of
              personnel in digital imaging and its  benefits.  This project proposes the
              development of digital imaging  curriculum and focuses on the creation of a
              leading edge digital  imaging laboratory/studio to facilitate the use of
              nontraditional  learning approaches that encourage interactive learning, team 
              building, and creative problem solving among students and  instructors.  Other
              key components of the project include extensive  collaborative efforts with
              secondary learning institutions, the  Tech Prep/School to Work Initiative, and
              regional, state and  national industries.  The population to be served by the
              project  includes students in the Rio Grande Valley of Texas--a  predominantly
              Hispanic populated area.  Distance learning  techniques will be used to provide
              access to artistically and  technically oriented high school students in remote
              areas of the  state who can benefit from such training early in their career 
              development process.
