Title       : Integrating New Visions in Environmental Sciences and Technology (INVEST)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9553696

Award Number: 9553696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catharine D. Almquist zpalmquist@trident.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leroy R. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Piecuch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trident Technical College
	      P O Box 118067
	      Charleston, SC  294238067    843/574-6195

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Project INVEST (Integrating New Visions in Environmental  Sciences and
              Technology year comprehensive ATE project encompassing  curriculum development,
              faculty enhancement and instrumentation and  laboratory improvement.  This
              project provides an opportunity to  address two different, but equally
              important postsecondary  education issues.  The first is the lack of
              educational  opportunities available to environmental technicians in advanced 
              technologies.  A second, but equally important issue, is the lack  of
              environmental education available to students at the secondary  and
              postsecondary level of studies.  Curriculum activities will  include
              development of:  (1) a curriculum course in X-Ray  Fluorescence Analysis of
              Lead Based Paint and Building Materials;  (2) stand-alone laboratory
              experiments in analysis of lead in  drinking water, GIS applications in
              environmental assessment and  remediation, and gas chromatograph/mass
              spectrometer sugar analysis  identification of viable airborne organisms; and
              (3) environmental  applications for integration into math, science, and
              technology.   Opportunities for faculty enhancement will be provided through 
              internships with industrial partners, as well as participation in  conferences
              and workshops.  A curriculum work group, composed of  project part (industry,
              secondary and postsecondary educators) will  facilitate a comprehensive
              approach to materials development and  sharing of expertise.  A one-week
              faculty training institute will  be held in the second year of the project to
              disseminate course  materials and train instructor technologies.  A variety of 
              activities designed to increase career awareness in secondary and 
              postsecondary minority student populations are planned for both  years of the
              grant.
