Title       : Development of a Center for Macromolecular Photochemistry and Photophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9553355

Award Number: 9553355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce Reiss                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Creed david  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Hoyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anselm C. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9553355  Creed  A enter for Macromolecular Photochemistry and Photophysics at
              the  University of Southern Mississippi (USM). Macromolecular  Photochemistry
              and Photophysics (MPP) is of unquestionable  scientific and technological
              importance. The results of basic  research on this topic would have an impact
              on technological  areas as diverse as degradation of plastics by sunlight, the 
              development of optical computers, and the fabrication of  increasingly smaller
              circuits for electronics applications. The  Center will draw upon the
              considerable body of expertise of nine  current faculty in the Departments of
              Chemistry and Biochemistry,  Physics and Astronomy, and Polymer Science at USM,
              and make use  of existing equipment and other physical facilities. It will draw
               these faculty closer together and promote synergism in their  research efforts
              through a broad spectrum of activities such as  participation in joint research
              projects, funding of graduate and  undergraduate students, participation in a
              seminar series and  international conferences, participation in a literature 
              discussion group, funding of travel to conferences and  industrial, academic,
              and government labs, funding of a seminar  series and consultant's visits to
              the campus with special  emphasis on visitors from industrial labs, provision
              of  specialized courses in photochemistry and photophysics, and  provision of
              modest support for operation and repair of common,  specialized research
              equipment. The Center faculty will also  serve the departments in an advisory
              role particularly in such  matters as identification of important research
              areas and  selection of new faculty, library acquisitions, and equipment 
              acquisitions. The Center will generate promotional materials for  such crucial
              activities as recruitment of graduate students and  informing industry of the
              Center and the expertise of its  faculty. Photochemical projects range from
              studies of the  photochemistry of polyimides to the development of new 
              functionalized photopol ymerizable monomers. Photophysical  projects range from
              the use of fluorescence probes in sol-gel  systems, associative thickeners, and
              surfactant polymers, to  studies of dynamic light scattering in liquid crystal
              polymer  dispersions.
