Title       : National Urban Advanced Technical Education Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9553738

Award Number: 9553738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156055             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline L. Cook   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Merideth  (Principal Investigator former)
              Louise Squitieri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Mannello  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CUNY NYC Tech College
	      300 Jay Street
	      Brooklyn, NY  112012902    718/260-5173

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Economic competitiveness, rapid technology advances and  changing workforce
              requirements call for new ATE teaching  strategies, curricular reform and
              better teamwork among educators,  business and industry and professional
              organizations.  Urban ATE  colleges face these and other challenges, serving
              largely  economically disadvantaged and predominantly minority students many 
              under-prepared for ATE college learning.  Yet, these same urban  institutions
              offer diversity, academic expertise and opportunities  for urban businesses
              seeking flexible, dynamic partnerships to meet  their workforce needs.  New ATE
              curriculum development and program  improvement resources and initiatives must
              be developed by urban  ATE colleges and their partners in a more cost-effective
              and  coordinated way.       The National Urban ATE Center is directed by a
              consortium of  City University of New York (CUNY) associate degree colleges, 
              eventually offering services to between 25-35 of the country's  largest urban
              ATE colleges.  Services include:  (1) establishment  of a Resource
              Clearinghouse creating an Internet hub,  teleconferencing and traditional
              research services; (2) exemplary  ATE curricula dissemination in engineering
              technology and  development of an ATE Curriculum Frameworks; (3) exemplary
              faculty  enhancement services in the use of technology in associate degree 
              engineering technology; and (4) student academic support services  to urban ATE
              colleges in mathematics and communications.  Ten major  urban ATE colleges
              throughout the United States will participate in  the first year, along with
              national professional organizations and  businesses, including CORD, American
              Chemical Society, Urban  League, NYNEX, Hughes Corporation and others.  CUNY
              expects  substantial resource gains among participating colleges and 
              development of effective strategies to improve student achievement  and to meet
              the workforce needs of business and industry.
