Title       : Machine Tool Advanced Skills Technology Educational Resources (MASTER) Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9553716

Award Number: 9553716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1550000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace Pelton WPELTON@TSTC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Pierson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Donald R. Gillum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh K. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Jon F. Botsford  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas St Tech Coll Waco
	      
	      Waco, TX  76705    817/799-3611

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal solicits funding to support a multi-state effort  to develop
              curricula and laboratory materials for student learning  in advanced skills
              technologies for fifteen occupational areas  supporting the American machining
              and machine tool industries.  The  Machine Tool Advanced Skills Technology
              Educational Resources  (MASTER) Program will design, develop, test and
              disseminate new  curricula materials for AS/AAS degree options in machining and
               metals related technologies.  Since these occupational areas  generally
              require some form of apprenticeship or internship, these  educational materials
              will also be designed and prescribed for use  with industry partners.  The
              problems addressed by this project  are:  (1) the use of outdated curricula
              materials by schools and  colleges; (2) fewer students entering programs of
              study in these  career fields that are highly important to the nation's economy
              in  aerospace, metals, and manufacturing; (3) the rapid evolution of  new
              multi-task machine tools that have reached beyond the  capabilities of many
              existing technicians; and (4) the lack of  rigorous college level programs that
              are needed to prepare a target  audience of knowledge based workers in advanced
              problem solving  skills.  Four key goals will be addressed by the MASTER
              Program:   (1) to provide more technical graduates that are multi-skilled in 
              new machining tools and support related technologies; (2) to  upgrade curricula
              and laboratories in these technical fields which  are critical to the success
              of our nation; (3) to offer  college-level training to existing industry
              employees to become  multi-skilled with new and highly advanced equipment; (4)
              to  establish realistic opportunities for college and industrial  partners to
              validate competency requirements, prepare a national  model for
              apprenticeship/internship with prescribed laboratory work  experiences; and (5)
              to disseminate the new curricula and  educational materials nationally.  This
              collaborative effort brings  together  six of the nation's leading two-year
              colleges,  geographically dispersed, in areas of high demand, with identified 
              public school and industry partners.  Significant national outcomes  can be the
              survival of many critical industries and technical jobs.
