Title       : MPWG: Pedagogical Transformation to Restructure Introductory Physics Courses and
               Retain Women and Minority Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9553630

Award Number: 9553630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114701             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milan C. Buncick mbuncick@cc.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dianne D. Horgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis G. Betts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Corinna A. Ethington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Buncick  9553630    The Physics Department and colleagues from the Department of
              Counseling, Educational  Psychology and Research of the College of Education,
              the Center for Research on Women, and  the University Honors Program propose a
              model program to improve learning and retention of  all students, but
              particularly women and minorities, in introductory physics courses.  Currently 
              many instructors are aware of the underrepresentation of women and try to
              encourage women  by increasing the visibility of women in science and providing
              them with role models.  The  purpose of this proposal is to move beyond these
              standard strategies and focus on removing  some of the  psychological barriers.
               This effort focuses on calculus-based introductory physics  courses.  Students
              who attend these courses major in all areas of science and mathematics, but 
              are primarily engineering and physics majors.  Some straightforward pedagogical
              changes that  will address these barriers are to be implemented.  The proposed
              teaching techniques are  designed:  (1) to increase the comfort level in the
              classroom by establishing a sense of  community; (2) to build confidence in
              women and people of color; (3) to increase the perceived  value and utility of
              science and mathematics; (4) to reduce the competitive nature of the 
              classroom; (5) to develop self-assessment skills; and (6) to encourage risk
              taking to enhance the  learning process.  In addition, faculty are to engage in
              workshops and discussion sessions to  raise their awareness of the barriers
              that women and minorities face.  Faculty also are to be  involved in the
              development and refinement of pedagogical techniques that help to remove those 
              barriers.  The advantage of the structural and pedagogical approach, compared
              to other models  of comprehensive, often course-specific curricular reform,
              lies in:  (1) its portability from course  to course and from discipline to
              discipline, and (2) its emphasis on "techniques" rather than  content, thus
              making is likely to b e more easily and readily embraced by a broader range of 
              faculty.  A focus on pedagogical techniques and class structure is a unique
              aspect of this  program.    The intention is to use this project as a
              foundation for long-term pedagogical and faculty  development.  The program
              seeks:  (1) to reduce the overall dropout rate from the introductory  physics
              course through increasing the number of women and people of color who complete
              it,  through raising the grades of those completing it, especially the women
              and people of color,  through increasing satisfaction with the course; (2) to
              increase the proportion of women and  people of color who choose to continue in
              science, engineering, or mathematics; and (3) to  introduce to the science,
              mathematics and engineering faculty pedagogical techniques designed  to make
              classes more supportive, and to improve learning.  These efforts, hopefully,
              will lead  to a cooperative and mutually supportive network of faculty from
              engineering, science,  mathematics and education who share a commitment to
              increase the diversity of students who  take and succeed in science and
              mathematics courses at the University.  ***
