Title       : SSC: Metekukukiah Pemaenakuaq-Keepers of the Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1997     
File        : a9553289

Award Number: 9553289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55424              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerilyn Grignon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula R. Huff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of the Menominee N
	      P O Box 1179
	      Keshena, WI  54135    /   -

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Metekukukiah Pemaenakuaq--Keepers of the Forest Summer Science  Camp--proposes
              an experiential field-based approach to studying  mathematics and science.  The
              six-week camp builds-in camper  mentorships during the school year that
              provides a supportive  network for 7th, 8th, and 9th grade students.  In order
              to measure  desired outcomes, career pipeline indicators will be used (positive
               experiences producing interest, encouragement, and enrollment in  appropriate
              mathematics and science coursework) so that students  enter post-secondary
              institutions and begin their careers in  mathematics and science-related
              fields.     Within the summer camp program, students will experience 
              mathematics and science in the context of forestry--they will learn  about the
              Annual Allowable Cut that is used in determining the  amount of timber
              harvested, and the measurements that are used to  calculate it.  Students will
              learn to make these measurements  themselves including DBH
              (diameter-at-breast-height), volume, and  height.  During their research
              projects, students will be using  measurements of tree diameter, height, and
              basal area either in the  comparison of forestry tools, or in the change of the
              measured  plots over time.    Mentoring systems are created during the camp
              session where  students and adults (forestry professionals and elder in the 
              community who have valuable experience and knowledge regarding the  forest,
              traditions, and necessity of sharing that knowledge) meet,  and discuss
              sustained yield forestry principles and its application  to global sustained
              development.  Follow-up activities after the  camp include:  Menominee Tribal
              Enterprise mill tours where  cooperating teachers have students conduct career
              interviews; trips  to the Menominee Logging Museum where the museum curator
              conducts  "hands-on" experiences using technology from the past; scheduled 
              visits to the College of Menominee to hear speakers within the  field of
              forestry; visits to larger campuses that offer bachelor's  degree s in forestry
              (student work on computers in the library where  information is obtained
              electronically); participation in career  day with focus enthusiasm and vigor;
              conduct presentations using  their own written pieces about research projects,
              using graphs and  charts to provide basis for decision-making about forestry 
              practices; and cooperate in project evaluation and students  assessment
              activities.    Evaluations are on-going and two-fold.  First of all, the
              project  activities planned will be evaluated by an external evaluator to 
              monitor program activities--effectiveness of planning meetings,  recruitment
              and retention strategies, camp activities, and follow-  up activities in
              student's own school in the community, on college  campuses, or in the forest. 
              Second, student assessment will entail  how students feel about the project in
              terms of its usefulness and  how it builds their self-confidence to enter the
              educational  pipeline via activity (experience), coursework, and career 
              planning.  Students will be monitored regarding school attendance,  enrollment
              in mathematics and science coursework, advanced  mathematics and science
              coursework, keeping tabs on oneself to seek  as much career information as they
              can (contacts and trips), and  providing information via public presentations. 
              In the long run,  students can monitor their own improved sense of usefulness
              and  self-confidence in mathematics and science because of planned  entrance
              and exit interviews.  Furthermore, they can build positive  experience during
              the camp and later with the mentorship systems  that provide a supportive
              network.  For monitoring the success of  the program beyond and outside
              evaluator's report, project staff--  guided by pertinent timelines--will have
              opportunities to adjust  plans through continuous meetings, but will know what
              outcomes have  been achieved through actual presentations made by the students.
                The staff will also be involved in various dissemination activities  to share
              knowledge gained fr om participation in this program.  ***
