Title       : Northwest Center for Sustainable Resources (A National Center for Advanced
               Technology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9553760

Award Number: 9553760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2998443            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wynn W. Cudmore wync@chemeketa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur McKee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Getter  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Chemeketa Community Col
	      P O BOX 14007
	      Salem, OR  973097070    503/399-5121

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1032,7348,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The Northwest Center for Sustainable Resources (NCSR) project  is a
              collaborative effort of Northwest high schools, community  colleges, higher
              education institutions, private industry,  government agencies, and Native
              American tribes and of applied  international research groups to create a
              comprehensive center of  innovative educational programs to support the efforts
              of agencies,  industry, and business for ecosystem restoration and natural 
              resource management.  Program completers will enter employment as  advanced
              technicians in a variety of science-based occupations  targeting sustaining and
              restoring our natural resources or who can  continue for advanced degrees. 
              Associate degree programs in  diverse natural resource and environmental fields
              will be created  or undergo major curricular revisions to incorporate a central
               focus on aquatic/terrestrial ecosystems.  Secondary schools and  colleges and
              universities will complete the conduit that will  provide a seamless delivery
              of basic scientific content, principles  and process culminating with hands-on
              applications, accomplishing  major systemic change.       Internships in
              industries and agencies will provide the  fertile ground to produce a workforce
              capable of contributing to a  unified approach to restoration, environmental
              clean-up, watershed  enhancement, sustainable forestry and fisheries, and
              habitat  restoration.  The Center programs will provide innovative, 
              transportable models for developing problem solving, communication,  and
              collaborative skills that match the requirements of an advanced  scientific,
              technologic workforce necessary to transform the  workplace to high
              performance.  The NCSR will provide a model for  collaborative efforts to
              address urgent regional, national, and  global needs while acting as a national
              center of excellence for  advanced technological education through its
              comprehensive  dissemination activities.  An electronic national clearinghouse,
               published instructional materials, and two national  teleconferelces  assure
              wide national impact.
