Title       : Advanced Technology Curriculum: Meeting AEA Standards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9553726

Award Number: 9553726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Davene Eyres deyres@sccd.ctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Woodson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Frank E. Jump  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fred A. Edelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Griffith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Seattle Cmty Coll
	      9600 College Way North
	      Seattle, WA  981033514    206/634-4444

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   North Seattle Community College seeks funding from NSF's  Advanced
              Technological Education program to make major improvements  in electronics and
              engineering technologies curricula By  collaborating with industry,
              professional associations,  institutions of higher education, and secondary
              schools, the  college proposes to develop model ATE programs that raises 
              standards and performance levels for technicians in industrial  applications. 
              Since its opening in 1970, the college has offered  comprehensive electronics
              and engineering technologies programs,  along with technical specializations in
              biomedical technology, CAD  for industrial applications, industrial power
              control,  communications technology, digital computer electronics, and 
              computer networking.  To comply with the new standards developed  for
              technicians by the American Electronics Association designed to  raise skill
              and knowledge levels, faculty propose significant  changes in the college's
              approach to technological education.   Spanning a period of five years,
              1995-2000, the project focuses on  three major components:         (1)  Faculty
              Development.  A rigormus faculty enhancement       program is planned to
              prepare faculty for curricular reform.       Participants in a summer institute
              in 1996 and 1997 will       include electronics and engineering faculty,
              secondary school       teachers, and representatives of industry.  Building a  
                  foundation for preparing technical workers, the institute will       cover
              a range of topics that include AEA standards, industry       practices,
              collaborative approaches to teaching, use of       interactive courseware, and
              competency-based instruction.  The       professional enhancement program also
              promotes faculty's       return to industry for updating their knowledge and
              skills.       (2) Curriculum and Instructional Materials.  Comprehensive      
              curricular reform requires development of Tech Prep career       pathways in
              electronics and engineering technologies with       Sea ttle Public Schools,
              pre-college level workshops in applied       academics for students deficient
              in basic skills, integration       of science and mathematics into technical
              programs, and new       and revised curricula in electronics and engineering.  
                   Included in the project is faculty's collaboration with       industry on
              training modules that can be used in the classroom       as well as at the work
              site.  These modules will focus on       basic skills and on specific,
              typically complex technical       topics such as object-oriented design and
              documentation.        Faculty will also coordinate curricula for improving     
               articulation between two- and four-year institutions and for      
              establishing new degree options for NSCC's students.         (3) Laboratory
              Improvement.  Over the five-year period,       faculty will integrate into the
              curriculum a new learning       laboratory where automated work environments
              can be simulated       and state-of-the-art systems demonstrated.  The
              integrated       systems laboratory will be designed to provide students with  
                  an overview of systems involved in taking a product from       design and
              pattern layout to a tested and finished product.
