Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9553405

Award Number: 9553405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Dandy david.dandy@colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick W. Smith  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9553405  Smith                                  A proposed Graduate Research
               Traineeship project is described  which will focus on research in 
              Environmentally Conscious  Manufacturing. The project would be  managed by a
              Principal Investigator  and five Co-Principal Investigators  who will work with
              five PhD  trainees as an interdisciplinary  team within the framework of the 
              Manufacturing Excellence Center  (MEC) at Colorado State University.  The MEC
              has operated for several  years and provides a unique setting  within which PhD
              trainees would  have the opportunity to interact  with small-and-medium sized 
              manufacturing firms as the PhD  education and research programs are  being
              undertaken. The research will  focus on specific advances in  environmentally
              conscious parts  cleaning technologies, chemical  vapor deposition reactors
              which  minimize waste production,  environmentally conscious design in 
              concurrent engineering, and low  pollution painting processes. These  areas are
              selected because they are  known to be relevant to the  competitive position of
               manufacturers. This is known based  upon the ongoing, day-to-day  interaction
              with manufacturers  through the MEC. In the context of  the long-standing
              commitment of  Colorado State University of  diversity, a significant effort 
              would be made in this project to  enhance recruitment and retention  of women,
              minorities and persons  with disabilities in the proposed  traineeship program.
              In addition, a  significant contribution to the  national infrastructure which 
              promotes and sustains student  diversity is expected.
