Title       : Graduate Training in Optical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9553333

Award Number: 9553333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold Metcalf HMETCALF@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9553333  Metcalf  We propose to increase the number  of optical sciences
              students in  Stony Brook's highly ranked PhD  program. The six specialization 
              areas are quantum optics, photonics  and materials, non-linear optics, X-  ray
              optics, atomic chaology, and  laser cooling. The program features  rotation
              throughout these groups to  familiarize students with the  field, our diverse
              and highly  educational seminars, close  laboratory interaction with 
              undergraduates and high school  students, association with post-  docs and
              instrumentation students,  and other special opportunities. We  maintain active
              connection with  optical scientists at Brookhaven,  Grumman Corp., Adelphi
              University,  various campus departments, and  other government, industrial, and
               academic institutions. We have long  experience with recruitment and 
              retention of women and minority  students in our programs. Two  optical science
              faculty are native  speakers of Spanish, and may serve  as role models for
              Hispanics. Two  others are among only three  department winners of a
              campus-wide  teaching excellence award. Our own  graduate students have won a 
              disproportionate share of  departmental excellence awards.  Optical science
              offers so many  challenges, and has such an  important future in American 
              technology, that the department  recently expanded its faculty by  four.
              Coupled with the plethora of  new problems, there is ample  capability to
              accommodate a five  student increase.
