Title       : MPWG: Awareness, Skills, and Mentoring Add Up to Success for Girls in Science,
               Engineering, and Mathematics Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1996     
File        : a9553486

Award Number: 9553486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca Pierce 01rlpierce@bsuvc.BSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernadette H. Perham  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ball State University
	      
	      Muncie, IN  47306    317/289-1241

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553486  Perham    The Ball State University project for high school girls in
              grades eleven and twelve has a dual  focus of career awareness and skill
              development in the areas of science, engineering, and  mathematics (SEM).  Its
              major goals are:  to increase the awareness of high school girls about  careers
              in SEM, to introduce them to SEM role models on the job, to have them
              collaborate on  a research problem with a SEM mentor, and to positively impact
              their choice of a career.   Through seminars, industrial site visits, and panel
              discussions, the girls are to learn about SEM  careers and job
              opportunities--what they require and how they are achieved.  This project 
              provides opportunities for all the girls to acquire skill in using statistics
              and technology to  support their future research efforts.  In collaboration
              with a SEM mentor at the University, each  girls will gain hands-on research
              experience in a university laboratory setting.  Afterward, each  girl will
              independently solve a related research problem at her home school with the
              support of  an on-site resource teacher and the University mentor, via
              Internet.  In addition, the girls will  disseminate SEM career information to
              their peers.    Participants should leave the residential program prepared with
              a knowledge of SEM careers,  technological skills that will support problem
              solving, and experience in using the scientific  method of discovery.  They
              will have explored SEM careers and interacted with professionals  in these
              fields.  They should have acquired skill in using spreadsheets, software
              packages,  graphing calculators, word-processing, and Internet communications. 
              They also will have  engaged in group and independent research projects
              supported by SEM mentors and high school  resource teachers.  In addition, they
              should have developed the confidence and self-esteem to  choose an appropriate
              career--and successfully embark upon it.  ***
