Title       : Presidential Faculty Faculty Award: A Unified Approach to Damage Tolerant Design
               and Manufacturing of Microelectronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9553009

Award Number: 9553009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheng Liu sliu@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9296,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9553009  Liu   This award is made to an outstanding young individual who has
              demonstrated great potential to advance both research and education in
              engineering.  The specific area of research  encompasses the design and
              fabrication of semiconductor devices.  The goal is to advance the reliability
              of electronic devices, which are an assembly of components.  The size range of
              the components can vary from microscopic submicron scale to macroscopic printed
              circuit board scale.  Inspite of this large variation in physical dimensions,
              the research will attempt to seek unifying fundamental failure mechanisms such
              as void generation, delamination, cracking, creep and so on which could arise
              out of stresses induced by moisture migration, thermal excursion and mechanical
              vibration.  The research will attempt to study fundamental materials behavior
              using submicron fatigue tester and monitoring flaw generation via
              nondestructive evaluation.  These physical properties are to be combined into
              the finite element modeling to arrive at a predictive reliability code.  The
              resultant computer software, combined with graphics could enable optimization
              iteration without a trial and error fabrication.  If successfully demonstrated,
              this research has the potential to offer a very robust integrated circuit
              design tool.  The educational plan is to take the multidisciplinary elements of
              the research into the class room combining mechanical, chemical and electrical
              engineering with elements of materials science, corrosion chemistry, and design
              for manufacture.  In addition, taking advantage of the very close liaison
              established with several industrial partners,  the education plan takes
              students to the real world industrial environment and at the same time brings
              industrial researchers into the class room.     Successful completion of the
              research and education plans brings together not only the research and
              education elements but also theory and practice.  As a result, the
              microelectronics industry may benefit with reliab le electronic devices.  In
              addition, a new cadre of educated workforce could result who can traverse
              between science and practice with equal ease.  This has the potential to
              advance the U. S. leadership in education and research in the important
              microelectronics sector.
