Title       : MPWG: Women in Astronomy: Planetarium Show and Video from the Chabot Observatory
               and Science Center Young Astronomers After-School Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9553488

Award Number: 9553488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Etta Heber eheber@cosc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Toy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen Engel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louise Predovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Hauben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chabot Space & Sci Center
	      10000 Skyline Blvd
	      Oakland, CA  94619    510/336-7300

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553488  Heber    This pilot after-school program at Chabot Observatory &
              Science Center seeks to involve and  excite adolescent girls about science,
              through astronomy-related activities, including their own  research and
              production of a new planetarium program about women's contributions to the
              field.   Dissemination is to include distribution of the planetarium show
              product, sharing information  about the project process with other education
              organizations, and a teacher enhancement program  to foster replication
              elsewhere.  The concept for this project came from teachers of science who 
              have expertise in astronomy.  They saw an opportunity to combine an existing,
              but modest,  volunteer program with a broader effort serving the community.    
               This project targets middle and high school girls at the point in their
              schooling where an interest  in science and related careers is most vulnerable
              to negative influences.  It involves them in an  innovative and creative
              project, honoring the contributions of women in science, and shedding  light on
              the skills which fostered those contributions, while developing in participants
              the very  skills which can influence their own career opportunities.  In this
              project, both the product--the  planetarium show and video, and the
              process--skill development as a means to the end product,  are equally
              important and encouraged.  After completion, the 40 girls and two teachers
              directly  trained will offer a model to thousands of others who can use active
              learning to tell their own  stories of scientific achievement.  ***
