Title       : MPWG: Exploring New Options: Science, Engineering and Math Careers - Program for
               Middle School Girls and Parents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1996  
File        : a9553379

Award Number: 9553379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89573              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Mortz seaton@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria T. Riva  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553379  Mortz    In order to maintain our nation's technological leadership,
              young women need to be encouraged  to explore careers in science, engineering
              and mathematics (SEM).  Currently many middle  school girls lose interest in
              math and science, thus failing to take the requisite courses which  could open
              career options in SEM fields.  This model project is designed to counteract
              factors  which influence girls' decisions away from SEM fields by enrolling
              young women from middle  schools and their parents in monthly Saturday programs
              with opportunities to enjoy fun, hands-  on, SEM activities, exposing the girls
              and their parents to positive SEM role models, and to  providing activities
              designed to help the girls' parents recognize and counteract negative social 
              pressures.  The girls are to be chosen from three urban Denver middle schools,
              which serve  substantial numbers of ethnic minority or socio-economically
              disadvantaged families.  The  format involves eight Saturday sessions for the
              girls, three of which have activities for parents  and for parents and girls
              together.  These sessions include "coping skills" activities, hands-on  SEM
              activities, and presentations and group discussions with SEM female
              professionals.  The  most effective components of this program will be
              determined by the use of a control group and  administration of various outcome
              measures throughout the program.  The following formal  measures have been
              prepared:  student questions on knowledge and attitudes, parent questions  on
              knowledge and attitudes, knowledge about careers, children's self-efficacy
              scale, science  career predictor scale for children and the science career
              predicator scale for parents.    A major outcome of this study will be an
              evaluation of how effective a comprehensive program  of this type can be in
              changing the attitudes and interests of the girls, and increasing their 
              commitment toward taking prerequisites for pursuing SEM careers.  The project
              also would  evaluate effectiveness of the pro gram in changing parents'
              attitudes.  Informal written and verbal  evaluations of each workshop should
              identify the most effective activities.  Written lesson plans  and videotapes
              of the workshop activities can provide useful documentation for future
              programs.  ***
