Title       : "SSI Study: New Jersey, Virginia, Vermont"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9553544

Award Number: 9553544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven A. Sanchez                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44626              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan K. McAdams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             :   e                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                        e    
                e        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                           (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    LPT1:                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9529402
              Gawarkiewicz The project involves the development of a series of coupled
              biological-physical models to examine the effects of wind forcing and seasonal
              stratification on the recruitment of zooplankton and fish to Georges Bank. 
              These models will examine the influence of transient and seasonal forcing of an
              idealized bank ecosystem, with the goal of elucidating the mechanisms which
              lead to trophic uncoupling.  Trophic uncoupling results from spatial or
              temporal dislocation of populations within a community, and can lead to rapid
              growth or depletion of affected populations.  Physical modelling will focus on
              the response of an idealized bank and bank-shelf system to wind forcing and to
              seasonal buoyancy forcing.  The biological modelling will have three major
              objectives:  (1) to understand the long term effects of "wash out" events and
              advective losses on trophic interactions and recruitment; (2) to study the
              mechanisms by which the dynamics at tidal fronts influence trophic coupling and
              production; and )3) to explore novel techniques of reducing complexity of
              biological models while maintainin g biological system necessary for
              robustness.  The ultimate goal of this work is to investigate the couplings
              between the biological and physical systems, in particular the effect of
              advective losses on recruitment of cod and haddock and the influence of tidal
              fronts on primary and secondary production.  These results can then be tested
              by, and used to guide the upcoming field observations and further analysis of
              historical data. ***                                  ;                        
                                  Oh     +'  0                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m
              a t i o n                           (                                          
                      '                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      $       H       l                                      
                      D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                      
              P:\BO\ABS\GAWARKIE.ASC              prtaylor                           
              prtaylor                    @     w  e                          @              
                                  @        e                                                 
                                                              @      G                       
                          Microsoft Word 6.0                                                 
                  3                                                                          
                          ;                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     e =       e                                             
                                               j       j   j       j       j       j       j 
                                                                                   K   C     
                                                                                             
                                           -           T       :   K                       j 
                                                                                     K       
                     j       j                                                               
                     j               j                                       ~              
              j       j       j       j                           .                          
                                                                                    9529402
              Gawarkiewicz The project involves the development of a series of coupled
              biological-physical models to examine the effects of wind forcing and seasonal
              stratification on the recruitment of zooplankton and fish to Georges Bank. 
              These models will examine the influence of transient and seasonal forcing of an
              idealized bank ecosystem, with the goal of elucidating the mechanisms which
              lead to trophic uncoupling.  Trophic uncoupling results from spatial or
              temporal dislocation of populations within a community, and can lead to rapid
              growth or depletion of affected populations.  Physical modelling will focus on
              the response of an idealized bank and bank-shelf system to wind forcing and to
              seasonal buoyancy forcing.  The biological modelling will have three major
              objectives:  (1) to understand the long term effects of "wash out" events and
              advective losses on trophic interactions and recruitment; (2) to study the
              mechanisms by which the dynamics at tidal fronts influence trophic coupling and
              production; and )3) to explore novel techniques of reducing complexity of bio
