Title       : Establishment of a Statewide Environmental Sciences Education and Research
               Training Program in Nevada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9553361

Award Number: 9553361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Seiber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9553361  Taylor  The University and Community College System of Nevada (UCCSN)
              will  develop an education and research tpaining program in the  environmental
              sciences that is integrated and system-wide, with an  emphasis on linking the
              disciplines of environmental chemistry,  environmental biology, ecology, and
              human health.  This  interdisciplinary area of emphasis within the
              environmental  sciences is an important initiative because the State of Nevada
              is  experiencing an unparalleled rate of population growth (5% per year  over
              the last four years), which is far in excess of all other  states.  In
              addition, the increases are confined to the urban  centers in Las Vegas (Clark
              County), Reno and Sparks (Washoe  County) and Carson City.  The net effect of
              this growth over the  last four decades has been to transform the state from a 
              predominantly rural to a largely urban environment.  The rate of 
              transformation is unprecedented, and the consequences for human  health and
              natural resources are just beginning to be recognized.    The current effort
              will stimulate the development of a cohesive  statewide program to address the
              relationship between quality of  the environment and the health of human
              populations and natural  resources in Nevada.  The program calls for the
              following:   (1) to  develop a system-wide infrastructure for graduate
              education and  training in the environmental sciences because none of the 
              UCCSN units have the depth and breadth to individually develop a  program of
              excellence; (2) to develop a research infrastructure to  encourage UCCSN
              faculty and graduate students to devote more  of their competitive research to
              the environmental sciences by  linking basic and mission-oriented research and
              emphasizing  priority problems in the state of Nevada; and (3) to develop a 
              training and networking infrastructure in Nevada to inform and  educate the
              population on issues in the environmental sciences,  focusing on linking the
              educational and research expertise in the  UCCSN with bus iness interests in
              the public and private sector.    These three platforms of the infrastructure
              will be implemented  through the Graduate Program of Environmental Sciences and
              Health  (ES&H) at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR); this program  is part
              of the Center for Environmental Sciences and Engineering  (CESE) at UNR.  The
              ES&H program will be aggressively expanded to  include faculty and graduate
              students from the University of  Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV), leading to eventual
              full partnership.   This will be the first example of a system-wide degree and
              training  program within UCCSN and will serve as a template by which other 
              systemic graduate programs in the sciences and engineering can be  developed in
              the future.
