Title       : Electronics Technology Curriculum Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9553685

Award Number: 9553685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Braun   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda L. Bryan  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ed Doran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis J. Abt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Wheeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Phillip Buck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Front Range Community Col
	      3645 West 112th Avenue
	      Westminster, CO  800302105    303/466-8811

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   We propose the development of an Applied Learning Institute  which would be
              the focal point for advanced technical education and  applied academic research
              and development for the Rocky Mountain  front range.  Such an institute would
              function as a catalyst for  updating curricula, would test new instructional
              techniques, and  provide training for instructors in these methodologies while 
              interfacing with industry to keep abreast of workforce  requirements.  The
              Institute would combine the resources of Front  Range Community College,
              Colorado State University School of  Occupational and Educational Studies, and
              local secondary  institutions in the integration of academic, technical, and 
              workplace skills, the use of instructional technologies, and the 
              implementation of innovative instructional methods.  The initial  project will
              focus on the electronics technology program.   Multi-media instruction and
              laboratory experiences equivalent to  1200 contact hours of traditional
              instruction will be developed.   Innovative, competency-based instruction that
              utilizes a  combination of pedagogical (task-oriented) and andragogical 
              (student-oriented) methods will be designed into small modules.   These modules
              will be used to develop career pathways based upon  student career choices. 
              This will increase flexibility and enhance  customization and/or modification. 
              They also promote  transportability, as modules may be used off-campus or even
              at  secondary institutions.  Multi-media techniques support consistency  and
              flexibility of instruction and delivery.  Results, techniques,  and modules
              will be shared through publications and conference  presentations.
