Title       : MPWG: Teaching Traineeships for Undergraduate Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9553445

Award Number: 9553445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99270              (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla S. Auchincloss PSA@PAS.ROCHESTER.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynne H. Orr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Auchincloss  9553445    Teaching Traineeships in Physics for Undergraduate
              Women is a  two-year pilot project in the Department of Physics and Astronomy, 
              in cooperation with the Women in Science and Engineering Project.   Women
              students, who are to be become co-instructors in the physics  laboratory
              courses taught by graduate teaching assistants, are to  be recruited from the
              top-scoring sophomores and juniors (not just  physics majors) who have taken
              the introductory laboratory courses.   The undergraduate trainees will
              participate in a special two-week  training session during the summer, as well
              as in training sessions  throughout the academic year.  Each trainee will be
              paired with a  graduate teaching assistant (TA), and assigned to a specific 
              laboratory section.  Most instructional duties (except grading)  will be shared
              equally by the lead TA and the trainee (e.g., the  graduate and undergraduate
              TAs will alternate in presenting the  15-minute introductions to the laboratory
              exercises).  Thus, the  trainees can acquire valuable experience as well as
              have visible  classroom responsibility.    The proposed traineeship effort aims
              to improve the long-term  retention of college women in science, fulfilling the
              immediate  need of recognizing achievement and encouraging further commitment 
              to science of talented undergraduate women science majors at an  early stage. 
              By design, this project also increases the number of  women instructors in
              physics laboratory courses, creating a more  gender-equitable environment than
              now exists for all students in  introductory physics, and providing female role
              models for  first-year women students.  The project should positively impact 
              the instruction in physics labs, by increasing not only the  number of
              instructors in each laboratory section, but also the  number of competent
              instructors, through the training and  supervision which will be provided
              through the project.  Thus, the  project expects to have a positive impact upon
              the quality of  college  science education, as well as upon the trainees. The
              latter  are to be recognized for their prior academic achievement, and  through
              participation in a proven teaching program, increase their  skills and
              leadership abilities. The teaching process involves them  as significant
              members of the Department and strengthens their  preparation for graduate work
              in science or science education.   Additionally, these women trainees serve as
              peer-mentors and role  models to the undergraduate women and men in their
              laboratory  sections, conveying through their presence the message that 
              "science is for everyone." It is anticipated that after the pilot  effort is
              completed, the traineeship program will be  institutionalized and supported
              with Physics Department funds.    The demonstrated competence of the trainees
              and the increased  satisfaction ratings from students in the labs should
              provide an  incentive for other departments with large enrollments in 
              laboratory courses to create similar traineeship opportunities for 
              undergraduate women.    ***
