Title       : Environmentally Friendly Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9553387

Award Number: 9553387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henrik Pedersen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9553387  Pedersen    This project is a joint effort of  the Department of
              Chemical and  Biochemical Engineering and the  School of Pharmacy at Rutgers 
              University to establish an  environmentally Friendly  Pharmaceutical
              Manufacturing  Training Program. Such a training  program will have a huge
              impact on  promoting the use of  environmentally friendly technology  in
              pharmaceutical manufacturing.  Such a program is needed because  pharmaceutical
              processes generate  large amounts of avoidable  pollution. Better designed and 
              controlled processes would decrease  the impact on the environment of 
              pharmaceutical processes, and would  also result in reduced cost of  drugs;
              more reliably produced drugs  and a more competitive US  pharmaceutical
              industry. The  objective of the program proposed  here is to train professional
               capable of designing and  implementing successful pollution  prevention
              strategies in  pharmaceutical operation. These  professionals will require
              solid  knowledge of chemical engineering  fundamental; optimization 
              techniques; Current Good  Manufacturing Practice (CGMP)  guidelines; risk
              assessment  techniques, end-of-pipe treatment  strategies, FDA and EPA 
              regulations, and unit operations  employed in pharmaceutical  processes.
              Training in these areas  will be imparted through a number  of activities,
              including:  * an extended menu of courses from  several academic units,  * a
              new curriculum component  consisting of a year-round  seminar/discussion
              session  highlighting successful pollution  prevention scenarios  * a PhD
              dissertation  * another new curriculum component  consisting of a supervised
              teaching  experience  * a summer internship in industry  In addition to
              training students,  the program proposed here will lead  to the establishment
              of a cohesive  and self-sustaining research  program on environmentally
              friendly  pharmaceutical manufacturing. Such  a research program will generate 
              new technologies for preventing  pollution in manufacturing  processes, and
              ensure t he viability  of the proposed training program  beyond the period of
              NSF funding  allocated by the GRT program.  Dissertation topics will address 
              four problems that are of direct  interest to industry and that offer  high
              potential for pollution  prevention:  a) process failures in solid dosage 
              manufacturing due to inadequate  handling of solid blending and  compaction
              operations.  b) failure of large scale  bioreactive processes (due to 
              starvation, shear damage, or poor  mixing )  c) lack of schedule optimization
              in  batch processes, generating a large  amount of emissions from processing 
              steps such as loading, unloading,  venting, cleaning, etc.  d) inadequate
              abatement techniques  capable of preventing emission of  organic solvents in
              reactive and  purification processes.  An aggressive plan for minority 
              recruitment has been formulated.  Minority recruitment activities  include,
              among others, expansion of  an already established minority  undergraduate
              internship program,  which serves as an in situ source  of minority and female
              graduate  students, an extensive  advertisement campaign in college  newspapers
              with large populations  of minority students, and a mailing  campaign directed
              to every Chemical  Engineering department in the US.  As proof of Rutgers'
              commitment to  this project, the University will  provide three five-year
              fellowships  to match NSF's contribution (one of  these fellowships will be
              earmarked  for a minority student). Additional  matching resources will be
              obtained  from the Department of Chemical and  Biochemical Engineering and form
               ongoing projects funded by other  federal agencies and by industry.  It is
              anticipated that these  matching resources will allow us to  significantly
              expand the number of  students supported by the proposed  training program.
