Title       : Strengthening Graduate Education in Science and Engineering Through Systemic
               Involvement in Research and Outreach Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9553350

Award Number: 9553350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diandra L. Leslie-Pelecky diandra@unlinfo.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9553350  Leslie-Pelecky  Participation in outreach, in addition to research, as
              part of  the training of graduate students in science and engineering will  be
              established and institutionalized.  Nine graduate students per  year will be
              funded to assist with the development of materials  for the outreach program. 
              Other graduate students, faculty, and  staff will work with the program on a
              volunteer basis. The  supported students will represent a wide range of
              disciplines  covering most of the sciences and engineering. Student awardees 
              will receive an enhanced stipend, $1000 for travel to a  professional meeting,
              and funding for purchase and/or  construction of demonstrations in their field.
              The outreach  project has as its basis scripted modules that develop a 
              scientific or technical concept using demonstrations and hands-on  activities
              supervised by members of the outreach group.  Graduate  student participation
              by both the awardees and volunteers will  assist in the development of skills
              such as: communicating the  importance of science and engineering to
              non-scientists, learning  the fundamentals of grant writing, improving oral
              communication,  and working with the media.  Centralization of these efforts
              will  create productive links between different departments and centers  on
              campus, as well as provide an efficient means for increasing  the
              competitiveness of graduates in the job market.  As part of  the project, a
              professional development seminar open to all  graduate students will be
              offered.  Topics covered will include  job hunting skills (writing a vita,
              interviewing), professional  skills (writing papers and proposals, presenting
              technical talks)  and outreach-related topics (working with children,
              communicating  with the media).  After the materials development phase, future 
              plans call for dissemination to colleges and high schools  throughout the
              state, in conjunction with conferences to prepare  the new users for outreach
              activity.
