Title       : South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE) Exemplary Faculty
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9553740

Award Number: 9553740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1419128            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn G. Mack   (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine L. Craft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S C St Brd Tech&Compr Edu
	      111 Executive Center Drive
	      Columbia, SC  29210    803/896-5410

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE)  Exemplary
              Faculty project addresses the issue of restructuring the  learning environment
              to prepare two-year technical college students  to compete in today's high
              performance global marketplace.  The  specific goal is to create a cadre of
              exemplary faculty teams for  the express purpose of implementing innovative
              research-based  advanced technological education practices across the SC
              Technical  College System.  The major objectives are to:  (1) Develop and 
              implement a comprehensive Faculty Development Program for ATE that  addresses
              faculty development needs in advanced technological  education content,
              effective pedagogy, and assessment of student  learning outcomes; (2) Develop,
              pilot test, and implement  research-based curricular reform in advanced
              engineering technology  programs; and (3) Evaluate implementation processes and
              materials  and disseminate successful processes and products at the local, 
              state, and national levels.  Methods include involving  interdisciplinary
              faculty teams from across the sixteen colleges in  intensive professional
              development activities; implementing a  system-wide electronic communications
              system based on the concept  of a physical conference room; and instituting
              project-based peer  teams to design and implement new curriculum materials and 
              instructional strategies.  The primary target audience is  mathematics,
              physical science, engineering technology and  communications faculty members. 
              Collaborative partners include  Clemson University and the National Dropout
              Prevention Center at  Clemson, the SC State Department of Education (SSI and
              Tech Prep  Programs), SC ETV, the Academy for Educational Development, and the 
              Virginia Community College System.  This project represents an  innovative
              approach to systemic reform in professional development  and seeks to coalesce
              the strengths of individual faculty members  into a unified effort to move the
              entire system forward in advanced  technolo gical education practices.
