Title       : The Development of an Advanced Applied Technological Mathematics Course Via a
               Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9553765

Award Number: 9553765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred J. Patrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Salvati  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Dalto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane L. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Patrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adirondack Cmty Col
	      Bay Road
	      Glens Falls, NY  128013074    518/793-4491

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this project is the strengthening and streamlining  of high
              school and community college technological education  programs.  To achieve
              this goal, a partnership between Adirondack  Community College, four area
              school districts, and area business  and industry will develop and implement an
              advanced applied  mathematics course AM4 to follow and extend Tech Prep's
              Applied  Math 1, 2, and 3.  The courses and materials will conform to reform 
              guidelines (Standards) established by the National Council of  Teachers of
              Mathematics, the American Mathematical Association of  Two-Year Colleges, and
              the New York State Curriaulum, Instruction,  and Assessment Framework for
              Mathematics, Science, and Technology.  Mathematics will be viewed as a powerful
              tool for real world  problem solving; calculators and computers will be
              integrated  throughout this contextual approach.  Labs will emphasize the 
              hands-on nature of the course.  The mathematics departments from  Adirondack
              and the four area high schools have worked closely in  the implementation of
              AM1, AM2, and AM3.  Initial feedback  indicates substantial success with the
              Center for Occupational  Research and Development (CORD) materials.  Desired
              student  outcomes measured include an improvement in problem solving and 
              critical thinking skills, concept attainment, motivation, and  making
              connections.  The project will serve as a model for  cooperation between high
              schools, community colleges, and area  business and industry in extending these
              desired outcomes to AM4.   Materials will be produced for use by interested
              school districts  from the Capital Region Consortium and throughout the nation.
               The  course and materials will be widely disseminated through  conferences and
              workshops, in journals, and possible publication as  texts.
