Title       : Training Within Environmental Biology - The University of Montana "Training-WEB
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9553611

Award Number: 9553611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope F. Kukuk pkukuk@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Zabinski  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9553611  Kukuk  The University of Montana (UM), in  collaboration with a
              diverse  network of private and government  organizations, proposes to 
              implement an alternative model for  training PhD graduate students in 
              Conservation and Environmental  Biology. The goal of the "Training  Within
              Environmental Biology  Program (Training-WEB)" is to train  PhD students to
              carry out cutting-  edge, creative research and bridge  the gap between
              academia and  organizations responsible for  making decisions that impact the 
              natural environment. The student-  centered Training-WEB will enroll 
              participants in the Graduate  Program of Organismal Biology and  Ecology (OBE),
              a program housed  within the Division of biological  Sciences at UM. Graduate
              students  in the Training-WEB will benefit  from a collaborative training 
              process featuring coursework and  research training in conservation  and
              environmental biology, along  with a substantial internship in a  government
              agency, private  organization or business with  interests related to the 
              environment or conservation. At the  end of this training process,  graduates
              will have developed  skills appropriate for a variety of  nontraditional and
              traditional  careers in environmental and  conservation biology. Embedded in 
              the Training-WEB approach are  carefully considered retention and  evaluation
              processes, and attention  to recruitment, career development  and expanded
              opportunities for  greater involvement of groups  traditionally
              underrepresented in  science. This approach will be a  powerful new model for
              providing  the highest quality training for  all future graduate students in
              OBE  and the Division of Biological  Sciences at The University of  Montana.
