Title       : High Quality Biotechnology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9553720

Award Number: 9553720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Frame KFrame@capaccess.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Assoc Biol Teachers
	      12030 Sunrise Valley Drive
	      Reston, VA  201913409    703/471-1134

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The National Association of Biology Teachers (NABT) will  conduct a project
              using the Life Technologies, Inc.(LTI):  GIBCO  BRL Training Center
              laboratories in Germantown, Maryland.  Two-year  college faculty in partnership
              with high school teachers from  across the nation will be updated on
              cutting-edge biotechnological  research and procedures.  Teamed with scientists
              and technicians  from industry, these teachers will develop an innovative 
              educational model to rapidly adapt the advanced techniques and  sophisticated
              equipment of modem biotechnology to inexpensive,  hands-on, investigative
              classroom activities.  These activities  will allow two-year college and
              secondary schools with limited  budgets to provide future technicians and
              scientists with an  excellent scientific background in the techniques and
              concepts of  biotechnology.  Additionally, a strong articulation between 
              two-year and high school programs and industry will be established  to ensure
              that students pursuing careers in biotechnology have the  ability to enter the
              industrial or research work environment, as  more than competent technicians,
              or to pursue higher degrees at  four-year institutions.  These activities will
              seek to involve all  students in learning biotechnology, including women,
              minorities,  and persons with disabilities.  Emphasis will be placed on the
              role  of biotechnology in the future of the human environment and  medicine and
              the effect of biotechnology on preservation of plant  species and enrichment of
              agriculture.       Activities from this workshop will be refined, reviewed for 
              scientific accuracy and pedagogy, and field-tested nationwide.   Field test and
              review panel input will be used to modify the  activities for compilation into
              a monograph for nationwide  distribution.  Project results will be disseminated
              through  training and in-service workshops at national, state, regional, and 
              local levels.
