Title       : MPWG: Jump for the Sun: A Research Project to Encourage Girls and Women in
               Science and Math
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1997   
File        : a9553411

Award Number: 9553411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Z. Hare sally@coastal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Crowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Kintz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Puskar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coastal Carolina U
	      P O Box 261954
	      Conway, SC  295286054    843/347-3161

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553411  Hare    This model is designed to investigate factors that affect the 
              awareness of girls and women about careers in science and math, and  to
              determine the effectiveness of hands-on activities and a  constructivist,
              cooperative approach to learning in increasing  interest in those careers.  The
              design is to increase participants'  knowledge of science and math, and to
              encourage girls and  women through role models, and through opportunities to
              build  community, to connect, and to construct their own learning.  The  design
              pays particular attention to the importance of science  and mathematics in the
              ways human beings live, and the ways in  which they treat the planet.   Field
              trips and hands-on experiences  are integrated with the content, and also
              provide opportunities to  talk, not only about content, but also issues of
              everyday life.   Project goals are:  (1) to increase the numbers of girls
              enrolling  in math and science courses at the middle and high school levels, 
              with a long-term goal of increasing the numbers of women who enter  careers in
              these areas; and (2) to make a difference in the  attitudes and agendas of
              teachers and parents, and of future  teachers and parents.      The model will
              provide opportunities for young women to see how  science and math applies to
              their lives, to use hands-on activities  with computers and to build awareness
              of the computer as  vital tool for learning and for access to knowledge, and to
               participate in hands-on, learner-centered units in math and  science.  The
              design uses available research in learning styles,  multiple intelligences, and
              "women's ways of knowing" to present  content in ways conducive to motivating
              the young women and tapping  their strengths as learners.  Leaders are to work
              with teachers and  parents to build a support system to encourage the young
              women and  to strengthen their self-concepts.  The program is structured to 
              encourage practice of the arts of democracy, including  problem-solving,
              ethics, conflict resoluti on, prejudice reduction,  roles of the individual
              within the community, service leadership,  and celebration of diversity, as
              well as to increase communication  skills of participants.  ***
