Title       : AMP: The Mid-South Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a9553315

Award Number: 9553315
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3713184            (Estimated)
Investigator: Muhammad Shafi muhammad_shafi@loc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea Miller  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jesse F. McClure  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Le Moyne-Owen College
	      807 Walker Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381266510    /   -

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553315  Miller    The Mid-South Alliance For Minority Participation (MAMP)
              consists  of a coalition of nine Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs) all 
              within commuting distance in the tri-state area of three two-year   colleges,
              and three majority colleges.  The alliance contains the  largest Tennessee
              community college, the largest Tennessee two-year  technical institution, the
              largest tennessee Board of Regents (TBR)  undergraduate institution, a private
              college with 47% majoring in  engineering and science, the University of
              Tennessee In Memphis a  predominantly graduate institution, three HBCUs, and
              the fastest  growing community college in eastern Arkansas.  It is an alliance 
              of private colleges, minority colleges, community colleges,  majority
              colleges,with African American community agencies and the  secondary school
              system.  One most probably should conclude the  demographics of Tennessee (See
              Figure 1 on next page).  Tennessee  is a very long (480 miles) narrow state
              with the three largest  cities 2000 miles apart with Memphis being the largest.
                Financially disadvantaged African American students cannot afford  to travel
              several hundred miles to participate.  the western  section of tennessee is the
              Memphis section bordering West Memphis  has the highest density of African
              American students in the  Tennessee, and the neighboring counties in the
              tri-state area have  a high concentration of African Americans.  This Memphis
              Mid-South  region has a minority population of 499,599, which is twice as 
              large as the combination of the Nashville and the knoxville regions  (13
              counties each).  Shelby county containing Memphis contains  371,267 year.  54%
              off all the youth in the city of Memphis are  African Americans.  47% of the
              youth in the Mid-South region are  African Americans while the Nashville and
              Knoxville regions are  only 18.4% density of the African American population
              and youth  decreases rapidly as one travel west to east as many African 
              American youth as Nashville and 13.5 ti mes as many as the knoxville  area. 
              During the first year, 320 incoming minority freshmen and  sophomore students
              will be prepared for completing baccalaureate  degrees in SEM and eventually
              graduate degrees.  The program  consists of instruction, and personal
              development during the summer  and mentoring and cooperative learning during
              the academic year  followed by research and employment in science laboratories.
                14,700 African American  undergraduate students are already  enrolled in
              these Mid-South Alliance colleges.  The Mid-South  Alliance intends to create a
              cadre of 800 minority students in the  SEM baccalaureate programs each year. 
              After the fifth year 160  more will be in the first year of graduate schools
              for a total of  960 per year.  An additional 1000 African American students 
              majoring in SEM baccalaureate programs each year.  An additional  1000 African
              American students majoring in SEM studies will be  influenced through auxiliary
              activities on the various campuses  through seminary by visiting African
              American role models.  The  fact that we have nine active IHE's in the alliance
              within  commuting distance allows us to work with small groups of twenty 
              students and yet permit all the first year students to come  together on
              minority and majority campuses for multicultural  activities during our summer
              and academic year activities.  This  Alliance will provide a stimulating means
              for students to work  their way through school with internships in science
              laboratories.   African American role models working as mentors will meet in 
              regularly scheduled classes for cooperative learning.  Memphis  Partners, one
              of the Alliances member, received a $3 million grant  form the Dept. of Labor
              in July, 1994 in "young Fair Chance" to  encourage African American into new
              careers, and provide African  American mentors and science related internships.
               The Memphis  school system received a $300,00 planning grant from the NSF, and
               opened an office of School Redesign and Training now funded  by a  private
              foundation.  Their CEO is on the Advisory Committee of MAMP  to improve
              bridging mechanisms from secondary to postsecondary  institutions.  Graduate
              schools and national laboratories will  provide research experiences to
              Alliance students for the  sophomores and juniors.  The MAMP views laboratory
              research by the  participants as extremely important to inspire students to
              continue  for graduate SEM degrees.  The pool of minority students will be 
              increased through recruitment to SEM college degree programs from  other
              disciplines, two-year colleges, and secondary schools.   Mentors will assist
              and encourage all Alliance scholars to apply to  SEM graduate schools.
