Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9553236

Award Number: 9553236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan H. Gruber gruberj@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9296,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to Dr. Jonathan Gruber under the National Science
              Foundation's Presidential Faculty Fellows (PFF) Program.  The PFF Program was
              established at the request of the President of the United States to recognize
              and support the scholarly activities of some of the Nation's most outstanding
              science and engineering faculty members early in their careers.  Awards are
              intended to allow Fellows to undertake self-designed, innovative research and
              teaching projects, to establish research and teaching programs, and to pursue
              other academic related activities.  This award will allow the investigator to
              pursue his research in public economics, the study of how taxes and government
              spending programs affect economic activity.  His particular specialty is the
              analysis of social insurance programs.  His research has been devoted to
              investigating two key economic questions about social insurance programs in the
              U.S.  First, how should social insurance programs be financed?  Second, what
              are the benefits of social insurance programs for participants?   His research
              over the five-year period of the award will extend his analysis of the benefits
              of social insurance programs along three dimensions:  health, labor market
              efficiency, and consumption smoothing.  Specifically, he will study the health
              benefits of public insurance coverage for infants; the effect of public
              insurance expansions for young children on their utilization of medical care,
              immunization rates, and health;  the utilization and health implications paying
              physicians more to see publicly insured patients; and the role of social
              insurance programs in alleviating the consumption fall for those who suffer
              adverse events such as unemployment.  Dr. Gruber has established himself as a
              major force in economics in just a few short years.  His work provides
              plausible evidence on the behavioral responses of economic agents to exogenous
              changes in the economic environment that can be used to analyze public
              policies, test alternative economic theories, and estimate important underlying
              behavioral parameters.  He is also an excellent teacher of undergraduate and
              graduate students.  Last year he was awarded the first Undergraduate Economics
              Association Teaching Prize.  This five year award will enable him to continue
              his important research as well as to train students in the field of public
              finance which he has helped to broaden to include public finance, health
              economics, and labor economics.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
