Title       : Multidisciplinary Regional Studies Graduate Training Program: A Critical Need
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a9553614

Award Number: 9553614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurel R. Fox fox@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9553614  Fox  Natural ecosystems are rarely  pristine, almost all are
              modified  by anthropogenic effects to varying  degrees. Human activities are 
              rarely treated as integral parts of  those systems, either in research  or
              training. Ecological communities  are structured by top-down and  bottom-up
              processes and  interactions between them; human  activities affect the same 
              ecological processes in similar  ways. The University of California  at Santa
              Cruz recently initiated an  interdepartmental,  multidisciplinary program of 
              research and training (the Monterey  Bay Regional Studies (MBRS) program  )
              focused on basic understanding of  regional coastal processes and  their
              relation to specific regional  issues. The regional approach  provides a
              foundation for  integrating research and training  across different research
              scales  and traditions. Scientists from  different disciplines engage in 
              multidisciplinary studies to  examine complex environmental  processes.
              Recently hired new  faculty, high student interest and  new doctoral program
              have rapidly  increased our capacity to train  students, but limited funds for 
              their support restrict our ability  to reach our potential. The quality  and
              innovation of our program and  the established need for  multidisciplinary
              training programs  in environmental biology make a  strong case for support of
              this  proposal. A Graduate Research  Traineeship will allow us to expand  the
              MBRS training component  significantly, and to attract  students seeking a
              broader,  multidisciplinary foundation for  their research. GRT students will 
              participate in symposia,  discussions, seminars and research  in projects
              supported by MBRS. In  addition, we will develop a  graduate seminar course,
              student  seminars and an apprenticeship  program aimed to encourage 
              multidisciplinary awareness and  respect.
