Title       : Development and Field Test of a Supplementary Welding Lab on Disk for Teachers
               and Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9553687

Award Number: 9553687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213851             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xueshu Song song@ceet.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis V. Stoia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Billman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed project involves the development of a "Welding  Lab on Disk,"
              a sophisticated interactive computer simulation  software package, to
              supplement and complement hands-on welding  laboratory experiences for welding
              technology students.  The  project integrates the development of instructional
              media, teacher  enhancement, and instrumentation and laboratory improvement via
              a  coalition of Northern Illinois University, and Rock Valley College,  a
              two-year community college in the northern Illinois region.  The  goals of the
              project are to enhance students' understanding of the  interdisciplinary nature
              of advanced welding technology, to  minimize laboratory-related costs, hazards,
              and environmental  pollution, to motivate teachers via application of computer 
              simulation and research participation, and to attract women and  minorities
              into advanced technology programs.  Preliminary  development and research
              findings, documented by the recent  publications of the principal investigator,
              have shown that the  proposed computer software package will result in good
              engineering  economy and high pedagogical effectiveness.  An advisory and 
              evaluation board of outside experts will provide additional  expertise and
              experience.  The proposed project will complement  future research and
              development activities leading to "Advanced  Technology Labs on Disk."
