Title       : MPWG: Science Service Learning-Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9553448

Award Number: 9553448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85255              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah H. Wiegand wiegand@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nan Little  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9177,9178,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553448  Wiegand    Since one of higher education's goals is to produce educated
              citizens, not just educated people,  there needs to be mechanisms to bring
              service learning into the mainstream of university science  education.  The
              University of Washington's Chemistry Department proposes adding to its 
              significant outreach programs a Science Service Learning-Community (SSL-C)
              class which links  undergraduate students to community projects.  Students who
              take the service learning section  of the basic three quarters chemistry series
              have the opportunity for a concurrent commitment  to a community service
              project.  Students are able to select one of three forms of community  service:
               1) link directly with an ongoing community group; 2) assist teachers and
              students to  implement on-going community service projects such as growing food
              for community food  banks; 3) serve in an elementary classroom assisting
              teachers to develop hands-on curricula  which help students understand the
              relationship between science and their community.   Numerous community groups
              and non-profit organizations take advantage of limited funding  resources, such
              as Neighborhood Community Action Grants, to undertake projects to benefit 
              their communities.  Many of these projects are science based, such as water
              monitoring, stream  revegetation, and salmon habitat efforts.  Typically these
              projects do not involve university  students, but they can be a perfect
              training ground for students to become involved in specific  activities which
              need scientific input to achieve measurable changes in communities.  Developing
               such relationships help achieve neighborhood goals; link students with mentors
              who live their  commitment to community service; and graphically illustrate to
              students the value of adding  scientific information to projects that directly
              impact communities.  This approach is particularly  important for young women
              because they are provided with opportunities to enhance their self-  esteem and
              perception; develop a b etter understanding of the scientific process through 
              applications of specific scientific concepts; develop a more positive image of
              scientists.  It also  enhances interest in and commitment to science majors by
              focusing on how science can help  people/the community.    The goals of this
              project are to instill in university science students the importance of 
              scientifically-based community service through projects which are designed and
              driven by  community volunteers, to encourage elementary students to generate
              and sustain community  service projects which have academic outcomes, and to
              generate elementary science curricula  which draw students into scientific
              inquiry through hands-on science related to community needs  and concerns. 
              This program can provide a model for intergenerational community service 
              learning with measurable academic outcomes.  The project is being jointly
              funded with FIPSE  (U.S. Department of Education).  ***
