Title       : Experimental Microelectronic Embedded Systems for Image Processing and
               Intelligent Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1995      
File        : a9553354

Award Number: 9553354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce Reiss                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart K. Tewksbury   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Hornak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9553354  Tewksbury  Within the last few years, it has become obvious that a
              profound  and far-ranging paradigm shift in the practice of (and 
              computer-aided design - CAD - tools for) the design of  competitive electronic
              system modules has occurred. Earlier,  designers worked with relatively simple
              ICs performing specific  logic functions to create an innovative and novel
              system  realization. Packaged integrated circuits (ICs) had a limited  number
              (14 - 64) of external connections (I/O) and were readily  hand soldered onto
              thru-hole printed circuit boards or connected  using standard wire-wrap
              prototyping techniques. This general  approach for circuit boards remained
              largely unchanged for over  two decades and provided the necessary capabilities
              until a few  years ago. During that period, the complexity of digital ICs was 
              doubling approximately every 18 months, with the simple quad  gates per IC
              evolving into today's ICs with hundreds of thousands  of gates per IC. Present
              high-density VLSI ICs routinely require  several hundred I/O pins and industry
              projections suggesting  several thousand I/O pins per IC within a little more
              than a  decade.  Over much of the last 20 years, the clock rate of  digital
              systems remained surprisingly constant, in the range 10  to 25 MHz. However,
              the last few years also has seen a remarkably  fast progression to higher clock
              rates extending well above 100  MHz. This progression to higher clock rates
              also impacts system  prototyping dramatically, requiring special techniques to
              handle  not only the fast signal transitions but also the large number of 
              interconnections and I/O lines operating at high speed.    The project will
              obtain (i) for equipment to fabricate prototype,  multilayer, surface mount,
              printed circuit boards (PCBs) and to  mount advanced VLSI components on those
              boards and (ii) for  initial research related to image processing accelerators,
               intelligent sensor systems, and advanced  packaging/interconnection
              technologies. These capabilities  provid e a foundation for a broad,
              experimental program in high  performance, embedded microelectronic systems,
              supplementing  existing capabilities for advanced packaging and interconnection
               technologies presently available.    The project will result in a strong
              experimental microelectronic  systems research program designed to provide (i)
              innovations in  microelectronic systems education (undergraduate and graduate),
               (ii) outreach to companies in WV both for continuing education  and for R&D
              support, (iii) development of high performance  modules in support of
              interdisciplinary research within the  academic research community of WV, and
              (iv) development of a more  competitive position for research in the area of
              high performance  microelectronic systems.
