Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows Award: Development of Methods for Multidisciplinary
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9553210

Award Number: 9553210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina L. Bloebaum clb@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9102,9148,9296,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9553210  Bloebaum   This grant provides funding for a Presidential Faculty
              Fellow Award.  Research during the period of the award will focus on developing
              computational design strategies for complex, multidisciplinary engineering
              applications, aimed at addressing industry problems.  Multidisciplinary Design
              (MD) problems are typified by complex couplings between disciplines which
              necessitate new design strategies that take these couplings into account.  The
              major areas of research during the term of this award include:  'System
              Reduction Strategies' to reduce the size of the analytical models without
              sacrificing system accuracy; 'Optimal Sequencing' to determine the best
              ordering of the participating disciplinary subsystems to reduce overall
              computational cost; 'Decomposition for Mixed Systems' to develop decomposition
              strategies for application in situations where variables are of continuous as
              well as discrete type; and 'Coordination of Decoupled Subsystems' wherein
              coordination coefficients amongst subsystems must be quantified for use in
              decomposition strategies.  Teaching objectives will focus on adding lab
              components to undergraduate courses, renovating existing graduate courses to
              include teaming and computational components, developing a new graduate course,
              developing a graduate Master of Engineering program in Multidisciplinary
              Design, and focusing on graduate training and mentoring.   The successful
              development of the proposed methodologies could result in substantially
              improved processes for the design of complex systems, such as are found in
              aircraft, automobiles, naval vessels, high speed trains, and even power plants.
               In the traditional serial design environment, the cost of making a change
              increases by an order of magnitude for each phase of the design cycle.  Due to
              recent competitive market pressures, it has become evident that for the design
              of complex systems, all requirements, manufacturing, and life-cycle issues must
              be addressed throughout all phases of the design process .  This results in a
              shift of the knowledge curve, thereby yielding more knowledge about the design
              while the design freedom is still high.  The increasing complexity of products
              requires new methods and processes to provide for this next level of
              integration.  Multidisciplinary Design (MD) is recognized nationally as a
              critical technology.  Only within the last couple of years have industries
              other than aerospace recognized MD as a discipline that can address many of
              their needs.  MD has the potential to obtain substantial reductions in both
              development time and costs, as well as improved performance.
