Title       : A Graduate Training Program in Environmental Biology: From Genes to Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9553386

Award Number: 9553386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Grosberg rkgrosberg@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen L. Stanton  (Principal Investigator former)
              Donald R. Strong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Turelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9553386  Stanton  This proposal outlines a multi-  disciplinary program of
              advanced  training for doctoral students, to  be coordinated through the Center
               for Population Biology at UC Davis.  The CPB is a newly-formed group  with
              established faculty of great  accomplishment in graduate  education and
              research; highly  qualified applicants have been  quickly attracted to our
              young  doctoral program. Bringing diverse  scholars together, the CPB 
              facilitates interdisciplinary  education in environmental biology  within the
              context of contemporary  population biology. A broadly  synthetic field using
              sophisticated  analytical techniques, population  biology addresses ecological,
               evolutionary, behavioral, and  genetic mechanisms at the heart of 
              environmental biology. Our program  pertains directly to biodiversity, 
              endangered species, and processes  of community restoration.  GRT traineeships
              would provide the  funds to increase PhD enrollment to  levels that our faculty
              and support  facilities are prepared to  accommodate. Significant matching 
              support has been pledged by UC  Davis for this GRT initiative. A  major
              component of our innovative  approach is a consortial  arrangement with San
              Francisco  State University, which will direct  diverse students into our PhD 
              program in environmental biology.  SFSU produces highly qualified and  prepared
              Master's students,  including large numbers of women  and minorities.
