Title       : ID/PPD: Systemic Assistance for Teaching Science to Students with Disabilities
               (SATSSD)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9553325

Award Number: 9553325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg P. Stefanich stefanich@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1508,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD 95-53325  University of Northern Iowa  Gregory Stefanich,
              Principal Investigator    "The Curriculum Development in Teaching Science to
              Students with       Disabilities Project"                                  
              ABSTRACT    The Curriculum Development in Teaching Science to Students with 
              Disabilities (CDTSSD) project is a two-year effort designed to  provide
              training to teachers and teacher educators to improve  their skills and
              knowledge in teaching science to students with  disabilities.  The project will
              train professionals who provide  services to students with disabilities about
              effective resources  and teaching/assessment strategies.  Participants will be
              exposed  to effective instructional practice through model hands-on, 
              multi-modality science lessons, which will include the use of  adaptive
              materials and suggestions for accommodating students  with disabilities.  The
              disability areas addressed will include  motor/orthopedic impairments, deaf and
              hard of hearing, visual  impairments, learning disabilities, cognitive
              impairments, and  behavioral disabilities.  The project will use a "training
              the  trainers" approach.  It will begin with the development of  training
              materials:  an in-service training module consisting of  a publication entitled
              Guidelines for Teaching Students With  Disabilities, print materials and video
              tapes related to  providing services to students with disabilities in the
              regular  science classroom, and hands-on science investigations that will 
              allow trainers to demonstrate five proven methods of delivering  science
              instruction with accommodations to students with  disabilities.  These
              materials will be tested and disseminated  through two routes: 1. Training of
              science educators and content  specialists in higher education.  The mode of
              delivery will be  pre-conference programs presented at NSTA and AETS
              (1997-1998),  Annual Meetings.  Participants in the sessions will be required 
              to prepare an action plan and deliver a program for faculty and  staf f at
              their institution of employment.  2. Training of science  teacher/special
              education teacher teams in a geographical region  where access to specialists
              is limited.  Collaboration of science  teachers and special educators as active
              teams will strengthen  the base of expertise and services to students with
              disabilities  in science education.  Participants in these sessions will be 
              required to prepare an action plan and will deliver a program for  teachers at
              their teaching location.
