Title       : SSC: "DAYS Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9553294

Award Number: 9553294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted A. Trujillo   (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Giulianelli  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : DAYS
	      1240 W Bayaud Avenue  #201
	      Denver, CO  80223    303/777-9240

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Denver Area Youth Services (DAYS), a community-based non-profit  organization
              serving predominantly minority children, youth and  families in Denver,
              Colorado, submits this proposal to sponsor a 4-  week Summer Science Camp for
              50 minority children entering 7th and  8th grade.   Most will be students who
              will be enrolling in the  Denver youth Academy, a new charter public middle
              school for at-  risk students that is scheduled to open in Fall, 1995. 
              Two-thirds  of the target population are Latinos, about 30% African-American 
              and the rest Native American, all minority groups that experience  high
              drop-out rates, low college enrollment rates and that are  dramatically
              underrepresented in math and science fields in  Colorado and nationally.    The
              Camp represents a unique collaboration of a community-based  agency that has
              access to and credibility with the minority  community, and two premier
              institutions of science education-Regis  University and Children's  Museum of
              Denver.  Regis University will  provide the Principal Investigator for the
              project, Dr. Jim  Giulianelli, as well as develop and facilitate the classroom 
              learning activities for the first week of the Camp.  The Children's  Museum of
              Denver will develop and facilitate the classroom learning  and research
              activities for the second and third week of the camp.   Youth in the Camp will
              thus be exposed to a university campus, as  well as to a family-friendly
              environment for practicing science  that they and their families can continue
              to access on an ongoing  basis throughout the year.  The Camp will conclude
              with a week long  residential experience at a campsite in a national park in 
              Colorado's Rocky Mountains.        The Camp will provide a rich experience of
              integrated classroom  instruction, experiments and research activities that
              will be  documented in the student's Science Journals.  Extensive Career 
              Exploration activities will be woven throughout the four weeks  through field
              trips to businesses and government agencies, meetin gs  with individual
              scientists, guided career research, and other group  activities.  Mentors will
              include: university professors; science  teachers; minority high school,
              undergraduate and graduate students  in math and science programs serving as
              Camp Counselors; and  volunteer scientists and engineers.  Student support
              activities  include numerous family involvement activities, peer support, and 
              ongoing involvement of the campers with the Denver Youth Academy.
