Title       : Technological Fluency And The Representation Of Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9553474

Award Number: 9553474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186524             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seymour A. Papert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchel Resnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553474  Papert    This project proposes to study and foster the development of 
              technological fluency in K-12 students.  In our view, technical  fluency
              involves not only knowing how to use technical tools, but  also knowing how to
              construct things of significance with those  tools.  Technological fluency
              involves the ability to express,  explore, and realize ideas with new
              technological media-and to take  advantage of those media to enhance learning
              in other domains.    The project focuses on two primary themes in the
              development and  support of technological fluency:    * Access to knowledge. 
              How can we provide students with better  access to the knowledge they need,
              when they need it, as they are  engaged in construction activities?  To serve
              these needs, we will  develop initial versions of a constructopedia-a new kind
              of  knowledge source in which concepts are indexed according to their  uses in
              construction.  The constructopedia is a browsable,  interactive database,
              designed to help students build new  constructions-and to help them make
              connections to mathematical and  scientific ideas underlying those
              constructions.    * Representations of knowledge.  New media call out for new 
              representations.  The language and forms most appropriate for  representing
              phenomenon in one medium might be quite inappropriate  in another.  We aim to
              develop new representations of scientific  and mathematical knowledge that are
              more intuitive and concrete for  students, and better suited to the nature of
              computational media.   Our goal is not to make traditional representations of 
              science/mathematics.  We will pay special attention to  "epistemological
              shifts"-for example, emphasizing dynamic  representations over static ones, and
              developing new ways of  casting knowledge computational terms (such as
              "agent-oriented"  descriptions of knowledge).    New representations of
              knowledge, and new access to knowledge, are  needed in all domains, but we will
              focus our efforts on two domains  for which our past wo rk has laid the ground:
              (a) the  physics/mathematics of motion, and (b) systems theory concepts  (such
              as feedback and dynamic equilibrium).  We will explore and  develop new
              representations of knowledge in these domains, and we  will create
              "constructopedia samplers" to support student  construction and learning in
              these domains.  Each sampler will  include examples, descriptions,
              explanations, and illustrations  (including graphic animations and video clips)
              related to the  conceptual themes.    We will make our constructopedia
              materials available widely, both  on the World Wide Wed and in CD-ROM format. 
              We will work directly  with teachers and students at a number of sites, with an
              increasing  proportion of our effort going to sites supporting the transition 
              from school to work, and to informal (non-school) settings.  We  intend to
              collaborate closing with user of our materials, using new  information channels
              to accelerate and enhance the development  cycle for the materials, using new
              information channels to  accelerate and enhance the development cycle for the
              materials,  making the development process more rapid, open, and transparent.  
              We also plan to use new information channels to make the evaluation  cycle
              shorter and richer.  We will pay special attention to the  dangers of "dilution
              in dissemination," exploring ways to  strengthen not only the adoption of our
              materials but the  appropriation of our ideas.  ***
