Title       : RCMS: Morehouse College Research Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9553332

Award Number: 9553332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosalyn M. Patterson   (Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Haynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehouse College
	      830 Westview Drive S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303101427    404/681-2800

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553332  Patterson    The Morehouse College Research Scholars program is
              designed to  increase the number of students who attend graduate school and 
              earn doctorates in the sciences.  The objectives of the program  are:  1)to
              motivate students to pursue careers in science  research through a coordinated
              mentoring program; 2) to provide  participants in the program with early
              research experiences,  beginning with a prefreshman summer program; 3) to
              enhance the  academic preparation of students through enrichment courses, 
              counseling, mentoring colloquia, and seminars; and 4) to provide  students with
              information on graduate schools, fellowships and  research careers.  The
              program consists of four components to  accomplish the stated objectives:  1)
              an academic year research  and enrichment program for undergraduates; 2) a
              prefreshman  summer research and enrichment program; 3) summer research 
              activities for upperclassmen; and 4) a coordinated  mentoring/counseling
              program.  The project will serve a target  group of up to fifteen
              scholastically talented undergraduates at  the College who are science majors. 
              These students will be  assigned to faculty mentors who will direct their
              research  projects and serve as academic advisors.  The participants will 
              enroll in enrichment courses, and participate in student  colloquia and
              departmental seminars.  Emphasis will be placed on  a coordinated
              mentoring/counseling program to ensure the  students' academic and research
              progress.  In order to enhance  student preparation for graduate school,
              specific strategies will  be implemented through a "Bridge to Graduate School
              Mentoring  Program."  Formal relationships will be established with ten or 
              more graduate schools where participants in the program may  consider
              matriculation.  it is expected that the Research  Scholars Program will
              significantly increase the number of  Morehouse graduates who obtain doctorates
              in the sciences over  the next five to ten years.
