Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9553134

Award Number: 9553134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel N. Rockmore rockmore@cs.dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9139,9148,9216,9263,9296,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9553134  Rockmore       The investigator uses this Presidential Faculty
              Fellowship to  pursue an interdisciplinary course of research and educational 
              innovation, unified by the themes of group theory and computation.  The primary
              research activity centers upon the continued  theoretical and practical
              development of generalized fast Fourier  transforms (FFTs).  Among the
              generalizations pursued are the  efficient computation of Fourier transforms on
              finite and compact  Lie groups and efficient polynomial transforms.  Current
              approaches  to these sorts of problems draw on the areas of group 
              representation theory, the theory of operator algebras and  sampling theory. 
              Practical considerations and goals demand that  implementational aspects such
              as numerical stability and  computational overhead be addressed as well, and in
              so doing  require the tools and techniques of numerical analysis, as well as 
              some knowledge of the targeted applications areas.  This sort of 
              interdisciplinary paradigm also informs the educational approach.  Under
              development are several interdisciplinary courses, intended  to increase
              mathematics interest and awareness among  undergraduates by highlighting the
              connections of mathematics to  other disciplines.       Arguably, the
              ``classical'' FFT is one of the most important  computational techniques ever
              developed.  It is the fundamental  tool behind most of digital signal
              processing and as such impacts  society in all aspects, playing a key role in
              areas such as  medical imaging, defense, telecommunications, high performance 
              computing, and entertainment.  The utility of the classical FFT  indicates that
              perhaps similar success may be obtained from  applying these newly developed
              generalized FFTs, and a large part  of this proposal is directed towards this
              end.  To date,  applications of these new computational methods have been 
              identified in areas such as climate modeling, image processing,  medical
              imaging, astronomy and statistics.  These are being pursued  actively.   The
              connection that this work evinces between pure  research and ``real-world''
              application is tremendously useful as  an educational model.  By focusing on
              this type of theme, the  investigator works towards enhancing the current
              mathematics  curriculum with the goal of increasing mathematics enrollments and
               awareness and in so doing working towards rebuilding the national  scientific
              infrastructure.
