Title       : Learning by Design: Integrating and Enhancing the Middle School Math, Science
               and Technology Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9553583

Award Number: 9553583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1206613            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Kolodner jlk@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Guzdial  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joanna H. Hornig-Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              60        Life Sciences                           
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553583  Kolodner    Project-based learning modules, built around engineering
              and design problems, promote the learning of essential concepts and processes
              in mathematics, science and technology education at the middle school addressed
              by the national standards. The methodology of problem-based learning is
              informed by research in cognitive science and education, and the experiences of
              teachers and science practitioners.  The modules, based on complex, realistic
              design problems, integrate the disciplinary material, focus on collaborative
              learning and doing, and foster reflection. There are several options available
              to arrive at a solution and both science knowledge and real world experience
              must be brought to bear in evaluating solutions.  Students design solutions,
              not just analyze existing solutions; they are asked to identify knowledge and
              information needed to solve the problem; students receive explicit feedback
              both about their reasoning process and about the solution. Computer support
              provides an interactive problem-solving environment, information resources and
              scaffolding for teachers. Diversity issues are addressed through the relevant
              realistic problems that are solved through cooperation and communication. The
              products of this pilot study include two engineering design problems for the
              sixth or seventh grade integrating life science, mathematics and technology,
              teacher materials that support problem-based learning, a software-based
              interactive problem-solving and learning environment and student assessments.
