Title       : Facility Development Criteria for Prototype Laboratories for Secondary School
               Science Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9553585

Award Number: 9553585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $516950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Lidsky arthur.lidsky@CHANNEL  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Dober  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dober Lidsky Craig & Assoc
	      385 Concord Avenue
	      Belmont, MA  021783037    /   -

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553585  Lidsky    The teaching of science, mathematics, and technology
              education is  changing to more hands-on, laboratory rich experiential learning
              as  teachers and schools explore new ways to teach.  Computers and 
              sophisticated instrumentation in schools are increasing as are  efforts in
              cooperative learning, team teaching, project-based  learning and student
              research.  Boundaries between disciplines are  blurring.  However, little has
              been done to define the physical  facilities necessary to support and sustain
              improved teaching and  learning.  The demands placed on facilities by
              educational reform  are studied to provide facility development criteria and
              guidelines  for programming, planning, and designing prototype spaces for 
              learning in the sciences, mathematics and technology education.   The study
              defines a process for planning that can be used to verify  needs and implement
              change.  The project is guided by an Advisory  Committee to provide the vision
              and case studies of educational  reform.  A Consultant Group of teachers and
              others assist in data  gathering and interpretation.  Both groups review the
              final  documents.  The main audience for the products of this project are 
              teachers involved in facility development or renovation; but it is  also useful
              to parents, board members, administrators, and  government officials.
