Title       : Science Learning in Context: Student Field Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9553639

Award Number: 9553639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1955976            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Tinker bob@concord.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boris Berenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concord Consortium
	      37 Thoreau Street
	      Concord, MA  017424023    /   -

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553639  Tinker    This project will vastly expand the range of contexts in
              which  students can learn science, mathematics, and technology by  providing
              flexible tools that help them extract data and meaning in  the complex, real
              world. We will bring a full range of computer and  networking tools outside the
              lab for explorations of rich, natural  settings (the field, classroom, school,
              neighborhood, town and  city) where we expect students will develop
              understandings and  investigative strategies that will last a lifetime. The
              project  will use portable MBL and client-server based wireless networking- 
              advanced technologies already beginning to make their appearance  and certain
              to be inexpensive, powerful, and widely available in  five to ten years.    The
              technology will make it possible for students to make digital  journal
              observations, gather a range of kinds of data, consolidate  data from others,
              reflect on the data, link findings with  background information and data,
              develop models based on these  data, and communicate with others. Used with
              intelligent prompting,  scaffolding, various data representations, and data
              exchange forms  at their fingertips, we expect to see far more student
              reflection  and analysis in the field. This will result in deeper learning, 
              better use of time, and the possibility of additional cycles of  observations
              and analysis.    In order to test the educational potential of this technology,
              we  will develop a series of innovative units that employ the  technology to
              support new ways to teach about scientific  measurement, modeling, mapping, and
              investigations. At the same  time we will test new instructional strategies
              using this  technology to develop holistic models of the natural, built, and 
              social environment. The instructional strategy will be based on a  learning
              cycle that starts and ends with field investigations, but,  in between, also
              uses the same technology in a lab.    Using this approach, we expect student
              inquiry to be more  efficient, student i nvestigations will be more expert, the
               resulting knowledge will be less inert , and many new topics will  be amenable
              to student investigation. In addition, students will  become more acquainted
              with their vocational choices. These results  will have important implications
              on the practicality of widespread  use of extended student investigations,
              equity, home study, and the  school-to-work transition.    The project will
              require four years, with the primary technology  and curriculum, development in
              the first two years, final design in  the third, and a full year of testing in
              the fourth.  ***
