Title       : Collaborative Model for Technician Education Through Interactive Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9553709

Award Number: 9553709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139450             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Carolyn L. Girardeau   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Parker Chesson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : NC St Brd of Comm Coll
	      200 West Jones Street
	      Raleigh, NC  276031379    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   We propose a three-year plan to develop a new classroom model  in
              mathematics education.  It will be focussed at the 11th and 12th  grade levels
              and at the community college level for engineering  technology students
              preparing to enter the manufacturing workforce.   Students will be taught the
              same powerful problem-solving  strategies that are used in the manufacturing
              industry and will  solve these problems by developing critical thinking skills
              and  using multimedia and interactive technology in networked  collaborative
              learning environments.  Students will learn to  develop solutions to real
              problems in a high technology virtual  workplace-the classroom.  Through
              partnerships with industry,  universities, community colleges, and high
              schools, new models of  apprenticeships and internships combining the classroom
              with the  workplace will be developed using full motion video conferencing.  
              Colleges of Education at universities in cooperation with the  manufacturing
              industry and non-profit technology institutions in  North Carolina will provide
              both in-service and pre-service  professional development and technical support
              to high school and  community college faculty.  To encourage alliances around
              the  nation in restructuring technician education, we will develop a  national
              discourse on innovative instruction in engineering  technology.  In this new
              model for technician education, the  classroom will become a virtual workplace
              for students to gain  experience and confidence in solving real problems facing
               engineering technicians in manufacturing, and share experiences on 
              problem-solving strategies used in manufacturing.
