Title       : Defining the Emerging Role of the Technologist in a Computer-Aided-Engineering
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9553767

Award Number: 9553767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gordon E. Uno                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $548260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Simoneau rsimonea@keene.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith W. Bird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Bohm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Piyush K. Dutta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Garfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keene State College
	      229 Main
	      Keene, NH  034350001    603/352-1909

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The Industrial Technology and Safety Program at Keene State  College seeks
              a four-year project grant from the Advanced  Technology Education Program to
              plan, implement, and optimize a  revised curricula in its two-year associate
              degree program in  Design and Manufacturing based on the emerging Computer
              Aided  Engineering environment.  Today our graduates are entering an 
              increasingly competitive job market.  They need to have readily  marketable
              skill in order to compete for jobs or the academic  proficiency to go on to
              obtain advanced degrees.  The companies  that hire our graduates are facing
              enormous competitive pressure  from around the world.  The loss of our
              manufacturing base  continues and the resulting job loss is a significant 
              social-economic and political problem.  United State's companies  need a
              flexible and technologically competent workforce in order to  stem this tide. 
              The emerging role of the technologist must be one  that can fully utilize
              computer assisted technology.  This computer  environment is integrating once
              discrete job functions, of design,  manufacturing, and business.  The current
              limitations in existing  discrete curricula suggests a new "seamless"
              educational paradigm.  To address this situation we are suggesting three areas
              of study.   The first is a conceptual based curriculum, using a projects focus,
               to deliver technical problem solving for meeting curriculum goals.   The
              second aspect of our proposal is to create a series of four  integrated courses
              in the area of product design and development  utilizing this computer assisted
              environment.  The third is to  establish a collaboratively working on these
              projects on the  InterNet, with other schools, government laboratories, and 
              companies.  The curriculum model we are creating is basically an  immersion
              model for our students that provide both a contextual and  constructivist
              environment for problem solving.  In this  environment students solve holistic
              and fully integrate problems in  math, science, te chnology, and business. 
              This curriculum model  emulates both the emerging computer assisted environment
              and the  world of work.  Our goals is to create this new curriculum paradigm 
              and study its effectiveness.  We are creating a model that is both  pragmatic
              and realistic and that can serve as a nation model.  This  is one of many
              solutions being offered to help improve the  competitive position of our
              graduates.  By breaking with  traditional paradigms it can serve as a model to
              entice  non-tradition, and minority students, as well as  displaced workers  to
              move into the exciting and challenging world of product design  and
              development.  Our project opens many new and exciting  opportunity for
              educational research.  Through this curriculum  project we will help guarantee
              our students the opportunity to  compete effectively and become contributing
              citizens in a global  economy.
