Title       : MPWG: Closing the GAP: Math Clubs for Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9553337

Award Number: 9553337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice R. Mokros jan_mokros@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa Yaffee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Berle-Carman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553337  Mokros    The proposed school-based clubs seek to provide a
              challenging, engaging, non-competitive  environment in which fourth and fifth
              grade girls can discover their power as mathematical  thinkers.  Girls of this
              age, who are beginning to lose confidence in their ability to solve 
              mathematical problems, need an extra boost in order to stay in the
              science-math-engineering  "pipeline."  The clubs are to involve girls working
              with their classmates and teacher on  investigations that:  (1) introduce them
              to the realm of mathematical thinking (logic, visual-  spatial reasoning,
              statistics, number theory) which extends far beyond the arithmetic that is 
              traditionally emphasized in these grades; (2) are conductive to multiple
              approaches,  interpretations, and solutions and that promote discussion about
              these approaches; (3) require  strategy and team working; (4) incorporate
              appropriate technology, including building materials,  calculators and
              tool-based software.  A collaboration with teachers and volunteers from the 
              business community is proposed to implement several model math clubs during the
              course of the  project.  The clubs are to meet for at least one hour per week
              during the semester, and initially  will be led by a classroom teacher working
              with a TERC staff member to link club activities  with classroom work.  Thus,
              the clubs should provide teachers with a means of deepening and  extending
              their own mathematical understanding as they explore new investigations that
              can later  be modified and introduced during the regular math class.  During
              the second round of  implementation, clubs are to be co-led by the teacher and
              a volunteer from a local business, who  will serve as a mathematically-skilled
              role model for the students.  Another important element  of the club is parent
              involvement.  Parents (especially mothers) need to know how they can  encourage
              and support their daughters mathematically, and to experience the excitement of
               working on meaningful mathematics problems wit h their daughters.  The clubs
              are to be based  on Investigations in Number, Data and Space, a new K-5
              curriculum, developed at TERC and  published by Dale Seymour Publications. 
              This curriculum is specifically designed to reach a  diverse group of learners,
              enabling all students to find their own passions reflected in the  activities,
              and encourage deep and thoughtful mathematical work across an extended period
              of  time.  ***
