Title       : MPWG: Young Women in Science: Intergenerational Partnership in Science,
               Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9553426

Award Number: 9553426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penny L. Hammrich phammric@thunder.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Henkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553426  Hammerich    The proposed project is designed to increase interest in
              science, engineering and mathematics  (SEM) among 60 fourth-grade, African
              American, Asian, and Hispanic females and to enhance  the science and
              mathematics curriculum at two Philadelphia elementary schools.  This project 
              brings together female elementary students, women who are retired from careers
              in SEM, and  female undergraduate science education and math education students
              to engage in intensive  experimental environmental projects.  This
              multi-generational approach enables elementary  school girls to investigate and
              explore urban environmental issues on a scientific level utilizing 
              mathematical concepts.  Through their involvement with retired scientists,
              engineers and  educators, as well as undergraduate students aspiring to be
              science and math educators, the  project introduces fourth-grade girls to
              career opportunities in SEM and effectively expands their  interest,
              enthusiasm, and concepts of math and science.    The proposed project
              represents a collaborative effort between Temple University, the School 
              District of Philadelphia, and area chemical companies.  Participants are drawn
              from:  (a) fourth-  grade students and teachers at Childs Elementary and Dunbar
              Schools; (b) retirees from area  chemical companies (including ARCO Chemical
              Company), the School District of Philadelphia  and Temple University; and (c)
              science and math education students of the College of Education  at Temple
              University.  The project is designed as an intensive intervention at two
              targeted  elementary schools, to demonstrate the effectiveness of a
              multi-generational approach to  enhancing the science and mathematics
              curriculum at the elementary level.  This model project  can be replicated in
              other school districts.  The project activities include three components:  
              classroom activities; after-school activities; summer program--City Rivers
              Exploration.  The  project is to be coordinated by The College of Education at
              Temple Uni versity.  ***
