Title       : Establish a Chemical Engineering Technology: Advanced Process Operations Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9553671

Award Number: 9553671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Fisher fisher@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy H. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn L. Sandford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The chemical and material manufacturing industries have made  a major
              commitment to making products and process safer and more  environmentally
              friendly.  To accomplish this, these industries  have placed tighter controls
              on processing, increased process  instrumentation, and generally increased
              process complexity to  minimize waste production.  This increase in
              sophistication has  placed substantially increased responsibility on the
              process  operator.       The innovative two-year degree program in Chemical
              Engineering  Technology:  Advanced Process Operations outlined in this proposal
               draws upon a strong partnership between Dow Corning Corporation and  Dow
              Chemical Company, major chemical and material manufacturers;  Delta College, a
              community college system serving the manufacturing  area; and Michigan
              Technological University, a major engineering  and technological university. 
              The proposed degree program will  consist of a first-year program taught at
              Delta College where high  school articulation agreements and diversity outreach
              initiatives  are well established.  Due to proximity, work internships will be 
              possible with the industrial partners.  Upon successful completion  of this
              first year experience based on academic performance and  work-related
              recommendations, students can transfer to the  second-year academic program at
              Michigan Tech.  The second year  will stress engineering technology with a
              strong laboratory  component leading to a capstone pilot plant experience in
              the new  multipurpose pilot plant facilities of the Process Simulation and 
              Control Center.  Cooperative and apprentice experiences will be  available
              during the second year.       This industry/college/university partnership
              between a local  community college, a major university, and two major process 
              industries will enable the development and implementation of a  model program
              which will lead to highly trained process operators  who are comfortable with
              new process technologies, the regulations  which shape  these industries, and
              the safety and teamwork skills  which are adaptive to the changing high
              performance workplace of  the chemical and material processing industry.
