Title       : Problem-Based Learning: A Key to Enhanced Performance in Advanced Technological
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9553705

Award Number: 9553705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Buck F. Brown buck.brown@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Buck F. Brown buck.brown@rose-hulman.edu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Buck F. Brown                               DUE 9553705  Rose-Hulman Inst of
              Tech                    FY1995 $    Terre Haute, IN  47803                     
              Advanced Technological Education                                               
                Title: Problem-Based Learning:  A Key to Enhanced Performance in    Advanced
              Technological Education           Education in the United States is at a
              pivotal juncture.  U.S.  citizens must compete in a demanding global society,
              but our  educational systems are struggling with outdated approaches and 
              stagnant budgets.  The "knowledge explosion" of the past 20 to 30  years has
              provided advanced technological education with the  singularly difficult
              challenge.  The traditional answer to this  "knowledge explosion" has been to
              pack more "essential facts" into  the curricula Careful consideration of this
              issue suggests that an  information-laden society requires resourceful skills,
              insights,  and abilities; hence, educational innovation must focus less on 
              facts and more on problem solving and inquiry-based learning.  The  Wabash
              Valley Educational Alliance seeks support for the  implementation of an
              important educational vision and the  establishment of a permanent cooperative
              effort within the Wabash  Valley (west central Indiana).  This project
              addresses  instructional methods that will impact the education of students of 
              technology, science, mathematics, and engineering in two year,  associate
              degree granting institutions.  It will affect educational  approaches at all
              levels of technology; produce new curricula  materials including problems and
              examples; provide a "living" video  series of applications; and create a
              national, refereed, electronic  database for sharing problem-based materials
              and experiences.   Problem-based instruction concentrates learning around
              "real-world"  problems similar to those encountered by practitioners in the 
              field.  In problem-based learning the teacher' s role changes quite 
              dramatically from that in a traditional learning s ituation.  The  teacher must
              guide the students in the problem-solving process,  directing them through
              questioning techniques.  Problem-based  learning can help students become
              critical thinkers and problem  solvers.  There is significant potential for its
              further refinement  and widespread application to advanced technological
              education.   This potential, if fully developed, can place technological 
              education in a leadership role and heighten it's visibility among  the
              professions.
