Title       : A Learning Center for Manufacturing Education and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9553345

Award Number: 9553345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farhad Azadivar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman G. Dillman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Ben-Arieh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prakash Krishnaswami  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9553345  Azadivar  A comprehensive manufacturing learning center (the MLC) will
              be  developed.  Just as teaching hospitals are full service medical  facilities
              yet provide a research and educational environment for  medical students and
              other health professionals to get hands-on  training solving real-life medical
              problems; this proposed center  would have a fully actualized manufacturing
              function integrated  into manufacturing engineering education capabilities. The
              center  would utilize an existing research and technology transfer  facility
              where students and trainees can intern in actual  manufacturing situations
              solving real-life manufacturing  problems. The MLC would enhance the
              manufacturing engineering  education and provide a research/education/
              technology transfer  model for others to emulate.  The manufacturing theme
              encompasses  a wide range of engineering activities. The theme allows training 
              and education for a large group of professionals in many  engineering and other
              supporting disciplines. It would also  addresses a critical need for
              development of human resources in  an area of economic activity that has been
              suffering in recent  years.    The MLC will utilize the existing full service
              "manufacturing  processes prototyping" plant at Kansas State University. This 
              research/teaching/manufacturing facility would bridge research  and engineering
              education at Kansas State University and the  research and development needs of
              small to medium-sized  industries.  The MLC will be managed and run by a
              partnership of  KSU' s Advanced Manufacturing Institute (AMI), faculty and 
              students in the Engineering and other Colleges of the University,  technical
              and vocational schools in the state, two technical  assistance organizations in
              the region and managers and  manufacturing experts from private manufacturing
              firms.
