Title       : SSC: CPEP Summer Science Camp at Trinity College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9553279

Award Number: 9553279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn A. Cassis cassisg@cpep.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi Amos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Mertens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Ahlgren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly Hunter-Daniel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CPEP, Inc.
	      45 Wintonbury Avenue, 1st Floor
	      Bloomfield, CT  060022476    860/769-5283

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Connecticut Pre-Engineering Program, Inc. (CPEP) Summer Program  at Trinity
              College will begin the summer of 1996 until the summer  of 1998.  Each summer a
              five week commuter program will offer an  integrated curriculum in science,
              mathematics, computer and  engineering applications, guidance/career counseling
              and language  arts/study skills.  All subject areas will be offered in an 
              interdisciplinary manner enabling students to develop an  appreciation for the
              breadth of the educational experience.  The  overall instruction will be
              focused on engineering applications and  practical lab applications utilizing
              the knowledge and problem  solving skills taught during the sessions.    A
              total of 135 underrepresented minority students entering the 8th  and 9th grade
              from the Hartford Public School system (45 each year)  will take grade
              appropriate courses and participate on field trips.   The state of the art
              engineering facilities and the enthusiastic  Trinity faculty will provide
              students with an exposure to some of  the most exciting technological
              applications of science and  mathematics.  The program will continue to employ
              a "hands-on"  approach to mathematics and science education.  Learning 
              experiences are designed to actively involve students in science  inquiry and
              mathematics as an integral aspect of investigation.    Guidance will address
              the need for enrollment in advanced secondary  science and mathematics courses
              during the academic year.  Role  models and mentors from the science,
              engineering and mathematics  community will make presentations during the
              program.  The language  arts component is closely aligned with the science and
              mathematics  curricula.  Opportunities for parents and guardians to become 
              empowered and actively involved in their child's education will be  provided. 
              Follow-up activities will take place during the school  year.  Participants in
              the program will remain in the CPEP data  file for tracking and evaluation
              purposes until they graduate high  school,  CPE P seeks $225,720.  ***
