Title       : MPWG: Family Tools & Technology (FT2)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9553482

Award Number: 9553482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120636             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene S. Chasek chasek@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9180,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9553428  Chasek    FAMILY TOOLS & TECHNOLOGY (FT2) is an after-school program
              targeting girls and their  parents who are to collaborate in problem solving
              activities (using tools and building models)  that illustrate the importance of
              science, technology, and mathematics in the world beyond the  classroom.  This
              proposal is for support of the second phase of the project:  an assessment to 
              determine the project's readiness for wider dissemination by evaluating the
              effectiveness of the  existing activities, materials and strategies.  FT2 was
              created to make tools and technology  activities and related careers accessible
              and exciting to girls who traditionally are on the margins  of technological
              experience.  The program seeks to increase the number of girls (and boys) who 
              are excited about science and technology and encourage to their continuing
              interest; to stimulate  parents to become advocates for their daughters'
              endeavors in science and technology; and to  train teachers to promote girls'
              confidence and competence in problem-solving and in real life  applications of
              mathematics and science concepts.  The program targets girls at a critical time
               in their educational development, pre-adolescence, before sex role stereotypes
              are solidified.  (During the first phase of the project, funded in 1992-94 by
              an Eisenhower Mathematics and  Science Education grant, 40 teachers, grades
              4-6, field tested original technology activities with  240 families in an
              after-school program.)    Objectives for this second phase of the project
              include:  (1) involving and encouraging girls,  (boys), and their parents in a
              hands-on technology program, FT2, by training a cadre of teachers  in the
              necessary facilitation, motivation, and science, pre-engineering, and
              mathematics skills;   (2) supervising the program in 12 urban, suburban, and
              rural schools, with diverse groups of  majority and minority girls, (boys), and
              their parents;  (3) providing technical assistance and  access to the FT2
              Resource Center to reinfor ce and sustain the interest of these girls, parents,
               and teachers in science, technology, and mathematics activities and related
              careers;  (4)  observing and evaluating the impact and effectiveness of the
              program (activities, materials,  facilitating and motivating strategies, and
              the career component) on participants (girls, their  parents, and teachers). 
              Ultimately, it is hoped that FT2 will become a national parental  involvement
              program, increasing awareness of the need for technological literacy by
              providing  a model program for girls and their parents that can be
              institutionalized in NJ and disseminated  to other states.  A multimedia
              package (teacher's manual and video) are to be produced and a  Leadership
              Institute is to be designed and conducted to prepare a cadre of FT2 teachers to
               become trainers of other teachers to facilitate dissemination of this model. 
              ***
