Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows Award - Observational Cosmology and Active
               Star-Forming Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9553020

Award Number: 9553020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Salzer slaz@parcha.astro.wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1217,9296,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  John J. Salzer  Wesleyan University        Galaxies that have active
              nuclei, or regions of intense starburst  activity,  represent  examples of the 
              most  energetic  phenomena  known  in  the universe.   Galaxian activity is
              very  common  and  occurs  on  all  scales,  from the super  luminous 
              quasi-stellar  objects  (QSOs),  down  to  the extremely  active 
              star-formation  regions in blue compact dwarf galaxies.  Much of our knowledge
              of  active galactic nuclei (AGNs) and starburst galaxies have come by  studying
              galaxies cataloged in objective-prism surveys which used  observations   by 
              Schmidt  telescopes  and  data   recorded   on  photographic  plates.   The
              opportunity  to  use  more  sensitive  charge coupled device (CCD) detectors to
              survey for emission-line  galaxies  now  exists,  and  initial observations 
              have  provided  results  that  have shown great promise to provide  better 
              data.  The  large, deep samples obtained from CCD-based Schmidt  surveys  will 
               provide  exciting  new  opportunities  to  study  galaxian  activity  of all
              types, and should allow us to better  understand  this activity in the context
              of galaxy formation and evolution in  general.    The  research  will involve
              carrying out the next  generation  of  objective-prism surveys for
              emission-line galaxies. The technique  to  be  used  combines  the  benefits of
               a  traditional  Qchmidt  telescope survey with the advantages of using a CCD
              detector.  It  is  planned to survey several hundred square degrees of sky to 
              a  limiting  magnitude  of B = 20 - 21 over  the  next  five  years.  Computer
              software developed specifically for this program will be  used  to 
              automatically locate, extract, and classify the spectra  in  each field, and
              use pattern matching algorithms to select our  sample  of  emission-line
              galaxies.  An  initial  pilot  project,  carried  out  in  the  Spring  of
              1994,  has  verified  that  our  technique  is  indeed capable of reaching the
              desired  magnitude.  It  is conservatively  estimated that 20-30 emission-line
              galaxies  will  be  found per square degree, roughly 200 times the  surface 
              density   of   the  galaxies  in  the  Markarian   survey.    The 
              emission-line    galaxy    candidates    will     be     observed 
              spectroscopically  using  a multi-fiber  spectrograph  to  obtain  redshifts
              and line strengths for the full sample.    The  results obtained from analyzing
              the data of this deep sample  of AGNs and star-forming galaxies will have
              numerous applications  to  the  study  of  galaxian  activity.   These 
              include:  global  star-formation  processes, chemical evolution  in  galaxies, 
              the  value  of  the primordial helium abundance, luminosity  functions  and 
              space  densities of AGN and actively star-forming  galaxies,  large-scale
              structure and observational cosmology.
