Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships: Integrating Science, Technology, and Management
               in Global Civil Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a9553380

Award Number: 9553380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue McNeil   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9553380  McNeil                                  Carnegie Mellon University
              is  proposing an innovative GRT program  that focuses on the joint impact of 
              science, technology and management  on global Civil Infrastructure  Systems.
              The student training will  include an appreciation and  understanding of the
              current state  of the U.S. Infrastructure systems,  an exposure to advances in
              other  areas of critical importance to  encourage interdisciplinary  technology
              transfer and  development, and internships abroad  and in national laboratories
              and  industries to provide the cultural  breadth and to bridge theory and 
              application. The research program  for each student will emphasize a  unified
              strategy towards  deterioration science, assessment  technologies, and renewal 
              engineering. This research vision  will enable the student to leapfrog  the
              current myopic strategy of  "design and new construction" to  unified strategy
              that recognizes  the importance of a systems  approach, good science, new and 
              emerging technologies and sound  management practices to sustain 
              infrastructure over its life. The  proposed training program will  provide the
              graduates with the  opportunity to be future leaders in  the development and
              sustenance of  U.S. and international  infrastructure. We will actively 
              recruit underrepresented groups  building on our success with  working with
              women graduate  students and utilizing our links to  other institutions. We
              have an  excellent track record with respect  to retention and intend to
              maintain  this through not only providing a  unique education experience but 
              also by maintaining strong advisor-  student relationships. The  innovative
              elements of the program  are also attractive for students  interested in a
              holistic graduate  experience.
