Title       : Virginia Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9553789

Award Number: 9553789
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5846331            (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuben W. Farley rwfarley@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Virginia Urban Corridor Teacher Preparation Collaborative is a  joint effort
              of the liberal arts and science and education  faculties of universities and
              colleges (Longwood College, Mary  Washington College, Norfolk State University,
              and Virginia  Commonwealth University) who train the large majority of 
              prospective teachers within Virginia's urban corridor, the region's  Community
              Colleges (Germana, J. Sargeant Reynolds, Tidewater), the  Virginia Mathematics
              and Science Coalition,  and the regional  school systems.    The goal of the
              Collaborative is to implement programs that will  prepare K-8 teachers who have
              strong science and mathematics  backgrounds, who  enjoy science and
              mathematics, who understand  what is known about the types of teaching that
              enable students to  learn, and whose teaching will reflect their scientific and
               pedagogical knowledge.    The Collaborative will put in place policies that
              require and  encourage prospective teachers to study more, and more
              appropriate,  science and mathematics. All science and mathematics courses
              taken  by prospective K-8 teachers will be renewed and reformed by  adapting
              the "best practices" being developed nationwide. Course  revision teams will
              include faculty from science disciplines,  education departments, and master
              teachers from the school systems.  A cadre of Clinical Faculty will work to
              improve all aspects of   the teacher preparation program, including the
              in-school  experiences of prospective and new teachers.  Recruitment and 
              retention efforts will enlist students in a teacher preparation   program to
              work with the faculty as Teaching Associates.  The  Collaborative will include
              three cross-fertilization/dissemination  activities:  an annual week-long
              Science and Mathematics  colloquium;  an annual four-week long Institute
              featuring courses  which are being developed by Collaborative institutions, and
              a  published journal devoted to the  preparation of prospective K-8  teachers
              in  science and mathematics.  This Collaborativ e will  impact policies
              required for preparation of K-8 teachers; improve  the  nature and quality of
              instruction in mathematics and the  sciences; improve in-school experiences of
              prospective teachers;  enhance recruitment of qualified teachers of science and
               mathematics, particularly for underrepresented groups; and promote  the
              dissemination of materials and approaches within the  Collaborative and beyond.
