Title       : Southeast Community College - A Chemical Technology Curriculum and Materials
               Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9553674

Award Number: 9553674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191590             (Estimated)
Investigator: John V. Kenkel jvkenkel@sccm.cc.ne.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul B. Kelter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeast CC
	      8800 O Street
	      Lincoln, NE  685201227    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Southeast Community College (SCC) will establish a National  Center of
              Excellence for Chemistry-Based Technician Education at  its Lincoln, Nebraska,
              campus.  Through this center, SCC will  coordinate and direct a comprehensive
              curriculum and educational  materials development project for chemistry-based
              technician  education.  The new curriculum will be developed for associate 
              degree programs with input from a national consortium of employed  technicians,
              business and industry representatives, community  college and high school
              instructors, university professors, and the  American Chemical Society's
              National Voluntary Industry Standards  project.  A new curriculum will also be
              developed for those already  employed as chemistry technicians following a
              comprehensive survey  of as many employed technicians as can be reached
              nationally with  the help of local alliances and the American Chemical
              Society's  Division of Chemical Technicians.  Both traditional and 
              technologically advanced educational materials will be developed  for all
              curriculum projects and published and/or distributed for  the purpose of
              delivering the new curricula in a manner consistent  with modern educational
              theories and systems.  Workshops for the  enhancement of high school and
              community college faculty will be  held during the summers in cooperation with
              local industries.   Topics of the workshops will center around the modern work
              place  and associated instrumentation and technologies community colleges  use
              in the training of technicians.  Marketing of chemistry  technology as a career
              will be addressed, with special attention  given to underrepresented groups, 
              To help the center achieve these  goals, all chemistry technician training
              programs, their students  and graduates, the business and industrial
              communities they serve,  and the feeder high schools in their areas will be
              united into a  national community college network centered at SCC.  The entire 
              project will be guided by a national advisory board and a s teering  committee.
