Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9553031

Award Number: 9553031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen R. Foltz foltz@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9296,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  ***  9553031  Foltz      NSF Presidential Faculty Fellowship  ABSTRACT   
              Research in our laboratory centers around two major questions. First, how is it
              that the sperm and egg specifically interact? That is, why is fertilization
              species-specific? And second, once the sperm binds an egg, how is the egg
              "activated" to begin development? These two interesting but rather broad
              questions are related at a molecular level. Using the sea urchin as a model
              system, we have helped identify and characterize a transmembrane protein on the
              egg surface which binds sperm species-specifically. This same protein
              (designated the "sperm receptor") is also rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated by an
              egg kinase at the time of sperm binding, suggesting that it may be involved in
              events that signal egg activation.  One of our long-term goals is to identify
              the structural aspects of the receptor protein which are responsible for
              species-specific interactions. To this end, we are identifying and
              characterizing receptor homologs in other species for comparison with that of
              the purple sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus). In addition, we are
              assessing variation in the receptor among individuals of the sarne species.
              This is to test a relatively new idea (put forth primarily by Dr. Steve Palumbi
              at the University of Hawaii and Dr. Vic Vacquier at Scripps Institute of
              Oceanography) that gamete recognition molecules such as the sperm receptor will
              have high intraspecific allelic variability that serves to promote
              diversity-enhancing selection. We also hope to be able to obtain crystals and
              eventually three-dimensional structural data for the sperm receptor. We are
              able to purify large quantities of recombinant receptor protein that binds
              sperm spccies-specifically~ which iS a major first-step towards this goal. If
              successful, we will combine mutational analysis and species-specific domain
              swapping experiments to get at the molecular basis of gamete recognition.  The
              other aspect of the research in the laboratory addresse s the mechanism of egg
              activation. There are two basic hypotheses for how this occurs. One model is
              that the sperm delivers an "activating factor" at the time of fusion that
              triggers egg signaling pathways to initiate development. Another model is that
              sperm binding triggers a receptor-mediated signal transduction event. Despite
              years of investigation, neither hypothesis has been adequately tested. In fact,
              the two mechanisms are not necessarily mutually exclusive; so many changes
              occur during "egg activation" that independent pathways could exist. Now that
              we have identified a candidate receptor on the egg surface, we plan to test the
              hypothesis that this receptor mediates a signal transduction event at the time
              of sperm binding. We have already established that the receptor interacts with
              a src-like tyrosine kinase and is phosphorylated within seconds of sperm
              binding. Our task now is to investigate whether or not this is necessary for
              egg activation. We will employ several strategies, including a straightforward
              search for signaling proteins that interact with the receptor and the role they
              may play in activation. But the real test will require that we "knockout" the
              ability of the receptor to signal and then ask if activation occurs. In order
              to accomplish this, we will express the sea urchin sperm receptor in a starfish
              oocyte.                                                                        
                                     If sea urchin sperm now bind to this oocyte and activate
              it, then we are in a position to test the hypothesis. We will then express a
              sea urchin sperm receptor that has been mutated such that it is missing the
              cytoplasmic signaling domain or has point mutations in that domain.            
                                                                       If sperm bind to the
              oocytes expressing the mutated receptor but no activation occurs, this would
              support the receptor-mediated activation hypothesis. If this does not appear to
              be the case, we will begin to assess the alternative hy pothesis in greater
              detail. Either way, having the ability to deal with molecular details of
              recognition and activation puts us in the exciting position of being able to
              investigate these basic questions about how development starts.  ***
