Title       : Automation and Characterization of Environmental Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1996      
File        : a9553363

Award Number: 9553363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Knox rknox@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Baxter E. Vieux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ken C. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall L. Kolar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Douglas Elmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Gremillion  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9553363  Knox  The goal of this initiative is to improve the understanding of 
              interrelated environmental processes within surface and subsurface  aqueous
              ecosystems.  To work toward that goal, the Oklahoma  EPSCoR Committee will to
              complete an automated environmental  monitoring system and develop a detailed
              site characterization  database for a landfill ecosystem.  These efforts will
              involve  equipment acquisitions and focused research applications.  
              Development of the landfill site into an automated, characterized  research
              facility will be coordinated with the United States  Geological Survey (USGS),
              which recently selected the landfill as  the next field research site for its
              Toxic Substances Hydrology  Program.              The Automation Component of
              this initiative centers around the  Oklahoma Mesonetwork, an outstanding
              example of the application of  technology for the benefit of people and
              programs.  The  MESONET is a statewide network of automated environmental 
              monitoring stations.  Each station measures a variety of  environmental
              parameters (temperature, wind speed, soil moisture,  etc.) every 15 minutes and
              transmits the data to a receiving  location via the Oklahoma Law Enforcement
              Telecommunications  Network.  The data is quality assured, archived, and made
              available  within 15 minutes to multiple agencies around the state.  Two 
              MESONET towers are planned for deployment at the Norman landfill  research
              facility.  The objective of the Automation Component of  this initiative is to
              install networks of selected environmental  sensors and exploit the
              capabilities of MESONET for remote,  continuous, real-time, environmental
              monitoring.  By using the  MESONET system, the landfill research site and its
              associated  characterization datbase will be made available to researchers 
              throughout the state.    The Research Component of this initiative is focused
              on developing  an accurate and detailed description of the surface and
              subsurface  flow and contaminant transport regimes at the lan dfill.  The 
              research work proposed herein was developed in direct consultation  with the U.
              S. Geological Survey (USGS); hence, each project is  designed to complement
              research activities of the USGS.  The  research activities will focus on
              quantifying/qualifying certain  hydrologic interactions and subsurface biotic
              processes.  In  addition, tracer studies would be conducted and geophysical
              surveys  will be conducted at the research facility.  Selected sensors 
              associated with these research efforts will utilize the MESONET  system to
              transmit data.  The objective of the Research Component  of the initiative is
              to characterize the surface and subsurface  flow regimes of the landfill
              ecosystem using innovative  monitoring, measurement, and modeling techniques.
