Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex Systems in Quantum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9203829

Award Number: 9203829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan P. Solovej   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Three topics in mathematical quantum theory of systems of                 
              many degrees of freedom will be investigated in this project.  Of              
              main interest are problems related to the structure and stability              
              of matter.                                                                     
                   First, rigorous estimates will be established on the effects              
              of correlations between many electron on the binding and                       
              ionization in atomic and molecular systems.                                    
                   Second, the structure of matter  on the surface of a neutron              
              star under large magnetic fields will be mathematically analyzed.              
              This study involves the fairly  new area of semiclassical                      
              analysis in the presence of a magnetic field.                                  
                   Third, are problems related to the statistical mechanics of               
              quantum spin systems, especially the systems with continuous                   
              symmetry.                                                                      
                   Quantum mechanics is probably one of the most successful                  
              attempts to give a mathematical description of the world around                
              us.  However, while many complex quantum mechanically systems are              
              fairly well understood at a somewhat heuristic level, a complete               
              mathematical analysis of these systems is very difficult and very              
              often lacking.  The lack of a detailed mathematical analysis of                
              these systems is not separate from a lack of complete                          
              understanding of the underlying physics.  The mathematical                     
              analysis of a series of these complex physical systems will be                 
              attempted and it is the hoped that new mathematical as well as                 
              physical insight will emerge.
