Title       : Intelligent Bus Extender Crossbar Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1992 
File        : a9203074

Award Number: 9203074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Farrelle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Optivision Incorporated
	      3450 Hillview Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    415/855-0200

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4095,
Abstract    :
              This project is funded under the National Science Foundation's                 
              (NSF) Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which is              
              designed to provide an opportunity for small business,                         
              particularly the small high technology firm, to participate in                 
              NSF research.  Phase I of the SBIR program serves as a filter to               
              select promising proposals and determine if the firm can do high               
              quality research.  Phase II is the principal research project.                 
              Phase III is the conversion of the NSF-funded research into                    
              commercial applications and technological innovation supported by              
              follow-on private venture capital or other non-federal financing.              
              This Phase II project addresses the need in networked                          
              environments to provide quick and efficient                                    
              application-to-application data transfers between workstations                 
              without the overhead of software network protocols.  The solution              
              advanced by the principal investigator is to move key software                 
              functions from the operating system device driver into hardware                
              and firmware, and by using a packet switch to interconnect the                 
              workstations.  The Phase I effort developed a preliminary                      
              designfor this network, called the FOX Network.  Phase II                      
              involves constructing a prototype FOX Network, testing to                      
              determine network performance, and developing an application for               
              visual demnostration of the benefits of the network.  Potential                
              application areas include simulation problems,                                 
              visualization-intensive applications, and large shared databases.
