Title       : Mathematical Sciences: LP Regularity for Nonelliptic Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9203904

Award Number: 9203904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41359              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hart F. Smith hart@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports mathematical research concerned with                  
              nonlinear differential equations which are nonelliptic.  The                   
              goals are to establish regularity results about solutions                      
              belonging to classes of functions in various spaces called                     
              Sobolev spaces.                                                                
                   The differential operators under consideration are inverted               
              through integral formulas of the Fourier-Airy type. These have an              
              oscillatory kernel and are under intensive investigation at this               
              time. Currently it is possible to obtain the mapping properties                
              of the integral operators within a small loss of derivative; work              
              is being done to show that one need not assume this extra loss.                
              Other emphasis will be placed on establishing the p-th power                   
              regularity of solutions of the wave equation on the complement of              
              strictly convex obstacles.  Some good results have been obtained               
              from a model case, by considering the problem with boundary a                  
              fixed distance from the obstacle and then letting the distance                 
              decrease.  If this technique can be validated in the general case              
              it will not only provide an existence proof of regularity but                  
              also provide a convergence method for approximating boundary                   
              data.                                                                          
                   Additional work is being carried out on the oblique                       
              derivative problem, where boundary data is given in terms of                   
              'flux' passing through the boundary at oblique and even                        
              tangential directions.  Two methods of solutions are known, each               
              depending on additional assumptions.  Efforts will be made to                  
              make sharp comparisons between them.
