Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Evolutionary Approaches to the Analysis and
               Synthesis of Artificial Life and Complex Adaptive Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9203229

Award Number: 9203229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey F. Miller geoffrey@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 6856,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long and Medium-Term Research:  Evolutionary Approaches to                     
              the Analysis and Synthesis of Artificial Life and Complex Adaptive             
              Systems                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. Geoffrey F. Miller to work with Dr. Phil Husbands at the                
              University of Sussex.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Evolutionary psychology and artificial life research have developed            
              almost entirely independently, although the failures which they                
              sought to correct, in psychology and in Artificial Life, respectively,         
              stem from the same problem: lack of an evolutionary framework                  
              for analyzing and synthesizing complex adaptive systems.  Dr.                  
              Miller's postdoc term will allow him to facilitate dialogue between            
              these two fields by 1) familiarizing himself with existing                     
              evolutionary theory, ethology, psychology, and computer science in             
              Europe, 2) allowing evolutionary psychology principles to be                   
              disseminated throughout the research groups in Europe, and 3)                  
              allowing the empirical test of the utility and adequacy of these               
              principles in real-world applications (i.e. robotics) and in his               
              continued experimental psychology research.  Since both of these               
              fields are at early but promising stages of development, their                 
              intellectual cross-fertilization should be fruitful.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for twelve months.
