Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Problems and Inverse Spectral Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1993  
File        : a9203771

Award Number: 9203771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Percy A. Deift   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project will focus on two fundamental areas of                       
              nonlinear mathematical analysis involving integrable systems of                
              differential equations.  Particular emphasis is placed on the                  
              relationship between eigenvalue algorithms and Hamiltonian                     
              mechanics. The first concerns the asymptotics of the oscillatory               
              Riemann-Hilbert problems of the kind that arise in the theory of               
              integrable nonlinear wave equations.  Work will be done                        
              exploiting a newly developed steepest descent method to study the              
              zero dispersion limit of the Korteweg de Vries equation,                       
              integrable statistical models such as the transverse Ising chain               
              at critical magnetic field and spatially discrete problems, such               
              as the Toda lattice.  Work will also continue on the eigenvalue                
              algorithms in the context of integrable systems.  It was shown                 
              earlier how the basic diagonalization of finite dimensional                    
              matrices can be realized as flows on manifolds.  A framework has               
              been developed in which many well known systems of physical and                
              mathematical interest can be embedded.  One focus of this                      
              investigation will be to place the recent theory of Moser and                  
              Veselov describing a class of variational problems that can be                 
              solved by a generalized QR factorization into the framework of                 
              Hamiltonian flows. The principal object of this research is the                
              analysis of systems of differential equations arising from models              
              of the physical world and the application of that analysis to                  
              studies of finite dimensional matrix theory; in particular the                 
              development of new, computationally effective means for                        
              diagonalization of matrices.                                                   
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them and validate methods for                    
              expressing solutions.
