Title       : Statistical Issues in Geometric Tolerance Verification UsingCoordinate Measuring
               Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9203054

Award Number: 9203054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary M. Dowling   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chen Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1463,9146,
Abstract    :
                   There is currently little or no guidance in the tolerancing               
              standards for evaluating geometric variation of part feature using             
              coordinate measuring machines (CMMs).  Practitioners are faced with            
              many important but unanswered questions, including the number of               
              measurements that should be made on a part feature, and the                    
              location of such measurements.  Since the standard requires                    
              knowledge of the entire feature while a CMM can take only a small              
              sample in a reasonable time period, there are no simple answers to             
              these questions.  The objective of this research is to develop a               
              rigorous procedure for the verification of standard geometric                  
              tolerance specifications, developing tradeoffs between accuracy and            
              cost.  The research will involve the following tasks:  a detailed              
              study of parts to allow identification of common profile variation             
              patterns for specific processes; the development and evaluation of             
              estimation techniques for the measurement of geometric variation;              
              and the study of the relationship between the number of                        
              measurements and the resulting sampling risks.                                 
                   The impact of the research will be in several areas, including            
              the development of a procedure to determine an appropriate number              
              and location of measurements to satisfy specified risk levels.                 
              Prior information will be exploited regarding feature                          
              characteristics to reduce sample sizes while maintaining the same              
              estimation accuracy.  Educational impact will also be included in              
              the form of classroom instruction, research students, seminars, and            
              conferences.
