Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Impact of Market-Oriented Policy Reforms on
               Households in Rural China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1993    
File        : a9203958

Award Number: 9203958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Sands   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1320,
Abstract    :
              The general purpose of this cooperative project is to carry out a              
              micro-level based investigation of the evolution and functioning               
              of rural market institutions in China.  Questions regarding both               
              individual and aggregate household behavior within newly-                      
              established rural markets will be addressed through the analysis               
              of data gathered in a multi-purpose household-level survey that                
              will be modeled after the World Bank's Living Standard                         
              Measurement Study (LSMS) survey.  This household-level survey,                 
              which will be undertaken in the provinces of Hebel and Liaoning,               
              will be carried out in the Spring of 1993, and will extend to                  
              between 1200-1500 households in 24 villages.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project will contribute to our understanding of the                       
              complexities involved in economic institutional change through                 
              providing a case study of household decision-making amidst                     
              China's recent rural economic reforms.  Intended contributions                 
              are several:  First, the project will help to identify those                   
              factors at the local level in China that are presently impeding                
              an expansion in the role of product and factor markets in                      
              resource allocation, and provide estimates of the resulting                    
              inefficiency.  Second, with elasticities obtained from the                     
              construction of an agricultural household model, the implications              
              of alternative price and tax policies in the agricultural sector               
              can be investigated, and better policies formulated.  Third,                   
              drawing on the household and village level data, estimates of the              
              degree of inequality both in consumption and income at the local               
              level can obtained, and sources of the inequality diagnosed.  And              
              fourth, drawing on time-series data dating back to the Land                    
              Reform, the implications of alternative policies for                           
              agriculture's long-term development will be investigated.  This                
              kind of analysis will not only help to resolve lingering                       
              questions relating to the impact of rural reforms on productivity              
              and growth but will be of much wider interest now that Eastern                 
              Europe and the Soviet Union are embarking on similar paths.
