Title       : Development of an Atomic Force Microscope for Use in Ultra-High Vacuum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1992     
File        : a9203133

Award Number: 9203133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William N. Unertl unertl@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Lad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The design and construction of an atomic force microscope (AFM)                
              suitable for operation in an ultra-high vacuum environment (UHV)               
              will be carried out in this project.  The AFM will have                        
              interchangeable cantilever-tip assemblies, in situ sample exchange,            
              and a field ion microscope (FIM) for tip characterization.  The AFM            
              will permit fundamental studies of adhesion, wear, and surface                 
              microstructure.  In particular, nanometer scale studies of the                 
              following will be carried out: (a) mass transfer caused by contact             
              between the tip and sample; (b) nanometer scale indentation of                 
              surface and thin film mechanical properties; (c) frictional forces             
              between the tip and sample; (d) surface structure by imaging in                
              contact and non-contact modes.                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              The AFM will be incorporated into an existing UHV surface analysis             
              system equipped for Auger spectroscopy, ion sputtering, and in situ            
              polymer and metal vapor deposition of thin films.  Research will               
              focus on the surface properties of non-conducting materials,                   
              specifically ceramics, polymers, and their composites.  Thin films             
              of metals and metal oxides on these materials will also be studied.            
              The FIM will allow the study of tip damage and mass transfer during            
              contact under well characterized conditions.  The UHV AFM/FIM                  
              system will also be capable of scanning tunneling microscopy                   
              studies.
