Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Bergmann Projection, the d-bar- Neumann Operator, and
               Holomorphic Mappings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9203514

Award Number: 9203514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold P. Boas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Emil J. Straube  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports a continuation of mathematical research               
              into problems associated with holomorphic functions and mappings               
              in the theory of several complex variables.  In addition to                    
              function theoretic methods, the work exploits the deep                         
              connections of the subject with partial differential equations.                
                   Among the most challenging open questions in several complex              
              variables is that of understanding the orthogonal projection of                
              functions (with finite quadratic norm) defined on a domain in the              
              space of several complex variables onto the subspace of                        
              holomorphic functions.  This is known as the Bergman projection.               
              The primary goal is to determine when the projection preserves                 
              differentiability up to the boundary.  A number of solutions have              
              been determined under various finiteness conditions on the                     
              domain.  The current work will pursue a line of investigation                  
              involving the construction of special vector fields which has led              
              to a broad class of results.  The ultimate goal is to use these                
              techniques to establish a general theory of regularity on domains              
              of infinite type.  The continuity of the Bergman projection and                
              the related d-bar Neumann operator in spaces other than quadratic              
              Sobolev spaces will also be studied.                                           
                   Since the Bergman projections are not always regular, there               
              is a need to determine obstructions to regularity as well as                   
              conditions for its presence.  It is known that the topology of                 
              the set of points of infinite type is not sufficient to give                   
              complete information about obstructions.  Some potential-                      
              theoretic condition on the d-bar Neumann operator must be found                
              to combine with any topological conditions.
