Title       : Reliability Based Bridge Inspection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1996   
File        : a9203276

Award Number: 9203276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehrdad Soltani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Bridge management is concerned with the improvement of existing                
              bridges through systematic inspection and maintenance.                         
              Inspection of bridges in the United States is normally performed               
              at two-year intervals, subject to change if requested by state                 
              agencies.  A bridge deterioration model obtained through                       
              statistical analysis of bridge inspection data as well as                      
              reliability evaluation of the bridge can be used as a basis for                
              the selection of a more objective inspection interval.  The                    
              statistical analysis will be applied to bridges in states with                 
              more diverse environmental and climatic conditions for a more                  
              complete evaluation of the current inspection practice.                        
                                                                                             
              A methodology is presented for quantifying inspection intervals                
              using reliability analysis and determining existing and future                 
              reliabilities of a bridge.  The conceptual inspection strategy                 
              schedules bridge inspection based on the prediction of the bridge              
              condition.  A simple bridge case study is presented to show the                
              effectiveness of such program.  Certain assumptions and                        
              approximations that are made for this case study will be studied               
              in detail and a comprehensive reliability based inspection                     
              strategy will be developed.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The National Bridge Inventory lacks structural properties that                 
              are needed in the reliability analysis.  Recommendations will be               
              presented for the creation of a bridge database using existing                 
              Computer Aided Design and Drafting (CADD) technology.
