Title       : Adaptive and Robust Nonlinear Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1992 
File        : a9203491

Award Number: 9203491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petar V. Kokotovic petar@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The ideal goal of feedback control theory, "to                                 
              employ imperfect models and design perfect                                     
              systems,"  critically depends on the characterizations                         
              of model imperfections and on the design                                       
              methodology.  If the uncertain nonlinearities can be                           
              characterized by a nonlinear bound or by a                                     
              parametrization for which an adaptive design is a                              
              available, then, as some of our results show, the                              
              designed system may be "perfect" in the sense that                             
              the ideal tracking performance is achieved globally.                           
              In this research we introduce structural and                                   
              parametric characterizations of model uncertainties                            
              and use them to develop adaptive and robust                                    
              nonlinear feedback designs which reduce the effects                            
              of uncertainties on system performance.  We plan                               
              to employ tuning functions to develop new adaptive                             
              output-feedback schemes with minimal                                           
              parametrizations and reduced complexity.  Our new                              
              partial-state-feedback schemes will exploit structural                         
              information to assess tradeoffs between additional                             
              measurements and stability augmentation.  We will                              
              analyze robustness not only with respect to                                    
              unmodeled dynamics and bound disturbance, but                                  
              also with respect to unmodeled nonlinearities.  The                            
              dead-zone and hysteresis characteristics are the                               
              representatives of the applications-motivated                                  
              uncertain nonlinearities to be addressed in the                                
              second part of this research.
