Title       : PRF: Hormonal regulation of reproductive behavioral plasticity in burying
               beetles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9203261

Award Number: 9203261
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Trumbo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many key questions in behavioral ecology can be profitably                     
              addressed by applying endocrinological techniques.  This research              
              will examine the physiological basis of plasticity of reproductive             
              behavior in a biparental burying beetle (Nicrophorus orbicollis).              
              Correlative analyses will be used in two ways to implicate                     
              specific hormones in the regulation of reproductive behavior.                  
              First, titer curves for juvenile hormone and ecdysteroids will be              
              developed for both males and females across a complete                         
              reproductive cycle. Second, environmental variables will be                    
              manipulated to alter the quality and duration of paternal care;                
              these behavioral responses will be matched to concurrent hormonal              
              responses.  To examine the casual relationship between hormones                
              and behavior, hormone treatments will be made in an attempt to                 
              induce changes in behavioral patterns.  The endocrine techniques               
              that are developed will subsequently be utilized as sensitive                  
              probes to identify the particular environmental stimuli that                   
              influence decision-making in burying beetles.  Hormonal                        
              manipulations will also be employed to alter male parental                     
              behavior in order to examine effects on reproductive success,                  
              female parental behavior, costs of maternal care and host                      
              selection by a symbiotic phoretic mite.  For the first time, this              
              study will integrate hormonal and behavioral analyses of an                    
              invertebrate species that exhibits biparental care, infanticide                
              and mate desertion and thus will bring new depth to the study of               
              plasticity of reproductive behavior.
