Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Beam Propogation Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1993  
File        : a9203842

Award Number: 9203842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Moses Glasner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9203842  Glasner       Propagation methods for the Schrodinger equation in
              quantum  mechanics, the Fresnel equation in guided-wave optics or the  paraxial
              equation in acoustics have been based on the  approximation of the exponential
              of the sum of two non-commuting  operators.  Recently a number of researchers
              have introduced a  variety of high order splittings of the exponential into
              products  of exponentials, leading to high order FFT based methods.  The 
              investigator and collaborators have established that the  exponentials can be
              replaced by Pade approximants  yielding finite-difference or finite-element
              methods and also  that high order splittings are possible in the time-dependent
               case.  The first part of this proposal is to extend the  applicability of
              these methods.  The investigator and  collaborators have introduced Lanczos
              reduction techniques for  approximating the reflection coefficient associated
              with the  planar interface of two inhomogeneous refractive index media.   The
              second part of this proposal is to develop accurate and rapid  high order
              wide-angle approximations to the Helmholtz equation  base on Lanczos reduction,
              making it feasible to model highly  divergent beams in components such as
              reflectors and microprisms.   The investigator is also examining the
              possibility of using  propagation techniques to accurately generate soliton
              solutions  to a variety of nonlinear Schrodinger equations.       The
              investigator has, in collaboration with  electrical engineers, developed
              techniques for mathematically  modeling the propagation of light through
              electro-optical  devices, such as waveguides, filters, gratings, corner 
              reflectors, switches and modulators.  The ability to use  computers to simulate
              light passing through devices reduces the  time and cost involved in designing
              new devices by cutting the  number of actual physical models that are needed in
              the process.   The results of these collaborations are already in use at a 
              variety of research and development centers, inclu ding Hughes  Aircraft,
              Corning Glass, AMOCO Technology Center, Bell Northern  Research, NIST.  The
              range of applicability of the modeling  techniques and their efficiency must
              keep pace with the constant  introduction of new materials and the down-sizing
              of components.   It is anticipated that the proposed research will provide some
              of  these improved modeling techniques and thereby will have an  economic and
              strategic impact on technologies based on these  devices, including optical
              communications.  The research should  also affect other fields that deal with
              wave phenomena,  for example acoustics, seismology, quantum chemistry and
              physics.  ***
