Title       : RUI: Deep Crustal Structure of the Ivory Coast Basin: an Ocean-Bottom
               Seismograph Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9203474

Award Number: 9203474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39997              (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. O'Brien   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwestern University
	      1001 East University Avenue
	      Georgetown, TX  78626    512/863-6511

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              This research involves the analysis and interpretation of a large-             
              airgun OBS seismic refraction data set collected in the Gulf of                
              Guinea, offshore West Africa.  This data set is a subset of a                  
              larger one collected by French scientists in 1990.  This part of               
              the African margin is known as the Ivory Coast-Ghana Margin, and is            
              an example of a passive margin formed through transform rifting.               
              The crustal structures developed during transform rifting are                  
              relatively poorly understood. Seismic refraction data offer one of             
              the best means of determining crustal thicknesses and structures               
              resulting from this process.  Information derived from the seismic             
              refraction data analysis will also be used as part of a site survey            
              for upcoming ODP activities in the area.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              When continents rift apart, they may do so through divergent (major            
              direction of motion perpendicular to continent-continent boundary              
              line) or transform (major direction of motion parallel to                      
              continent-continent boundary line) processes.   The latter process             
              has not been studied in as much detail as the former, and is                   
              relatively poorly understood.  The rifting record is contained in              
              now-buried and submerged structures within passive margins, or                 
              trailing edges of continents.  These structures can perhaps be best            
              determined through deep seismic sounding techniques.                           
                                                                                             
              Within the area offshore West Africa known as the Ivory Coast-Ghana            
              Margin, lie submerged features that record the transform rifting               
              that occurred between West Africa and Brazil in the Cretaceous.                
              Ocean Bottom Seismometer seismic refraction data collected in 1990             
              will be analyzed and interpreted, resulting in a picture of                    
              subsurface structures in this region.  In addition to answering                
              fundamental questions concerning the nature of structures contained            
              within transform passive margins, the seismic data will be used as             
              background information for upcoming Ocean Drilling Project                     
              activities in the area.
