Title       : PRF: Multiply-sired Fruits in Field Populations of Lesquerella fendler:
               Occurence and Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9203203

Award Number: 9203203
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1176,
Abstract    :
                   While the potential for sexual selection as an important                  
              factor in plant evolution is now becoming recognized, there is                 
              surprisingly little direct knowledge about how often conditions                
              required for its actions occur.  One indication of the                         
              opportunity for sexual selection in plants is the occurrence of                
              multiply sired fruits.  Such fruits are unambiguous evidence that              
              pollen from more than one mate was available to fertilize seeds,               
              and therefore indicate that female choice of male competition                  
              (forms of sexual selection) may act.  However, there is detailed               
              knowledge about the frequency of multiply sired fruits for only a              
              single, introduced species.  The P.I. will study the occurrence                
              of and mechanisms causing multiply sired fruits for a native                   
              plant of South Western deserts, Lesquerella fendleri.  To                      
              determine frequency, the P.I. will ascertain paternity for seeds               
              from plants in 3 separate populations at the Sevilleta Long-Term               
              Ecological Research Site.  Preliminary studies indicate that                   
              Lesquerella fruits are commonly multiply sired.  To determine the              
              mechanisms causing multiply sired fruits two approaches will be                
              taken.  First, paternity resulting from single and multiple                    
              pollinator visits in nature will be compared.  Second, observed                
              pollinator visitation rates will be used to construct a realistic              
              schedule of hand pollinations to investigate the effects of                    
              single and multiple visits under more controlled conditions.                   
              Knowledge of the responsible mechanisms will not only help to                  
              predict which species are likely to produce multiply sired                     
              fruits, but can help delimit their possible evolutionary                       
              consequences.
