Title       : SGER: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Biogeochemistry of Individual Proteins of Ancient
               and Modern Gastropods: A Molecular Level Approach to the Study of Diagenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1992   
File        : a9203995

Award Number: 9203995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy H. Ostrom ostrom@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   Organic material isolated from fossils provides a potential               
              substrate for determining paleoecological and taxonomic                        
              relationships based on isotopic and amino acid data.  Present                  
              criteria for evaluating indigeneity has focused on a bulk organic              
              fraction derived from fossils and includes analysis of amino acid              
              abundances and enantiomers and comparison of the  13C and  15N                 
              values of the fossil material to those of the modern organism.                 
              These criteria incorporate two assumptions that 1) the bulk organic            
              material is homogeneous and 2) the relative abundance of amino                 
              acids and the isotopic compositions are comparable to a modern                 
              analog.  The difficulties with these assumptions are that the bulk             
              material is not homogeneous but rather composed of several                     
              different proteins and the organic matrix of fossils may be                    
              altered. If the diagenetic product obtained from a fossil is a                 
              consequence of differential loss or retention of specific protein              
              fractions then the geochemical characteristics and interpretation              
              of the data are entirely a function of the protein composition of              
              the organic matrix.  Therefore, more precise and new methods are               
              needed to assess the effects of diagenesis and derive criteria for             
              indigeneity.  A better understanding of changes in the organic                 
              fraction of fossil material over time must include 1) an evaluation            
              of variation in the relative contributions of each of  the protein             
              fractions over time, 2) an understanding of the alterations that               
              occur in the biochemical characteristics of individual protein                 
              fractions during diagenesis and 3) new molecular level approaches,             
              such as evaluation of the  13C of individual amino acid enantiomers            
              (see Justification of explanation).  We anticipate that the                    
              proposed research will provide unique information on diagenesis                
              through molecular level analyses on individual proteins.
