Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Cell-Cycle Regulation of theJun Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1992       
File        : a9203092

Award Number: 9203092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curt M. Pfarr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  Cell-Cycle Regulation of the Jun                 
              Proteins                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. Curt M. Pfarr to work with Dr. Moshe Yaniv of the                       
              Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur Institute, Paris, France.                 
                                                                                             
              While the Jun Proteins are thought to function by binding to DNA               
              and interacting with other nuclear factors, the molecular details of           
              these interactions are still poorly understood.  In addition, how the          
              amount of each Jun varies under different growth conditions and                
              where Jun is compartmentalized within the cell is presently                    
              unknown.  Dr. Pfarr will use three experimental approaches to                  
              address these questions using cultured cells as a model.  They are             
              1) localization of Jun proteins; 2) Inducible overexpression of Jun;           
              and 3) affinity-probe analysis of cell extracts.  By this concerted set        
              of experiments he hopes to reveal novel aspects of Jun function and            
              further clarify the complex control pathways of cell proliferation.            
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel, a stipend for twelve months and a dependents' allowance.
