Title       : A Global Regulon in Escherichia coli Controlled by the Leucine-Responsive
               Regulatory Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1994      
File        : a9203447

Award Number: 9203447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rowena G. Matthews   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) is a recently                  
              discovered transcriptional regulator from Escherichia coli that                
              mediates extensive changes in gene expression, and acts both                   
              positively and negatively.  The first genes assigned to the Lrp                
              regulon were identified by their Lrp-dependent response to leucine.            
              We have used two-dimensional gel electrophoresis to identify over              
              30 polypeptides whose expression is regulated by Lrp.  Expression              
              of the majority of genes in the regulon is, in fact, not affected              
              by leucine.  These experiments are designed to systematically                  
              identify genes and proteins in the regulon, and to characterize the            
              mechanisms of action of Lrp on these target genes.  We are                     
              particularly interested in studying the regulation of leucine-                 
              independent genes, and in determining what physiological factors               
              govern their interaction with Lrp. We have identified glutamate                
              synthase (GltBD), and outer memebrane porins OmpC and OmpF as                  
              proteins that are regulated by Lrp in a leucine-independent manner.            
              Our initial studies are designed to distinguish between direct and             
              indirect effects of Lrp on the expression of these genes, and                  
              between transcriptional and translational regulation.   We will                
              determine N-terminal sequences of polypeptides whose expression is             
              regulated by Lrp, and design oligonucleotides for cloning the                  
              relevant genes.  We will also use blotting and two-dimensional band            
              shift assays to identify DNA sequences that bind Lrp, and to clone             
              the corresponding genes.                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              These studies should provide clearer understanding of the                      
              physiological role of Lrp, the means by which it controls its                  
              target genes, and the integration of metabolism by global                      
              regulators.
