Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic and Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1994       
File        : a9203939

Award Number: 9203939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence R. Taylor Laurence.R.Taylor.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Dwyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The work of three investigators is involved in this project.              
              L. R. Taylor plans to study induction theory (and applications to              
              the algebraic K and L theory of finite groups), certain                        
              cohomological questions about low-dimensional manifolds, the                   
              modules over the symmetric group given by the cohomology of                    
              configurations spaces, and the theory of approximate fibrations.               
              W. G. Dwyer will study the classification of finite loop spaces,               
              realization problems involving Pi-algebras and unstable algebras               
              over the Steenrod algebra, homotopical questions related to the                
              Quillen-Lichtenbaum conjecture, and some conceptual properties of              
              the cotangent complex.  E. B. Williams intends to study a general              
              framework for computing the homotopy type of spaces of                         
              homeomorphisms and diffeomorphisms of manifolds, and various                   
              related questions about the linear and Hermitian K-theory of                   
              discrete rings.                                                                
                   The details of these three parts vary, but all are concerned              
              either with reducing geometric information to a subject for                    
              calculation or to perfecting one of the principal algebraic tools              
              used for this purpose.  The nature of the geometric information                
              involved is the crux of the difficulty.  While questions about                 
              lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth virtually cry out to             
              be reduced to calculations, it is far different with what are known            
              as topological properties of geometric objects.  These are                     
              properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece),                     
              knottedness, having no holes, and so forth.  All systematic study              
              of such properties, for example, how to tell whether two geometric             
              objects really differ in respect to one of these properties or are             
              only superficially different, or how to classify the variety of                
              differences that can occur, all these have only truly been                     
              comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of            
              calculation.
