Title       : Recruitment Processes of Anchovy in Chesapeake Bay: Predation Effects, Spawning
               Sites and Larval Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9203307

Award Number: 9203307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391423             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward D. Houde   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Fluctuations in adult fish abundance are caused by variable               
              recruitment levels, a consequence of high and variable mortality               
              during the early life stages.  Causes of high mortality of bay                 
              anchovy Anchoa mitchilli eggs and larvae in Chesapeake Bay are                 
              believed to be primarily from predation by abundant jellyfish,                 
              which are both temporally and spatially patchy.  "Windows" in which            
              anchovy cohorts can develop under low predation pressure are                   
              hypothesized to provide a mechanism for successful recruitment.  A             
              conceptual model predicts that anchovy larvae will be transported              
              up-bay and into the tidal tributaries by estuarine hydrodynamics.              
              This model and related hypotheses will be tested in this                       
              investigation.  Bay-wide cruises will map abundances of anchovy                
              eggs, larvae and predators, relating them to environmental                     
              gradients that may affect survival, growth and distribution.  Area-            
              specific age-frequency distributions, growth rates and mortality               
              rates will be estimated from daily increments in larval otoliths.              
              Areas of origin, and probable transport trajectories of late-stage             
              larvae and juveniles will be determined from otolith microchemistry            
              by analysis of strontium:calcium ratios, which should indicate                 
              salinity zones where larvae hatched.  Direct measures of predation             
              rates will be obtained in large drifting mesocosms under ambient               
              environmental conditions.                                                      
                   Chesapeake Bay is an appealing ecosystem within which to study            
              recruitment processes.  Abundant cohorts of bay anchovy eggs and               
              larvae are presented with wide ranges of temporal and spatial                  
              variability in predator abundances, food availability and well-                
              described estuarine circulation patterns.  The bay-wide analysis               
              here will provide new information of mechanisms that affect                    
              survival and recruitment potential of fishes.
