Title       : Biomedical Image Processing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9203294

Award Number: 9203294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Egelman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Biomedical Image Processing Laboratory at the University                   
              of Minnesota is a         computational resource that will                     
              provide image analysis for basic research projects employing                   
              transmission electron microscopy, scanning electron                            
              microscopy, and confocal and conventional light microscopy.                    
              The resource is devoted to research and development in                         
              methods that can be used to elucidate biological structure                     
              by means of computational analysis and reconstruction of                       
              images of macromolecular assemblies, organelles and cells                      
              obtained by different microscopic techniques.  In addition,                    
              the center will provide hardware and software to aid in the                    
              three-dimensional representation of the structures that are                    
              being studied.  Collaborative projects, such as the study of                   
              bacteriophage morphogenesis and microtubule-tektin                             
              interactions, will take advantage of the facilities and the                    
              methods being developed.  Further, the center will provide                     
              image analysis services to a large core of users at the                        
              University of Minnesota Medical School.                                        
                                                                                             
              The center will develop a second-generation on-line image                      
              analysis system for the transmission electron microscope, as                   
              well as a novel image analysis system for a low-voltage                        
              field-emission scanning electron microscope.  The center                       
              will also take advantage of the fact that many different                       
              forms of microscopy and imaging generate similar problems                      
              and similar solutions. Thus, the research on methods within                    
              one of these areas may be easily applied to other areas                        
              within this center.
