Title       : PRF: Cladistic Biogeography of the Genus Gleditsia (Leguminosae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9203214

Award Number: 9203214
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew F. Schnabel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1173,
Abstract    :
                   The remarkable floristic similarities between temperate                   
              eastern Asia and eastern North America have been recognized for                
              over a century.  Despite an unusually healthy fossil record, we                
              are far from a general biogeographic hypothesis that will prove                
              to be robust across many distinct taxa.  The most informative                  
              approach to this problem will combine estimates of genetic                     
              divergence, preferably for several different data sets, with                   
              explicit methods of cladistic and biogeographic analysis.  Such                
              an approach is described herein for the woody genus Gleditsia                  
              (Leguminosae: Caesalpinioideae), which contains two hypothesized               
              eastern Asian-eastern North American vicariad species-pairs, in                
              addition to other intra- and intercontinental disjunctions.  The               
              study will first use cladistic analysis of different molecular                 
              data sets to recognize putative monophyletic groups.  Area                     
              cladograms will be constructed to discern intra- and                           
              intercontinental disjunctions within monophyletic groups.  Tests               
              of competing biogeographic hypotheses (especially dispersal vs.                
              vicariance) for the origin of eastern Asian-eastern North                      
              American disjunctions (and others) will derive from the topology               
              of area cladograms coupled with estimates of genetic divergence                
              provided by the molecular data.  Gleditsia will thus serve as a                
              model for similar approaches in other genera, with the ultimate                
              objective being to understand the origins and biogeographic                    
              history of other northern hemisphere Tertiary disjunctions.
