Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Cirrus Cloud Studies With a Counterflow Virtual
               Impactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1992       
File        : a9203166

Award Number: 9203166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore L. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              0511601   Cloud & Precipitatn Process             
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1522,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  Cirrus Cloud Studies with a                      
              Counterflow Virtual Impactor                                                   
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support an twelve-month postdoctoral research visit            
              by Dr. Theodore L. Anderson to work with Professor Jost                        
              Heintzenberg of Stockholm University.                                          
                                                                                             
              The Counterflow Virtual Impactor (CVI) is a well-established                   
              device for collecting liquid hydrometeors.  Unlike other cloud                 
              water collectors, the CVI should perform equally well in cirrus                
              (ice) clouds, allowing microphysical data to be collected which                
              could help to resolve such fundamental questions as whether cirrus             
              act as a positive or negative feedback in greenhouse-gas-induced               
              climatic warming.                                                              
                                                                                             
              A key goal of this project will be to characterize and develop a               
              method of controlling the collection of large hydrometeors by the              
              CVI.  Other goals include (a) improving the overall CVI sampling               
              and analysis system so as to lower the detection limits for both               
              condensed water and hydrometeor number concentration and (b)                   
              optimizing all instruments for the low pressure cirrus environment.            
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel, a stipend for twelve months and a dependents' allowance.
