Title       : Molecular Beam Epitaxial Growth of Nanocrystals for Optical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9203183

Award Number: 9203183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo J. Schowalter schowl@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Persans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xi-Cheng Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,9294,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Research on the controlled growth of Si and Ge nanocrystals in                 
              epitaxial fluoride on Si substrates using Si MBE techniques will be            
              conducted.  The linear (including photoluminescence) and nonlinear             
              optical properties of these nanocrystals will be studied, along                
              with fundamental efforts to understand and control the optical                 
              properties of these nanocrystals.  With this information, the                  
              potential usefulness of this material will be evaluated for a                  
              variety of applications.  The research is motivated by the need to             
              fabricate new opto-electronic materials which are easily compatible            
              with silicon Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) and which can                 
              either produce visible light or have large, nonlinear optical                  
              coefficients.  We are particularly motivated by the recent                     
              demonstration of visible light photoluminescence from porous Si,               
              and believe the work proposed here will give an opportunity to make            
              much more controlled nanocrystal structures and will present more              
              opportunity for electro-luminescence device structures than porous             
              Si if the proposed mechanism of quantum confinement in Si                      
              nanocrystals proves to be valid.  We are also motivated by recent              
              theoretical and experimental work showing that quantum dots of                 
              semiconductors can have very large nonlinear optical properties.               
              %%%                                                                            
              Fundamental studies of the epitaxial growth and the optical                    
              properties of very small crystallites (nanocrystals) will be                   
              carried out.  These nanocrystals will be fabricated with techniques            
              potentially compatible with silicon Very Large Scale Integration               
              (VLSI), and may lead to the fabrication of new opto-electronic                 
              materials allowing monolithic fabrication of devices which utilize             
              VLSI digital processing and optical communication and/or processing            
              for faster, more efficient computing and information processing in             
              the future.
