Title       : Transport Phenomena and Microstructure Development in Thermoplastic Composites
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1994        
File        : a9203968

Award Number: 9203968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh G. Advani advani@me.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9294,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   In rapid and continuous manufacturing situations such as                  
              filament winding and pultrusion, the goal is to obtain a high                  
              volume fraction of the fibers with uniform resin impregnation and              
              a structure that is well bonded and free from voids and residual               
              stresses.  Hence, the mechanics of resin impregnation under non-               
              isothermal conditions, the mass diffusion of the polymer across the            
              interfaces of impregnated fiber bundles and the changing                       
              crystallinity as the structure solidifies are key phenomena during             
              the processing of such composite materials.  This research will                
              develop a systematic understanding of the mechanisms of transport              
              of mass, momentum and energy in a continuously deforming                       
              anisotropic porous media of aligned fibers and examine their                   
              interactions and estimate their relative importance.  This can then            
              be integrated into process models which will allow calculation of              
              the fiber volume fraction, void fraction and residual stresses as              
              a function of the manufacturing process, material form and                     
              processing conditions.  The approach will involve model                        
              experimental studies in carefully controlled laboratory conditions,            
              which will serve to identify and understand the physics of flow of             
              shear thinning viscous fluids and will form the basis for                      
              theoretical modeling.  Simultaneously, the role of transport                   
              equations at the microscopic level in a cell geometry                          
              representative of the anisotropic medium will be explored.  The                
              intent being to develop a macroscopic process model based on                   
              microscopic analysis that will relate the fiber volume fraction,               
              void content and residual stress distribution of different material            
              forms and processing conditions.  To establish the validity and                
              usefulness of the formulated process models, experiments in actual             
              processing environment encompassing of filament winding and                    
              pultrusion processing techniques will  be carried out.                         
                   The study will allow the production of more uniform, high                 
              strength components from composite materials.
