Title       : Structural Complexity Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9302057

Award Number: 9302057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald V. Book book@henri.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9302057  Book  This continuing research project has investigated foundational 
              issues in the theory of computation with emphasis on structural  complexity
              theory.  The study of the structure of complexity  classes, reducibilities, and
              complete sets is part of the effort  to develop a theory of resource-bounded
              reducibilities as an  important portion of a more general theory of
              computational  complexity.  The research proposed here is based on the 
              assumption that the notion of randomness is a potentially useful  tool to learn
              about complexity theory.  To a large extent the  research is directed toward
              learning about unrelativized  complexity classes (e.g., P, NP, PSPACE) by
              studying  reducibilities computed in various ways and by studying  properties
              of complexity classes specified by resource-bounded  oracle machines.  The
              amount of information that an oracle set  can make available in a computation
              of an oracle machine appears  to depend on the amount of information encoded in
              the set, the  method of coding and decoding, the type of question that an 
              oracle machine may ask, and the amount of computational power  needed to
              generate the appropriate queries (e.g., does the  ability to use more time
              allow for the generation of more useful  queries?).    There has been a growing
              interest in probabilistic algorithms (or  machines) and randomness. 
              Probabilistic machines incorporate  randomness into their underlying logic, so
              that randomization is  part of the internal calculation.  Just as in the case
              of non  deterministic machines, there are problems which probabilistic 
              algorithms can solve much faster than is known to be possible by  deterministic
              algorithms.  Hence, these concepts have received a  great deal of attention in
              computational complexity theory.  The  research proposed here presupposes that
              randomness is a useful  tool with which to study complexity theory and is based
              on a  collection of results that focus on properties of complexity  classes
              specified by random oracles; these result s lead very  naturally to similar
              questions about complexity classes specified  by pseudo random oracles.  ***
