Title       : The Biogeochemistry of Hydrogen Sulfide and Carbonyl Sulfidein the Surface
               Ocean: Production and Consumption Mechanismsand Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1995     
File        : a9302125

Award Number: 9302125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Cutter   (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Dunstan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Hydrogen sulfide in oxic seawater can be found as uncomplexed                  
              dissolved species ("free sulfide. H2S+HS+S2), as dissolved metal               
              sulfide complexes ("complexed sulfide"), and as particulate metal              
              sulfides.  The biogeochemical cycle of sulfide species in the                  
              surface ocean includes sea-air exchange, reactions with trace                  
              metals, production via carbonyl sulfide (OCS) hydrolysis and                   
              emissions from phytoplankton, and removal via oxidation and                    
              particle sinking.  In this fashion, an understanding  of the                   
              cycling of OCS and hydrogen sulfide species is relevant to the                 
              global sulfur cycle and to the cycling of trace metals.  Analytical            
              methods have been developed to determine OCS and hydrogen  sulfide             
              speciation (uncomplexed/complexed; particulate/dissolved) at                   
              picomolar concentrations, the rate of OCS hydrolysis in seawater               
              has been measured, and  phytoplankton has been identified as                   
              important sources of dissolved and particulate sulfide in the                  
              surface ocean.  This research will quantify the remaining portions             
              of the hydrogen sulfide cycle, with the specific objectives being              
              (1) to determine the formation constants of sulfide complexes with             
              Cd, Ni, and Zn, and use these in thermodynamic complexation models             
              to help elucidate the chemical speciation of dissolved sulfide; (2)            
              to determine the rate of oxidation of uncomplexed sulfide by                   
              iodate; (3) to measure the flux of particulate sulfide production              
              by phytoplankton; (4) to quantify the rates of total dissolved and             
              particulate sulfide production by phytoplankton; (5) to evaluate               
              whether OCS, a precursor of uncomplexed sulfide and a radiatively              
              important gas, can be produced during the regeneration of                      
              particulate organic matter.
