Title       : Rathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Problems of Solid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9302726

Award Number: 9302726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart S. Antman ssa@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project will involve research on a number of nonlinear               
              problems in solid mechanics.  These problems include: (1)                      
              dynamical problems of viscoelasticity and dissipation and shocks               
              (including one-dimensional problems for nonlinearly viscoelastic               
              bodies and self-sustained oscillations, Hopf bifurcations, and                 
              fluid-solid interactions); (2) asymptotics of light flexible                   
              bodies; (3) bifurcation problems of nonlinear elastoplasticity;                
              (4) contact problems; (5) coexistence of phases in anisotropic                 
              media; and (6) other problems such as inverse bifurcation                      
              problems, nonlinear magnetoelasticity, and control problems.                   
              Each problem will be given an exact formulation (without ad hoc                
              geometric simplifications) and each problem employs general                    
              constitutive equations satisfying the standard invariance                      
              conditions and mild physical restrictions.  The use of such                    
              constitutive equations illuminates the mathematical structure of               
              the governing equations and permits the detection of new effects               
              associated with material response.  The goals of the research are              
              to detect new phenomena, especially those associated with                      
              instabilities and the occurrence of thresholds, to treat concrete              
              problems that illuminate the general theories, and to develop                  
              analytic tools for the treatment of both general and specific                  
              problems.                                                                      
                   A variety of dynamic and steady-state nonlinear problems for              
              rods, shells, and three-dimensional solid bodies will be studied.              
              The bodies are composed of nonlinearly elastic, viscoelastic,                  
              plastic, or magnetoelastic materials.  In each case, fully                     
              invariant, geometrically exact theories encompassing general                   
              nonlinear constitutive equations are to be used.  The goals of                 
              these studies are to discover new nonlinear effects, determine                 
              thresholds in constitutive equations separating qualitatively                  
              different responses, examine important kinds of instabilities,                 
              contribute to the theory of shocks and dissipative mechanisms in               
              solids, and develop new methods of nonlinear analysis for                      
              problems of solid mechanics.
