Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Viscosity Solutions of Fully Nonlinear Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9302995

Award Number: 9302995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Crandall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Crandall  9302995       This project continues mathematical research on
              nonlinear  partial differential equations.  A very broad class of equations 
              referred to as fully nonlinear will be under consideration.  Also  included
              will be the associated evolution equation one can form  from a time-dependent
              differential equation.  The thrust of the  work carries forward investigations
              into a class of solutions  developed during the past decade known as viscosity
              solutions.   To be precise, a viscosity solution is a class of functions 
              within which one expects to find a solution to the equation.  The  methods are
              closely related to that of continuous game theory  in that from many possible
              solutions one wants to show that a  best can be determined. There has been
              considerable success  in obtaining existence results for viscosity solutions in
              which  the basic operators involved are bounded.  The present work seeks  to
              expand the possibilities for extending to unbounded versions  and infinite
              dimensional generalizations. A second line  of investigation will be carried
              out in an effort to  obtain numerical approximations of fully nonlinear
              equations.   The work proceeds in several directions.  One must determine what 
              an effective type mesh would be and in terms of this give error  estimates. 
              This will first be done without regard to boundary  conditions, but with the
              understanding that such cases must be  taken into account at a later date.  A
              modest beginning will be  made on uniformly elliptic equations.       Partial
              differential equations form a basis for mathematical  modeling of the physical
              world.  The role of mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the
              equations as it is to  provide qualitative and quantitative information about
              the  solutions.  This may include answers to questions  about uniqueness,
              smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis  often develops methods for
              numerical approximation of solutions  and estimates on the accuracy of these
              approximations.  ***
