Title       : Acquisition of Portable Two-Axis Servo Hydraulic Testing System for Materials
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1993  
File        : a9302467

Award Number: 9302467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert H. Einstein einstein@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. Y. Leung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9302467  Einstein  Numerous research projects and academic courses in several 
              departments at MIT require the capability to apply loads in  two directions.
              The proposed portable two-axis hydraulic  testing system will be used for this
              purpose.  The system  fabricated by Instron, consists of two modular hydraulic 
              actuators (with 5 gpm servo-valves) and capacities of 11 and  22 kips
              respectively, each with a 6" stroke.  The actuators  will be powered by a 6 gpm
              hydraulic pump mounted on  casters. The control console will be cart mounted
              and  provide uni-axial and biaxial capabilities.  Each actuator  can be
              configured for force control, stroke control or  external transducer control. 
              The digital function generator  does accommodate for a phase shift between the
              two actuator  motions.    The equipment will be part of the MIT REMERGENCE
              (Resource  Extraction, Materials and Energy, Reservoir, Geotechnical, 
              ENvironmental and Construction Engineering) Laboratory, a  joint laboratory of
              the Departments of Civil Engineering;  Materials Science and Engineering;
              Mechanical Engineering;  Ocean Engineering and Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary
               Sciences.  Faculty, graduate and undergraduate students use  this laboratory. 
                Typical research projects for which the equipment will be  used are:   
              Experimental Investigation of Microcracking Processes in  Cementitious
              Composites under Biaxial Compression (PI:  C.  Leung)  Fracture Coaalescence
              Research on Model Rock and Real Rock  (PI: H. Einstein)  Cyclic Fatigue of
              Soils (PI:  J.T. Germaine)    The close tie-in between research and education
              at MIT  implies that graduate and undergraduate students will work  with his
              equipment be it in research projects or courses  with experimental
              requirements.
