Title       : Search Algorithms for Data Retrieval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9302920

Award Number: 9302920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan E. Willard dew@cs.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Three groups of open questions concerning sorting,  searching,  and related
              problems in computational geometry  and database management are  considered
              from both a  pragmatic and theoretical perspective.      (1) The first group of
              questions concerns the recently    introduced fusion tree data structure. 
              Fusion trees can  perform dynamic tree search-and-update operations in  O( logN
              / log logN ) worst-case time, and they support a worst-  case time 
              O(NxlogN/loglogN) for sorting. These results  circumvent the Information 
              Theoretic Lower Bound by  utilizing the power of a digital computer for 
              performing  arithmetic and bitwise logical operations in constant time. 
              Numerous open questions arise about upper and lower bounds  for sorting, 
              searching, balance tree operations, and hashing  in this mathematical model. 
              The second goal is to examine algorithms in order to improve    the performance
              of relational calculus, LDL  and SETL  queries.    Its goal is to study both
              theoretical and  pragmatic issues related   to data base performance.  This
              study  examines both the methods for decomposing a general query into component
               parts, and the underlying  search algorithms to process these individual
              parts.  The  research also includes an examination of the  implications of 
              statistical sampling to improve algorithmic  performance.      (3) The third
              research area  is in the domain of  computational geometry.    The implications
              of this subject  for relational databases are considered.  Also investigated
              are the implications that fusion trees have for    geometric search algorithms.
               This study of computational  geometry   includes a continuation of  a prior
              investigation into range query algorithms, and special  attention is given to
              the problem of lower bounding    the number of addition-subtraction operations
              for an    aggregate range query.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
