Title       : U.S.-Republic of Korea Cooperative Research: Adsorption and Diffusion of Fluids
               in Model Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1995   
File        : a9302837

Award Number: 9302837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22118              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5942,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9302837  Gubbins    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Keith E. Gubbins,
              School  of Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, to pursue with  Dr.
              Soong-Hyuck Suh, Department of Chemical Engineering, Keimyung  University, and
              Dr. Soon-Chul Kim, Andong University, Korea, for  24 months, a program of
              cooperative research on the behavior of  fluids in narrow pores and in
              microporous media using the methods  of statistical mechanics and molecular
              simulation.  The  objectives of the research are (1) to use several molecular 
              dynamics and Monte Carlo simulation techniques to study the  equilibrium and
              transport properties of simple fluid and their  mixtures in porous media having
              simple geometries, (2) to use  these computer experimental results to test
              recently developed  density functional and kinetic theories of fluids in pores,
              (3)  to study networking effects in porous media using molecular  dynamics
              simulation techniques, (4) to study the adsorption and  dynamical behavior of
              water in porous carbons, and (5) to further  develop and improve the density
              functional and kinetic theories  for fluids in porous media.    Microporous
              materials are widely used in the chemical, oil and  gas, pharmaceutical, and
              food industries to carry out chemical  reactions and for purification and
              separations.  The  collaborators expect the proposed work to help them design 
              improved processes and materials for these industries.  The  collaborators are
              recognized as experts in the field of the  proposal.  They will be assisted by
              several postdoctoral workers  and graduate students.  This project is relevant
              to the  objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which  seeks
              to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and  Korean scientists and
              engineers through the exchange of  scientific information, ideas, skills, and
              techniques and through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean 
              participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science  and Engineering
              Foundation (KOSEF).  Thi s project adds an  international cooperative dimension
              to the PI's research under  NSF Grant No. CTS-9122460.  ***
