Title       : Novel Computational Approaches to the Transport Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1996     
File        : a9302782

Award Number: 9302782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Nelson pnelson@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin L. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Donald Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project is directed toward computational solution   of the  linear
              particle transport equation, which usually is termed    simply the  ``transport
              equation.''  This equation historically has    provided a major  challenge to
              the state-of-the-art computer  hardware   available at any given  time.  More
              specifically, the  project is directed toward   spatial approximations  to this
               equation, because new approaches and better basic   understanding  in  this
              area seem essential to permit the solution of the    transport equation in  the
              complex material arrangements  underlying some of the   emerging applications 
              of this equation  (e.g., identification of underground waste   locations for 
              environmental restoration).    A certain abstract model (CLOF methods) of
              one-dimensional   approximations in particle transport  is being extended and  
              applied, as follows:  a massively parallel code is being developed for a 
              general   class of  one-dimensional spatial  approximations; the model is being
               extended to multiple (two or more)  spatial dimensions; a   that permits
              computational determination of  the order of   accuracy of an  arbitrary
              two-dimensional CLOF is being developed; the CLOF  methods that have the very
              desirable  property of satisfying   the diffusion limit  are being 
              characterized.  The corner-balance method, which   is a novel  spatial 
              approximation that seems to enjoy several properties   that  are highly 
              desirable for multidimensional calculations, is being   extended to the 
              three-dimensional setting,  initially for parallelepiped   cells, and
              subsequently  for  meshes composed of cells that are general (convex)   
              polyhedra.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
