Title       : Acquisition of a Luminescence Micro-Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9302158

Award Number: 9302158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99700              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Tanner tanner@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie P. Harmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9162,
Abstract    :
              9302158  Tanner       This luminescence microspectrometer will be capable of
              making  measurements of either photoluminescence (PL) or  electroluminescence
              (EL) spectra on microscopic size areas of  luminescent materials.  The
              instrument is built around a high-  quality optical microscope combined with
              two monochromators, light  sources, and detectors.  One monochromator measures
              the spectrum of  light emitted from the sample under study-as small a
              micrometer in  size-can be over the 240-800 nm range.  The sample is
              illuminated  by means of the second monochromator, with the illumination 
              wavelength independently adjustable over the same 240-800 nm range.   Thus, the
              instrument may be used for photoluminescence spectroscopy  by fixing the
              illumination wavelength, for electroluminescence  spectroscopy by blocking the
              illuminator and connecting the EL  sample to a voltage source, and for
              transmittance and reflectance  studies by scanning the monochromators together
              or bypassing one of  them.       The equipment will be used in several research
              projects in  condensed-matter physics, high-energy physics, and polymer 
              chemistry.  In particular, it will enhance substantially two  projects for the
              study of luminescent properties of polymers.  One  project is developing
              radiation-hard scintillators for use in  particle detectors.  The luminescence
              micro-spectrometer will be  used to characterize the emission of light from
              fibers of dye-doped  polymers, to monitor spatially-distributed
              radiation-induced  damage, to follow recovery of damage, and to investigate 
              aggregation and mobility of the dopant materials.  A second project  studies
              the electroluminescence and photoluminescence in conjugated  polymers. These
              materials have applications in EL display devices.   The spectrometer requested
              here will be used for measuring the PL  and EL spectra of these materials,
              including characterizing the  effect of polymer orientation on the spectra. 
              Thus, this  instrument will  contribute to advancing state-of-the- art
              knowledge  in the development of particle detectors and light-emitting 
              devices.  ***
