Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dispersive Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9302988

Award Number: 9302988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: JANICE L ALEXANDER                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. McLaughlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9302988  McLaughlin       The investigator continues his research in the theory
              of  nonlinear waves, using a combination of mathematical theory,  formal
              approximation methods, and scientific computation.  In  addition, some of the
              projects in nonlinear optics will be done  in collaboration with members of the
              Department of Physics at  Princeton University who will provide a direct
              experimental  component to the research.  McLaughlin will work in three general
               areas of nonlinear waves -- (i) temporally chaotic waves, (ii)  nonlinear
              optics, and (iii) spatially and temporally  chaotic waves.  In the project on
              temporally chaotic nonlinear  waves, mathematical methods from dynamical
              systems theory will be  adapted to the partial differential setting of waves. 
              The  project on spatially and temporally chaotic waves will develop  both
              stochastic and dynamical mathematical methods for the  partial differential
              equations of waves.  The projects in  nonlinear optics will focus upon laser
              light interacting with  liquid crystals. Because liquid crystal media are
              extremely  nonlinear, they provide excellent materials in which to study 
              ``light-matter''interactions.       All nonlinear waves in nature, from the
              light waves of  laser physics to water waves on the surface of the ocean, are 
              modeled mathematically by partial differential equations known  as nonlinear
              wave equations.  While linear wave equations have  been well understood for
              some time, scientists and mathematicians  knew little about the behavior of
              solutions of nonlinear wave  equations until the recent explosion in scientific
              computing  power.  While scientific computation can suggest and discover new 
              and unexpected behavior in solutions of nonlinear wave equations,  one can
              never be certain of the outcome of numerical experiments.   Mathematical
              studies, often of further idealized models, are  required -- not only to ensure
              the validity of the numerical  experiments, but also to establish qualitative
              behavior in the  model.  With results  certain for the model nonlinear partial 
              differential equations, physical experiments can then be used to  validate the
              wave equations as a description of real waves in  nature.  This project, taken
              together with the experiments in  nonlinear optics on the ``light-liquid
              crystal'' interaction,  addresses each of these related areas (scientific
              computation,  mathematical studies, and physical experiments) in the 
              mathematical studies of nonlinear waves.  ***
