Title       : Patent Indicators of Global Technology Strategy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9302340

Award Number: 9302340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Mogee mogee@mogee.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mogee Res & Analysis Assoc
	      11701 Bowman Green Drive
	      Reston, VA  20190    703/478-2827

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1320,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9302340    Mogee          To be competitive in today's environment of
              technological change  and global competition, firms need to develop and follow 
              sagacious technology strategies.  In order to make important  decisions
              regarding which particular technology strategies would  be optimal to follow, a
              firm needs reliable information to answer  questions such as:  how quickly and
              efficiently can its R&D  department develop and build on new technological
              innovations in  its industry relative to its competitors, and how effective is 
              the firm at appropriating the benefits of its R&D efforts and  withholding
              those benefits from others?  Results of the Phase I  Small Business Innovation
              Research (SBIR) study establish the  technical basis for using patent citation
              data as a valuable tool  for helping firms evaluate their own technological
              capabilities  and those of their competitors.  The objectives of the Phase II 
              research focus on (1) demonstrating the feasibility of  constructing a patent
              citation database that meets technology  managers' analytical needs easily and
              cost-effectively; (2)  extending the citation model developed in Phase I to the
              point  where it can function as a reliable tool for (a) correcting  citation
              data for censoring and (b) predicting future citation  levels;  and (3) using
              these prototype tools to examine the  validity of hypothesized relationships
              between citation patterns  and the technology strategies of companies.  The
              project aims to  provide analytical tools for developing and assessing
              corporate  technology strategies, including patent citation databases and 
              user-friendly search and analytical software, consulting  services, and
              publications.    The project addresses the need to understand the 
              interrelationships among patent citations, the technology  strategies of
              companies, and their economic performance.  The  project will use this
              knowledge as the basis for its contribution  to the future of US economic
              competitiveness, that is, to make  available analytical to ols useful for
              formulating and analyzing  corporate technology policies that will be valuable
              to companies  and investors.    ***
