Title       : Subglass Relaxation Processes in Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1995  
File        : a9302393

Award Number: 9302393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Boyd boyd@poly2.mse.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The details of the molecular mechanisms underlying subglass                    
              relaxations in amorphous polymers remain largely a mystery.                    
              Although there is a considerable body of useful experimental                   
              description, the experiments are rarely specific in revealing the              
              nature of the motions taking place.  Molecular modelling or                    
              simulation is becoming of increasing value in interpreting the                 
              details of molecular motion.  An important recent advance has the              
              been the ability to generate, via molecular dynamics (MD)                      
              simulation, detailed description of the structure and packing in               
              amorphous polymeric melts and glasses.  In the present work, such              
              advances in modelling will be exploited in describing subglass                 
              relaxations.  The work will be done in association with dielectric             
              relaxation experiments.  Systems to be studied include subglass                
              processes in main-chain liquid crystalline aromatic polyesters;                
              subglass processes in other aromatic polyesters; the gramma-                   
              relaxation in polyethylene; subglass processes that are, by design,            
              at very low temperature by virtue of low internal rotational                   
              barriers; and, side-chain mesogen liquid crystalline polymers.                 
                                                                                             
              Unlike many other materials, such as metals and ceramics, the                  
              usefulness of all polymeric materials depends on the fact that                 
              they are very dynamic on the molecular scale.  That is, the                    
              constituent molecules are in a constant state of motion and the                
              kinds of motion determine the properties.  Even in polymers that               
              are apparently rigid and glass-like, residual molecular motions                
              determine such behavior as strength and toughness.  However there              
              is not yet a clear understanding of these motions.  The present                
              work is directed toward attaining this understanding in order that             
              better materials can be developed.  Modern computer modelling                  
              techniques will be combined with sophisticated experimental tools              
              in accomplishing this goal.
