Title       : Scientists, Engineers and Technicians in Non-Manufacturing Industries, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9302727

Award Number: 9302727
Award Instr.: Contract Interagency Agreement               
Prgm Manager: Carolyn F. Shettle                      
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian MacDonald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bureau of Labor Stat
	      
	      Washington, DC  20212    /   -

NSF Program : 8803      SCIENCE & ENGINEERING PERSONNL
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will provide information on scientist,                            
              engineer, and technician (SET) employment in industry.  It                     
              will develop national estimates from the on-going                              
              Occupational Employment Statistics Survey of the Bureau of                     
              Labor Statistics (BLS) which provides annual information on                    
              employment in detailed occupations by industry.  The OES is                    
              a Federal-State cooperative program in which State                             
              Employment Security Agencies collect data following BLS                        
              specifications.  Data collection occurs on a three-year                        
              cycle, sequentially covering manufacturing, non-                               
              manufacturing, and trade and regulated (communications,                        
              public utilities, and transportation) industries and                           
              colleges and universities.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The OES data help NSF meet its mandate under the National                      
              Science Act to develop and maintain a database of                              
              demographic, educational, and employment information on SET.                   
              The OES surveys are a key part of the system for developing                    
              such information.  Thus, the survey data:                                      
                   a.  helps in developing an accurate profile of U. S.                      
              SET personnel;                                                                 
                   b.  are used in analyzing the supply of and demand for                    
              scientists and engineers;                                                      
                   c.  are used to develop current estimates of SET                          
              employment in total and by detailed SET field and industry;                    
              and                                                                            
                   d.  allow identification of SET growth fields, and                        
              those in decline or otherwise changing.
