Title       : Zooplankton Capture by Corals: Effects of Water Movement and Prey Escape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1996      
File        : a9302066

Award Number: 9302066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Sebens   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer E. Purcell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Information on water flow in coral reef environments has generally             
              been done to quantify mass transport across reefs or to identify               
              important processes generating nutrient flux from reefs.  This                 
              project will investigate the effects of water flow on several                  
              aspects of the feeding biology of corals.  Field measurements of               
              feeding rates on four species of corals will be made with prey                 
              sampling by an automated pump/sampler and field flume that allows              
              concurrent measurements of water flow and prey availability.                   
              Feeding experiments will be manipulated by varying flow rate, prey             
              type, and food availability and will be conducted over several days            
              with different flow conditions.  Capture events and prey type, and             
              food availability and will be conducted over several days with                 
              different flow conditions.  Capture events and prey escape behavior            
              will be filmed using underwater video.  Another important aspect of            
              feeding biology in coral reefs is the small scale water flow around            
              corals in the field.  This will be accomplished with three self-               
              contained underwater thermistors flowmeters with 2 mm spatial                  
              resolution, based on the design of LaBarber and Vogel (1976).  The             
              data collected will be used to characterize the general flow regime            
              at the site, providing new information about the flow environment              
              of coral reefs in Jamaica and other sites in the Caribbean.
