Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9302430

Award Number: 9302430
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra J. Rosenthal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Sandra J. Rosenthal has been awarded a Postdoctoral                        
              Research Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Rosenthal's doctoral                     
              degree was from the University of Chicago under the supervision                
              of Professor Graham Fleming. Dr. Rosenthal will continue                       
              research at the University of California/Berkeley under the                    
              sponsorship of Professors Charles Shank and Richard Mathies.                   
              Dr. Rosenthal's postdoctoral training will study the role of                   
              vibrational and electronic coherence in nonlinear optical                      
              phenomena and the photoisomerization of rhodopsin, using                       
              ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopy and theory. Longer term                   
              she plans to study the mechanism and timescale of electronic                   
              dephasing processes and investigate the formation and                          
              relaxation of biexcitons in semiconducting nanoclusters. The                   
              information gained from these studies will lead to an                          
              understanding of exciton relaxation and the origin of nonlinear                
              susceptibility, provide a blueprint to tailor the optical                      
              properties of new systems and, and initiate the use of                         
              semiconducting nanoclusters in the field of molecular                          
              electronics.                                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is                  
              viewed as an important infrastructural program designed to                     
              broaden the knowledge and experience of recent Ph.D.s and                      
              attract them into meaningful careers in contemporary chemical                  
              research and teaching.
