Title       : Software Process Data Capture, Visualization and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9302739

Award Number: 9302739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander L. Wolf alexander.wolf@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2880,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Software process research is concerned with the problem of  systematically
              managing and automating the development and  maintenance of software systems. 
              Key challenges in software  process research include understanding and
              describing existing  processes, developing and specifying new processes, and
              evolving  existing processes toward new processes.  This project  investigates
              techniques in two areas of software process research  that fundamentally
              contribute to answering these challenges:  (1)  capture of characteristic
              process data and (2) analysis of  process data for purposes of detailed problem
              identification.  With such results, software engineers can gain a
              statistically-based  understanding of an existing process, uncover systemic 
              problems indicating areas for possible process improvement, and  calculate the
              effects of changes to processes.  The starting point for the investigation is
              an event-based model  of software processes.  An event is used to characterize
              the  dynamic behavior of a process in terms of identifiable,  instantaneous
              process milestones, such as invoking a development  tool or deciding upon the
              next activity to be performed.  A  novel, hybrid approach integrating automated
              and manual data  collection techniques records information about both
              computer-based  events (e.g., tool invocation) and non-computer-based  events
              (e.g., decision making), relating events within and across  these categories. 
              Metrics appropriate for revealing anomalous  software process behavior are
              defined and calculated.  A flexible  testbed for storage and retrieval of
              process data with a variety  of analysis tools is used as a basis for
              correlation analysis.  Results are validated by employing the techniques in the
              capture  and analysis of several real-world software processes used in 
              industry.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
