Title       : Highly Parallel Wavelength Distributed Data Interface for Fiber-Optic Local Area
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9302388

Award Number: 9302388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan M. Gerrish   (Principal Investigator current)
              Behzad Moslehi  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Optivision Incorporated
	      3450 Hillview Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    415/855-0200

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4095,9256,
Abstract    :
              This project is funded under the National Science Foundation's                 
              (NSF) Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which is              
              designed to provide an opportunity for small business, particularly            
              the small high technology firm, to participate in NSF research.                
              Phase I of the SBIR program serves as a filter to select promising             
              proposals and determine if the firm can do high quality research.              
              Phase II is the principal research project.  Phase III is the                  
              conversion of the NSF-funded research into commercial applications             
              and technological innovation supported by follow-on private venture            
              capital or other non-federal financing.  This Phase II project                 
              addresses the use of wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) and                
              optical amplification to handle multimedia communications with                 
              varying data rates in both analog and digital formats in a single              
              optical network.  In Phase I the researcher developed an                       
              optically-amplified subnetwork-partititoned WDM network concept                
              with the following attributes: multiple wavelength-addressed                   
              virtual subnetworks, compatibility with other network standards                
              including FDDI; incremental and flexibile upgradability; and high              
              reliability.  In Phase II the company is designing, building, and              
              evaluating a small scale experimental 4-node WDM network                       
              integrating wavelength MUXs/DeMUXs, tunable transmitters/receivers,            
              optical amplifiers, a star coupler and an FDDI adapter board.  The             
              network will serve as a testbed for subsequent Phase III                       
              commercialization.
