Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Numerical Analysis of
               Reaction-Diffusion Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1993      
File        : a9302016

Award Number: 9302016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38696              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Estep   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Donald Estep                                
              of the Georgia Institute of Technology to work                                 
              with Professor Claes Johnson at Chalmers                                       
              University of Technology in Gothenburg, Sweden.                                
                                                                                             
              This project involves the development of a                                     
              mathematical theory for adaptive finite element                                
              methods for systems of singularly-perturbed                                    
              reaction-diffusion equations.  These equations                                 
              offer many technical challenges to                                             
              mathematicians while representing many                                         
              important models in applied science.  Because                                  
              solutions of such problems typically have                                      
              multiply-scaled behavior and because accurate                                  
              results are needed for a range of parameter                                    
              values, standard numeric techniques and                                        
              analysis are inadequate.  Dr. Estep and                                        
              Professor Johnson hope to overcome these                                       
              difficulties by developing an error control                                    
              based on a posteriori and a priori error bounds                                
              that will indicate how to control the error as                                 
              well as give a measure of robustness to the                                    
              computations.  The ultimate goal is the public                                 
              release of a code that can solve general                                       
              problems with minimum user interface.                                          
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months and administrative costs for                                     
              Georgia Tech.
