Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Physics of DNA and Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1993      
File        : a9302839

Award Number: 9302839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Simon simon@research.nj.nec.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Adam Simon                                  
              to work with Dr. David Bensimon at Ecole                                       
              Normale Superieure, CNRS in Paris, France.                                     
                                                                                             
              Their proposed research program concerns the                                   
              physics of DNA and proteins.  It consists of                                   
              two general parts.  The first one is a plan to                                 
              accurately characterize the physical properties                                
              of DNA, including the elasticity and torsional                                 
              strength using laser tweezer based experiments,                                
              and to study the physics and dynamics of DNA                                   
              replication and polymerization, including the                                  
              activity of the associated motor proteins                                      
              involved.  For the second part, they intend to                                 
              make precise picoNewton force measurements of                                  
              motor protein pairs, like actin-myosin, using                                  
              an enhanced magnetic feedback non-contact tip                                  
              on an Atomic Force Microscope.  Precise                                        
              interaction force measurements can be made by                                  
              coating the tip, for example, with a low                                       
              density of myosin molecules and measuring the                                  
              interaction force with an actin filament.  They                                
              expect to reveal details of the single molecule                                
              interaction, allowing understanding of the                                     
              elementary force generator.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months and a small travel allowance for                                 
              in-country travel.
