Title       : Dissertation Research: The Technological and Social Dimensions of the Mallorcan
               Copper Age Metallurgy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9302934

Award Number: 9302934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10414              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Hoffman  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Ruth Tringham, Mr. Christopher Hoffman              
              will collect data for his doctoral thesis. He will study copper                
              artifacts from a series of archaeological sites which are located              
              on the Spanish island of Mallorca and which date to the Copper Age             
              (from approximately 2500 to 1800 BC). Through a series of analyses             
              he will attempt to determine where the metal producing ore was                 
              mined, whether it was smelted locally, how the wide range of                   
              objects were fabricated, how they were used, and how and why they              
              were disposed of. To accomplish this he will conduct chemical and              
              lead isotope analyses of copper bearing ores from local deposits,              
              attempt to define chemical signatures and then match these                     
              signatures to those of the artifacts themselves. Metallurgical                 
              analysis will shed light on manufacturing techniques and                       
              microscopic examination for traces of wear will provide insight                
              into how the objects were used.                                                
                                                                                             
              Mr. Hoffman wishes to understand the relationship between                      
              technological and social change. Metallurgy did not originate on               
              Mallorca but diffused to the region from the Eastern Mediterranean.            
              While it is known approximately when copper tools first appeared on            
              the island much less is understood about the effects which this                
              very basic technological change had on social organization. This               
              particular situation is interesting because archaeologists have                
              argued that Mallorcan and much of Spanish society was basically                
              unaffected. Because however of the wide variety of artifact types              
              found on the island and because of the varied archaeological                   
              contexts in which they were recovered, Mr. Hoffman believes                    
              otherwise and he wishes to reconstruct how these objects were                  
              manufactured and used.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists and increase our                       
              understanding of Mallorcan prehistory. It will also shed light on              
              the complex relationships between societal and technological change            
              and will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
