Title       : NMR Studies of Molecular Motion in Constrained Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1995   
File        : a9302557

Award Number: 9302557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gina L. Hoatson gina@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Vold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9178,9229,AMPP,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the                       
              Chemistry Division, Prof. Gina Hoatson of the College of                       
              William and Mary will engage in developing new techniques of                   
              pulsed nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy in order                  
              to expand the accessible range of time scales over which the                   
              rates of molecular motion as well as the associated dynamical                  
              trajectories can be determined.  These include methods of                      
              selective inversion, the determination of double quantum line                  
              shapes, methods of  Hadamard excitation spectroscopy, which is                 
              a variant of stochastic NMR possessing considerable advantages                 
              over conventional pulsed NMR, and spectral density measurements                
              on powders.  Systems to be investigated in the course of this                  
              work include molecular crystals, inclusion compounds, and                      
              liquid crystals.                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a powerful,                   
              ubiquitious method for the study of solids and liquids through                 
              the interaction of nuclear magnets of the constituent atoms                    
              with electromagnetic radiation.  The absorption of this                        
              radiation by the nuclear magnets is not only characteristic of                 
              the specific chemical element but is also affected by the                      
              chemical environment.  The atomic nuclei thus act as                           
              microscopic probes and yield site specific information about                   
              the structure and dynamics of the solid or liquid substance.                   
              Continual developments in theoretical and experimental                         
              techniques have resulted in vastly improved performance of the                 
              NMR method as a tool for basic studies of the properties of                    
              condensed matter and have greatly expanded its application to                  
              problems in physics, chemistry, materials science, biology, and                
              medicine.  In this project further developments are planned to                 
              enable the NMR method to deal with difficult or so far undoable                
              problems and thereby extend the range of its applicability to                  
              practical problems.
