Title       : 11th Annual Southwest Regional Developmental Biology Conference, May 14-16,
               Kingston, OK
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9302750

Award Number: 9302750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Begovac   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Seto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Eleventh Annual Southwestern Developmental Biology Conference              
              will be held May 14-16, 1993 at the University of Oklahoma                     
              Biological Station located on Lake Texoma near Kingston, OK.  The              
              meeting is sponsored by the Society for Developmental Biology,                 
              which states in its guidelines:  "Regional meetings are an                     
              important activity of the Society for Developmental Biology...  The            
              function of the Regional Conference is to provide a more informal              
              opportunity than national meetings for the exchange of information             
              on development.  Participation by graduate students, postdoctorals             
              and junior faculty is particularly encouraged..."  The meeting to              
              be held at the University of Oklahoma Biological Station will                  
              adhere to the goals outlined above.  For this conference, four                 
              prominent speakers (Drs. Randall Moon, Raymond Runyan, Helen                   
              Hathaway, and Gary Wessel) have been invited to present papers                 
              related to the following theme: "Cellular Signalling and                       
              Recognition in Development".  To complement these invited talks,               
              developmental biologists, as well as cell biologists working on                
              developmentally-related problems, from the Southwest will be                   
              encouraged to present recent and preliminary findings on the                   
              meeting topic, or on any other field of developmental biology.  We             
              will seek especially to encourage and promote graduate students and            
              postdoctoral fellow participation in the scientific program by                 
              providing financial support to cover the costs of registration,                
              housing, and travel wherever possible.  The conference format will             
              thus give developmental biology students in the Southwest an                   
              excellent opportunity to give a talk, interact with a variety of               
              active investigators in developmental biology, and gain a better               
              understanding of the developmental biology research being pursued              
              in their own geographic region.
