Title       : SGER: The Influence of Hurricane Iniki on Metrosideros- Acacia Forest Ecosystems
               on Kauai
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1992  
File        : a9302803

Award Number: 9302803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Y. Kaneshiro kykanesh@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   On September 11, 1992, Hurricane Iniki, the most powerful                 
              hurricane to hit the State of Hawaii this century, struck the                  
              Island of Kauai with steady wind speeds of over 230 km/hr and                  
              gust over 280 km/hr.  Everything in the path of the hurricane was              
              profoundly transformed; homes, public building, hotels,                        
              agricultural crops, and the natural features of the island were                
              severely damages or destroyed.  An aerial survey by the State                  
              Division of Forestry and Wildlife described the vegetation of the              
              mountains as being "mowed by a giant weed-eater>"  This event                  
              presents a once-in-a-century opportunity to study the                          
              consequences of such a phenomenon for the natural environment of               
              the Hawaiian Islands.  Prior research on Kauai will, in some                   
              cases, provide a baseline from which to measure changes wrought                
              by the hurricane and track subsequent responses as t he                        
              ecosystems adjust to its short, medium and long-term                           
              consequences.                                                                  
                   The research proposed her seeks to measure the immediate                  
              effects of the hurricane and to monitor the ongoing consequences               
              of this natural phenomenon.  Of particular interest are the                    
              genetic effects of a population flush of some organisms, e.g.                  
              some species in the insect family Drosophilidae, in response to a              
              huge but temporary increase in decaying organic mater.  The                    
              population explosion may followed by a long period of small                    
              population size as the decaying material diminish and since it                 
              may be months or even years before some of the vegetation is                   
              restored to pre-hurricane conditions.  Understand the genetics                 
              consequences of the sudden increase in population size followed                
              by an extended period of small population size is important for                
              understanding the ability of populations to survive catastrophic               
              environmental conditions.                                                      
                   Dr. Kaneshiro will also monitor population levels of exotic               
              drosophilid species which have been shown to be a good indicator               
              for disturbed habitats.  As exotic fruit plants invade the now                 
              open forest, an increase is expected in exotic drosophilid                     
              species which are associate with the exotic plants.  As the                    
              native forest canopy recovers and is restored to pre-hurricane                 
              conditions, a decrease in populations size of endemic                          
              drosophilids should occur.  The results of the research here                   
              would therefore further document the significance of the                       
              drosophilids as an important indicator species group for                       
              monitoring the relative health of Hawaii native ecosystem.     //
