Title       : Dissertation Research: Transition to Domestic Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1993       
File        : a9302853

Award Number: 9302853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6755               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane D. Peterson  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Geoffrey Clark, Ms. Jane Peterson will              
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her project            
              is to determine how social organization changed in the Near East               
              over the period from ca. 15,000 to 6,000 years ago. During this                
              time plants and animals were first domesticated and thus Ms.                   
              Peterson is attempting to relate changing social systems to a                  
              changing subsistence base. To accomplish this goal she will study              
              three classes of data. First she will examine materials and site               
              plans from a series of archaeological excavations. She will look at            
              the patterning of activities as revealed by structures and                     
              artifacts on the ground and relate these to gender specific work.              
              Secondly, she will take advantage of cultural data associated with             
              human burials. With this information, she can attempt to relate the            
              type and number of material remains to age and sex as revealed in              
              skeletal materials. Finally she will analyze skeletons themselves.             
              Bone responds to repeated stress and therefore those muscles which             
              receive heavy use can be determined by examining them for increased            
              thickness and growth at attachment regions. With this approach it              
              is possible to reconstruct specific activities and relate them to              
              gender and age.                                                                
                                                                                             
              A central goal of archaeology is to understand how complex social              
              systems develop. A major shift in both human subsistence and social            
              organization occurred with the domestication of plants and animals             
              and their incorporation into the human diet. Closely related to                
              this are gross changes in patterns of social organization for with             
              domestication sites become larger and many new traits such as                  
              pottery appear. While archaeologists know a great deal about the               
              subsistence part of the equation, they do not understand on a                  
              detailed level how social organization was altered. The work by Ms.            
              Peterson will provide new insight into this question.                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will synthesize             
              a large and diverse body of data. It will shed new light on the                
              origins of complex society and will assist in the training of a                
              promising young scientist.
