Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Elliptic and Parbolic Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1993      
File        : a9302516

Award Number: 9302516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicolai V. Krylov krylov@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project concentrates on three areas of mathematical                  
              research in partial differential equations.  The first concerns                
              the general theory of degenerate elliptic Bellman equations with               
              underlying quasilinear operators.  These equations arise as the                
              dynamic programming equations for controlled diffusions.  In many              
              important cases the equations become degenerate, i.e. the                      
              governing matrix in the equation becomes singular, and the wealth              
              of theory on elliptic equations is no longer applicable.  The                  
              goals of this work are to develop new techniques for proving                   
              a prior estimates on solutions, investigation of nonlinear                     
              equations related to the real and complex Monge-Ampere equations               
              and to study equations of surfaces with prescribed curvature.  A               
              second area of investigation focuses on viscosity solutions of                 
              nonlinear elliptic equations.  The use of this concept, which is               
              similar to that of finding the value function in control theory,               
              allows one to investigate solutions of nonlinear equations                     
              without assuming that they are differentiable.  Once a solution                
              is known to exist in the viscosity sense, an important problem of              
              numerical or other approximation arises.  Work will be                         
              done developing methods for estimating the speed of convergence                
              of approximations to the true solution.  To construct                          
              good approximations one must also make further investigations                  
              into the smoothness properties of viscosity solutions.  The third              
              element of this research concerns properties of solutions of                   
              linear parabolic equations with white noise forcing terms.  These              
              are equations in which randomness is a natural ingredient.                     
              They arise in filtering problems, genetics, quantum mechanics                  
              and magneto-dynamics.  Very little work has been done                          
              in approximating solutions to such equations.  This research will              
              concentrate on those equations defined on bounded domains in                   
              which the boundary conditions introduce unusual problems not                   
              encountered in the deterministic equations                                     
                   Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical              
              modeling of the physical world.  The role of mathematical                      
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to                    
              provide qualitative and quantitative information about the                     
              solutions.  This may include answers to questions about                        
              uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis often                
              develops methods for approximation of solutions and estimates on               
              the accuracy of these approximations.
