Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations in Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9302513

Award Number: 9302513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Bell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project focuses on the interaction between studies of                
              partial differential equations and the theory of several complex               
              variables.  The history of these interactions has been long and                
              fruitful, with each subject providing valuable information to the              
              other. The present work builds on a recent formulation of a                    
              unique continuation property for the inhomogeneous Cauchy-Riemann              
              equations in several variables that will yield information about               
              boundary behavior of holomorphic mappings between domains in                   
              complex space.  Efforts will be made to verify the property in                 
              the most important categories of domains.  Work will also be done              
              using recent results about the regularity of the Cauchy-Riemann                
              equations combined with geometric arguments to prove regularity                
              theorems for the Bergman projection.  Such results also have                   
              applications to mappings problems in several complex variables. A              
              program to express the classical solutions to the Dirichlet and                
              Neumann problems for the laplace operator on domains in the plane              
              in terms of the Szego projection and kernel has just been                      
              completed.  These results give rise to new and practical methods               
              for numerically computing solutions to classical problems in                   
              partial differential equations and conformal mapping which are of              
              interest in the applied sciences.  Work will continue exploring                
              applications of the Szego projection to related problems.                      
              Students on the project will be used to test the efficiency of                 
              the resulting numerical methods.                                               
                   The theory of several complex variables plays a central role              
              in the analysis of linear partial differential equations.  It                  
              provides an excellent environment in which tools from geometry,                
              analysis and functional analysis can be brought to bear on                     
              equations which relate to modeling of the physical world.
