Title       : CEDAR: Analysis of CEDAR-HLPS Polar Cap Arc Observations Using Model Observation
               Comparison Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9302165

Award Number: 9302165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan J. Sojka fasojka@sojka.cass.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The CEDAR High Latitude Plasma Structures (HLPS) initiative               
              has carried out several observational campaigns to acquire                     
              comprehensive data bases on Sun-aligned polar cap arcs (SA).  At               
              USU, two distinct modeling efforts have produced models that                   
              pertain to polar cap Sun-aligned arcs, namely, an upgraded Time                
              Dependent Ionospheric Model with embedded Sun-aligned polar cap                
              arcs (TDIM-SA) and an MHD coupled magnetosphere-ionosphere polar               
              cap Sun-aligned arc model (M-I SA).  The PIs propose to use these              
              two models in five specific collaborative investigations utilizing             
              these CEDAR-HLPS data lets, each investigation having a specific               
              scientific goal.  The first and second investigations pertain to               
              understanding the dawn-dusk (or vice versa) drift associated with              
              SA and their multiple arc, striated, nature.  Both of these studies            
              use the M-I SA model which exhibits both of these features.  The               
              third is to use the HLPS observations of many electrodynamic and               
              plasma parameters to validate the TDIM-SA model, especially the                
              model prediction that the cross arc drift speed is a key parameter.            
              Our fourth study is to understand the strong convection rotation               
              observed in the vicinity of polar cap and auroral arcs during times            
              when the arc is changing.  Again, this type of feature is present              
              in the M-I SA simulations.  Strong plasma depletions have been                 
              observed adjacent to SAs and have been tentatively associated with             
              electrodynamic current closure requirements.  For this fifth study,            
              we will use the TDIM-SA to quantify all the electrodynamic                     
              parameters and evaluate if this hypothesis is the source of the                
              plasma depletions.
