Title       : "Electronic Tools for Research in the History of Science: AnExploratory Study"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1992  
File        : a9302806

Award Number: 9302806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Crane gcrane@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Professor Crane has argued that computers do not make hard tasks               
              easy in the social sciences and humanities; rather, computers make             
              hard tasks possible.  He has demonstrated how computer technology              
              can make hard tasks possible in his already completed work in the              
              humanities, Project Perseus.  He now proposes to turn his attention            
              to the history and philosophy of science.                                      
                                                                                             
              As in many fields, major, long-term database projects are being                
              planned to provide a new kind of scholarly infrastructure for the              
              fields of Science and Technology Studies (STS).  Among these are               
              the Einstein, Oppenheimer and Peirce projects.  Questions are being            
              framed and decisions will, in the very short future, be taken that             
              constrain what we can and cannot do for many years to come.  The               
              organization of these databases, however, is extremely complex                 
              since they incorporate full text, images, linguistic tools,                    
              historical and cultural background.  Given the lack of broad                   
              experience, it is not now possible to predict with accuracy what               
              will and will not work.  Yet, Project Perseus does bring relevant              
              experience to bear on issues in STS.  The purpose of this                      
              exploratory grant is to bring to the attention of the STS research             
              community the way in which Project Perseus has addressed many of               
              the database problems researchers in this area are confronting and             
              to explore how the experience gained in the development of Perseus             
              can be most effectively used for scientific and technical texts.               
                                                                                             
              Under this SGER grant, Professor Crane and his colleagues are                  
              studying the possibilities of developing an electronic database                
              that would serve as a model that would greatly extend the questions            
              which researchers can pose about science.  This database would be              
              built upon the existing Perseus multimedia database on Greek                   
              culture, but the framework they construct is meant to help                     
              establish standards in STS.  With a large amount of information                
              already on-line and accessible in a published database, they are               
              exploring setting the history of Greek science within an unusually             
              rich existing framework.  By extending the Perseus database into               
              Greek science, they would not only be able to create a powerful                
              tool more cost-effectively, but they would also be able to create              
              a working model for a comprehensive database for research.  Their              
              experiences would in turn help those working in other areas better             
              understand the strengths and weaknesses of the electronic medium               
              and thus have the capacity to allow work in other areas to progress            
              more rapidly and effectively.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The SGER project is progressing in two phases:  meetings in                    
              Washington in December, 1992 to discuss the possibilities  of this             
              work with members of the field; and a small conference in late                 
              spring, 1993 to plan the actual organization of the database for               
              Greek science.
