Title       : Collaborative Research: Lidar Studies of Middle Atmospheric Dynamics(CEDAR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1994    
File        : a9302183

Award Number: 9302183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Wilkerson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  A lidar consortium consisting of Clemson University (CU), Utah            
              State University (USU), the University of Maryland (UMD), and the              
              University of Pittsburgh (UP) jointly propose a 2-year research                
              program on middle atmosphere dynamics based on Doppler Rayleigh and            
              Raman lidar observations combined with other optical measurements              
              obtained at Bear Lake Observatory (BLO) and measurements of winds,             
              densities, and temperatures obtained from balloon and rocket                   
              flights.  (Proposals have been submitted by three institutions                 
              using the same text, but different budgets; UP will support this               
              effort through current NSF funding.)  CEDAR funding made possible              
              the installation in Utah of a Nd:YAG Rayleigh lidar system that had            
              been developed at UMD and moved to USU to be part of the BLO                   
              facilities.  The possible altitude coverage has been extended                  
              upward to 75 km with the addition of a 6 times more powerful                   
              frequency-stable Nd:YAG laser that was purchased by CU for use with            
              the lidar Consortium system.  This upgrade of the Maryland lidar               
              facility also includes one additional detector channel, which is a             
              Raman 607 nm channel that extends profile observations of                      
              temperature structure downward to the ground from 30 km.  The first            
              year of this proposed effort would continue observations of                    
              components - a high-resolution Fabry Perot etalon and a double-axis            
              mirror system - that are necessary for measuring the Doppler shift             
              of the backscattered Rayleigh and Mie lidar spectra to observe                 
              line-of-sight winds in the middle atmosphere.  A small radar system            
              will be added to observe line-of-sight winds in the middle                     
              atmosphere.  A small radar system will be added to shut off the                
              laser transmitter when any aircraft is near the beam.  A new lidar             
              transmission channel will be added (607 nm) based on Raman-shifting            
              the Nd laser output in a high pressure Raman cell.  Upon completion            
              of these instrumental modifications at the beginning of the second             
              year of the grant award, application of the new Doppler lidar would            
              collect vertical profiles of middle atmosphere winds and                       
              temperature from clear-air portions of the atmosphere above 10 km              
              by using the laser returns from Mie (particulate) scattering and               
              Rayleigh scattering at 532 nm.  These profiles will provide the                
              basis for examining the occurrence, structure, interaction, and                
              variability of the jet stream, planetary waves, tides, and gravity             
              waves in the middle atmosphere above the extended mountainous                  
              region of the American Rocky Mountain chain.  The oblique                      
              propagation of these waves through the middle atmosphere as                    
              filtered by the prevailing winds in the middle atmosphere will be              
              related to the dynamic activity simultaneously observed in the                 
              mesopause region by several instruments at BLO.  Correlative                   
              observations of temperature, density, and winds will be made                   
              between the lidar and a combination of balloons and rockets.  A by-            
              product of the PIs observations will be the measurement of aerosol             
              backscatter and extinction in high clouds, particularly thin                   
              cirrus, and the detection of stratospheric aerosols.
