Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Pattern Formation, Turbulence and Singularities in PDEs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9302013

Award Number: 9302013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Newell anewell@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Y Pomeau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Ercolani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir E. Zakharov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander M. Balk  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9302013  Newell       The investigator and his colleagues undertake projects
              aimed  at gaining a better understanding of turbulence in its many 
              manifestations and at obtaining macroscopic descriptions for  patterns that
              serve to simplify and unify the behavior of classes  of pattern forming systems
              in fluids and optics seemingly  unrelated at the microscopic level.  In the
              turbulence studies,  the aim is to understand the origins of short-lived
              coherent  structures and their role in causing intermittent and 
              non-Kolmogorov-like behavior.  It is important first to gain a  clear picture
              of weak turbulence theories, the reasons for more  than one Kolmogorov finite
              flux solution, and to understand the  roles that these solutions play in
              producing inverse cascades and  the roles that inverse cascades may play in
              originating collapse  structures.  The principal aim of the studies on pattern 
              formation  is to extend the previous far-from-onset theories to include a 
              description of pattern behavior when the local wavenumber is  driven outside of
              a stability band known as the Busse balloon.   The results of the research so
              far have led to a properly  regularized theory of patterns that can handle
              pattern  singularities such as dislocations and disclinations.  Moreover,  the
              latest work suggests that all point defects of almost  periodic  patterns are
              composed of the two elementary disclinations.       Patterns of an almost
              periodic nature arise all over the  place.  One sees them in the sand ripples
              under an advancing or  receding tide, in geological formations, on the coats of
              animals,  as fingerprints.  They occur in systems driven far from  equilibrium
              by some external stress that acts to destabilize  spatially and temporally
              uniform states and preferentially  amplify  certain shapes and configurations. 
              Geometrical symmetries, such  as rotation in the plane, lead to degeneracies
              (the wavelength of  a periodic pattern may be chosen but the direction remains 
              undetermined) and the competition betwee n the various amplified  states leads
              to patterns that often consist of a mosaic of almost  periodic patches
              separated by grain boundaries, domain walls and  point defects.  The goal of
              this research is to build a  macroscopic field theory for patterns that will
              unify and  simplify  the behavior of systems seemingly unrelated at the
              microscopic  level and that can capture both the smooth (field) and singular 
              (particle) components of the pattern.
