Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Classical Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9302823

Award Number: 9302823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Marshall marshall@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work supported by this award focuses on problems arising in               
              the mathematical theory of complex function theory.  Three primary             
              research themes will be followed.  The first concerns angular                  
              derivatives of conformal maps, that is, mappings of domains in the             
              complex plane which are univalent and analytic.  It has been a long            
              standing problem to determine whether or not a conformal mapping of            
              a simply connected region onto the unit disk has an angular                    
              derivative.  Although many special cases are known to be true, only            
              recently has the techniques of extremal length been developed to               
              the point where a general existence result is now possible.  It has            
              been possible to obtain a precise statement about the existence for            
              the heretofore unknown case of strip domains.  More work remains.              
              A second area of work will focus on the continued refinement of                
              numerical algorithms for conformal maps.  A fast, reliable program             
              has been developed and used primarily for finding experimental                 
              properties of maps.  Work will now be done to understand                       
              convergence properties and use them to study the classical corona              
              problem for triply-connected domains. Finally, efforts will be made            
              to determine whether the class of interpolating Blaschke products              
              generate the entire space of bounded holomorphic functions on the              
              disk.  It was shown in 1976 that if one uses all Blaschke products,            
              the statement is true. The interpolating products are much less                
              likely to occur, yet have more regularity and therefore are a                  
              better class to use as approximates.                                           
                   Complex analysis, the study of differentiable functions of a              
              complex variable, lies at the heart of vast areas of mathematics               
              stretching from number theory through potential theory and on to               
              linear algebra and numerical analysis.  This particular project                
              combines some long-standing problems and methods with new                      
              applications of computational geometry and graph theory.
