Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Bergman Spaces: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9302985

Award Number: 9302985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Korenblum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Korenblum  9302985       This project is a continuation of mathematical research
              into  classical function theory focusing on Bergman spaces and   developments
              which have issued from recent advances.  A  fundamental breakthrough occurred
              when H. Hedenmalm discovered a  factorization of functions in Bergman space
              analogous to the  classical one of F. Riesz which helped clarify the structure
              of  the Hardy spaces.  Among the goals of this research, work will be  done to
              describe the invariant subspaces of the analytic Lebesgue  spaces, on
              understanding the nonstandard invariant subspaces and  determining the
              domination relations on zero sets.  Work will  also be done on the Green's
              function for the biharmonic operator  in n-dimensional Euclidean space and
              algebras of harmonic  functions in three-dimensional space.  The latter is
              concerned  with locating those complex harmonic functions whose modulus is 
              also harmonic.  These are thought to be the closest  generalization to odd
              dimensions of analytic functions.       Complex analysis has a long,
              distinguished mathematical  history.  It has been a basis for studies in
              diverse areas as  number theory, computation, approximation theory and
              potential  theory.  Although the classical theory has been thoroughly 
              investigated for centuries, the newer Bergman spaces have been  slow to
              develop, despite their recognized importance.  The recent  work of Hedelmalm
              has completely changed the landscape to a point  where one fully expects major
              thrusts to take place in this area  similar to those which occurred when the
              theory of Hardy spaces  flourished in the 1950's and 60's.   ***
