Title       : Radiative and Non-radiative Centers in Indium Phosphide Alloy Thin Films and
               Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9302357

Award Number: 9302357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Wessels b-wessels@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Fundamental studies of the radiative and non-radiative defects in              
              epitaxial indium phosphide and its alloys with aluminum and                    
              gallium will be undertaken.  Defects and their properties                      
              resulting from deliberate doping of the alloys will be                         
              investigated; specific defect phenomena to be studied include:                 
              1)formation and stability of deep level native defects by                      
              self-compensation, 2)formation of deep donor levels associated                 
              with simple substitutional impurities, and 3)isoelectronic,                    
              rare-earth centers and their complexes.  Indium phosphide alloy                
              thin films and heterostructures will be prepared by metalorganic               
              vapor phase epitaxy.  Photoluminescence, photoconductivity and                 
              deep level transient spectroscopy will be used to determine                    
              defect parameters and defect stability. To determine the symmetry              
              and identification of the radiative and non-radiative deep level               
              defects polarized excitation spectroscopy will be used and the                 
              results compared to other symmetry sensitive measurements.  The                
              applicability of recent theories on native defect stability in                 
              these alloys will be examined.  Recent theories on the electronic              
              and optical properties of rare-earth impurities and their                      
              complexes will be examined with respect to experimental results.               
              %%%                                                                            
              Research will be conducted on the factors that influence the                   
              electronic and optical properties of compound semiconductor                    
              materials.  This research is expected to give a fundamental                    
              understanding of the effect of defects on material properties and              
              performance.  The semiconductors under study have wide                         
              applicability in electronic and optoelectronic devices;                        
              understanding the defect structure will also improve the                       
              performance of devices made from these materials.  New photonic                
              materials and devices may result from these studies as well as                 
              significant improvements in devices and integrated circuits                    
              currently used in computing, information processing, and                       
              telecommunications.
