Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Weighted Norm Inequalities and Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9302991

Award Number: 9302991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Wheeden wheeden@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Wheeden  9302991       This award continues support for mathematical research
              into  problems arising in the modern theory of partial differential  equations
              and singular integral operators.  The form of the  analysis which takes place
              involves critical inequalities  measuring the power norms of functions with
              that of their  gradients, especially when the measures are weighted by
              different  functions.  Such comparisons fall under the heading of Sobolev- 
              Poincare inequalities.  From such results one obtains upper and  lower bounds
              for fundamental solutions of divergence form  degenerate parabolic equations in
              case the degeneracy is time-  dependent and measured in terms of the two weight
              functions.   Work will be done establishing similar inequalities when the 
              gradient is replaced by vector fields other than the gradient.  A  second line
              of investigation concerns Carleson-type estimates for  measuring functions
              (weighted) in a half-space with their  boundary value norms taken against
              different weights.  Good, but  incomplete, results have been obtained for
              harmonic functions.   Efforts will be made to determine the extent that
              integral  transforms generated by other than the Poisson kernel produce the 
              same type of inequalities - especially in cases of non-  convolution kernels. 
              Finally, work is to be done on  characterizing weights which give good bounds
              on weighted  fractional integrals when compared with the original function 
              norms.       The measurement of integrals plays a central role in  determining
              both existence and bounds on solutions of  differential equations. Many of
              these results involve parameter  bounds which are dependent only on the
              underlying dimension.   Through careful analysis of the integrals and norms of
              the  corresponding derivatives one obtains significant information  about the
              existence and regularity of solutions.  ***
