Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9104731

Award Number: 9104731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Pavlowsky  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Metals entering streams in association with milling waste                 
              particles and spoil leachates have produced toxic concentrations               
              of arsenic, cadmium, lead, and zinc in fluvial deposits.  To                   
              understand metal transport dynamics in streams requires the                    
              integration of knowledge from several disciplines, including                   
              geomorphology, sedimentology, and geochemistry.  The complexity                
              of such integration helps explain why few investigators have                   
              attempted to describe metal dispersion in terms of the                         
              sedimentary units in which they are stored.  This doctoral                     
              dissertation research project will focus on determination of the               
              physical and geochemical controls on the distribution of trace                 
              metal storage in fluvial sediments in the Upper Mississippi                    
              Zinc-Lead District.  The research will describe the spatial                    
              patterns of metal storage by (1) mapping of surface and                        
              subsurface floodplain and channel deposits; (2) analyzing total                
              metal concentration, particle size and mineralogic composition;                
              and (3) identifying sediment-meal phase relationships.                         
              A goal of the project is development of a model that                           
              characterizes the interaction of watershed sediment and metal                  
              pollutant budgets.                                                             
                                                                                             
                   This project will contribute to a better understanding of                 
              the geomorphic and geochemical factors that determine the                      
              distribution and residence times of metal storages in mined                    
              watersheds.  It will increase our understanding of the effects of              
              nonpoint pollution sources on long-term water quality problems                 
              and the use of geochemical tracers in environmental-based                      
              studies.  This project also will provide an excellent opportunity              
              for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent               
              research skills.
