Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1992   
File        : a9104139

Award Number: 9104139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Schroeder  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Decisions by Third World farmers about which crops to raise               
              and how to produce them are related to the gender of the decision              
              makers.  Because women and men play markedly different roles,                  
              greater understanding about the incentives for increased                       
              productivity and distribution of proceeds must include                         
              exploration of the dynamices of gender-specific income generation              
              and household responsibility.  In the past two decades, women                  
              have established a major new cash-crop system centered on                      
              vegetable production has emerged in The Gambia.  The process has               
              entailed the inversion of the income-earning potentials of                     
              husbands and wives, the radical alteration of the farming system,              
              and the advent of a new sense of urgency in gender conflicts.                  
              Men have adopted different strategies to control the growing                   
              network of market gardens.  This doctoral dissertation project                 
              will focus on the ways in which women are defending themselves                 
              against these attempts to encroach on their new economic                       
              position.  Data will be collected from village and communal                    
              garden site censuses, garden surveys, individual interviews,                   
              income and land tenure surveys, and archival materials.  These                 
              data will be used to test four hypotheses related to climate                   
              change, seasonality, competing land use systems, and the dual                  
              nature of social and technical conflicts over gardening.                       
              Research will be focused on sites located primarily in the North               
              Bank community of Kerewan.                                                     
                                                                                             
                   This project will provide an opportunity to analyze                       
              intrahousehold bargaining and negotiation under circumstances in               
              which women appear to have an economic upper hand.  It will make               
              an important contribution both to the understanding of gender                  
              conflict and to the social fabric of Third World agricultural                  
              development.  This project also will provide an excellent                      
              opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop               
              independent research skills.
