Title       : Plant Terpene Metabolism: Monoterpene Hydroxylases and Sesquiterpene Cyclases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9104983

Award Number: 9104983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney Croteau croteau@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9178,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes are derived by cyclization of             
              prenyl pyrophosphates to olefins followed by oxidative modification            
              initiated by cytochrome P450-dependent hydroxylation.  Studies with            
              two sesquiterpene cyclases, differing in physical properties and               
              reaction complexity, will test the hypothesis that the same active             
              site residues play similar roles in the electrophilic mechanism of             
              this enzyme type.  Studies with three closely-related (-)-limonene             
              hydroxylases, that differ in position of allylic hydroxylation of              
              this simple monoterpene olefin, will test the proposal that minor              
              alterations in active site topography underlie regiochemistry of               
              oxygen insertion by these cytochrome P450 enzymes.  Homogeneous                
              proteins will be used to generate antibodies and partial amino acid            
              sequences, and a molecular cloning and expression strategy adopted             
              to obtain complete primary sequences and larger amounts of the                 
              enzymes.  Radioactive modifying reagents will be employed to                   
              selectively label active site cysteine and histidine residues of               
              the cyclases, and photolabile substrate analogs will be utilized               
              to label hydrophobic regions of both cyclase and hydroxylase sites.            
              Active site peptides will be prepared, sequenced, compared, and                
              located on the proteins.  The role of specific residues in cyclase             
              catalysis will be determined by protection against chemical                    
              modification using analogs representing different substrate binding            
              domains, and by directed mutagenesis.  Limonene-tethered heme-                 
              directed inhibitors, as well as 19F-NMR methods, will be used to               
              probe the spatial relationship between the heme iron of the                    
              cytochromes and the limonene substrate.  These studies will provide            
              new information on the nature of these novel cyclase and                       
              hydroxylase catalysts and a clearer understanding of the origin of             
              terpenoid natural products.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Terpenoids play an important role in the interaction of the plant              
              with its environment.  An understanding of terpenoid biochemistry              
              will allow a deeper understanding of the role of these compounds               
              in plants.  In addition to the well known essential oils of resins             
              of commerce, serious consideration is being given to nontraditional            
              uses of these plant metabolites as renewable sources of energy-                
              intensive chemicals.  A broad range of terpenoids are of                       
              pharmacological significance and many are of agrochemical utility.             
              New knowledge gained from this work will assist in efforts to                  
              increase the production of these valuable plant metabolites.//
