Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9104490

Award Number: 9104490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7718               (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Blumberg  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Friction between air and a ground surface affects both the                
              velocity of winds and the configuration of materials on the                    
              ground.  The higher winds are above the surface, the less their                
              velocities are retarded by surface friction.  The height above                 
              the surface at which surface friction ceases to affect wind                    
              velocities is its aerodynamic roughness length, but this height                
              varies in relation to the nature and configuration of surface                  
              materials.  This doctoral dissertation project will examine                    
              the spatial variation of the aerodynamic roughness length as                   
              measured over natural terrains, and it will develop a tool to                  
              predict the aerodynamic roughness length by remote sensing.                    
              Field data will be obtained under natural conditions:  the                     
              aerodynamic roughness length will be derived from wind profiles                
              corrected for atmospheric stability.  The topographic surface                  
              roughness will be measured in the field using a variety of                     
              methods to assess both micro-topography and the overall                        
              topography.  The relationship between variations in wind                       
              veolcities and the aerodynamic roughness length will be studied                
              using traps that capture airborne sediment.  The project also                  
              will examine means of analyzing aerial radar images for several                
              wavelengths and polarizations to determine their utility in                    
              estimating aerodynamic roughness.                                              
                                                                                             
                   This project will provide valuable information about the                  
              aerodynamic roughness length and thus about wind activity that                 
              affects erosion processes, desertification, and the nature of                  
              windblown sands.  In addition, greater knowledge about the                     
              aerodynamic roughness length will contribute significantly to the              
              refinement of global and regional climatic models.  This project               
              also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young               
              scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.
