Title       : Adaptational and Phenotypic Differences in Capacity for Intracellular pH
               Regulation in Molluscan Cardiac Myocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9104548

Award Number: 9104548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239700             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Ross Ellington elling@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Marine bivalve molluscs such as oysters, clams and mussels often               
              are found in habitats where oxygen availability may vary                       
              dramatically with time.  For instance, species which live in the               
              intertidal zone may go through daily cycles of air exposure at low             
              tides.  Most species close their shells to avoid desiccation.                  
              However, this results in a severe depletion of internal oxygen                 
              since the organism is effectively sealed from the respiratory                  
              environment.  Surprisingly, many of these species survive without              
              oxygen for extended periods due to the ability of their cells to               
              produce energy in the absence of oxygen.  One major drawback in                
              making energy without oxygen is that metabolic acids accumulate as             
              waste products.  This study will investigate how the cells of these            
              animals deal with the metabolic acids produced during period of                
              hypoxia.  Experiments will be conducted to see if cells from high              
              intertidal species (frequent exposure to oxygen deprivation) show              
              a higher capacity for dealing with these metabolic acids than cells            
              from low intertidal species (infrequent exposure to oxygen                     
              deprivation).  Additional studies will investigate whether the                 
              capacity for cells to cope with acid loads is enhanced when animals            
              are subjected to chronic oxygen stress.  These studies will provide            
              information on the unique mechanisms by which these animals are                
              adapted to their habitats and also yield insights into general                 
              mechanisms applicable to higher organisms.//
