Title       : Ovine Luteinizing Hormone Structure - Function Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9104968

Award Number: 9104968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231100             (Estimated)
Investigator: H.Edward Grotjan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Luteinizing hormone (LH) is produced by the anterior pituitary                 
              gland and acts to stimulate steroid production by the gonads of                
              both males and females.  Among the hormones known to exist, LH has             
              one of the more complex chemical structures because it contains two            
              dissimilar peptide chains and because each of these peptide chains             
              has attached sugars.  During the synthesis of this hormone, some               
              of the sugar portions of the molecules are altered giving them                 
              different amounts of molecular charge.  Thus, rather than existing             
              as a single molecular entity, luteinizing hormone exists as a                  
              family of closely related molecular forms.  Previous research has              
              demonstrated that the distribution of LH among these identifiable              
              molecular forms can be changed by hypothalamic and gonadal hormones            
              which act at the anterior pituitary gland to regulate the secretion            
              of luteinizing hormone.  Research to be performed will address the             
              major question:  "Does the fact that luteinizing hormone exists as             
              a family of identifiable molecular components play a significant               
              role in regulating the reproductive processes of animals?"  In                 
              order to answer this question, sheep will be used as the                       
              experimental model because they have relatively large pituitry                 
              glands from which these distinct molecular forms can be purified.              
              Once these are purified, their chemical structures will be                     
              obtained.  In addition, the biological functions of selected                   
              molecular forms of luteinizing hormone will be examined by                     
              determining their ability to survive into circulation,by examining             
              their ability to stimulate gonadal target cells in vitro and by                
              examining their ability to stimulate gonadal target cells in intact            
              animals.  This research should reveal whether the subtle changes               
              which occur in the molecular structure of ovine LH play a                      
              significant and meaningful role in the regulation of reproductive              
              function.//
