Title       : The Mechanism of Water Splitting and Oxygen Evolution in Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9104104

Award Number: 9104104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Sauer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Melvin P. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The oxidation of water to molecular oxygen is a characteristic                 
              reaction associated with photosynthesis in higher plants and                   
              cyanobacteria.  Light quanta producing excitation of the                       
              photosystem results in the transfer of electrons one at a time                 
              until four electrons are removed from two water molecules to                   
              produce O2.  Drs. Sauer and Klein are investing the chemical                   
              intermediates involved in this transfer of electrons and in the                
              storing of the oxidizing equivalents needed to yield O2.                       
              Manganese is involved in the water-splitting enzyme, and they                  
              are using X-ray absorption spectroscopy to determine the                       
              oxidation states, ligation and local structure around the Mn.                  
              Together with studies using EPR spectroscopy, their results                    
              have verified the direct participation of Mn oxidation state                   
              changes in the water-splitting process.  This proposal aims to                 
              characterize further the structure of the quartet of Mn atoms                  
              involved, the essential cofactors, inhibitors and protein                      
              ligands through the use of X-ray absorption spectroscopy,                      
              electron-nuclear and electron-electron double resonance                        
              spectroscopies.  They hope to learn, most importantly, how                     
              water becomes incorporated into the water-splitting enzyme                     
              prior to the final formation and release of O2.  Knowledge of                  
              this process will be most useful in development artificial                     
              systems whereby solar energy can be used to convert water into                 
              molecular oxygen and hydrogen fuel.
