Title       : Self Organizational Origin of Fibrous Texture and Twisting of Agate Quartz:
               Dynamic Crystallization Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1991  
File        : a9104198

Award Number: 9104198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique Merino merino@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is to continue work on the genesis of repetitive,            
              associated self-organization patterns of texture and composition               
              of quartz in volcanic agates.  The main patterns to be studied are             
              (a) the systematic interlayering of bands made up of twisted (and              
              very fine and high-Al) chalcedony fibers with bands made up of non             
              twisted (and coarser and low-Al) fibers, and (b) the systematic                
              association of fibrosity with banding, and of non-fibrosity with               
              lack of banding.  We theorize the fibrous habit and texture are                
              produced by a morphological instability of the crystallization                 
              front.  This spatial instability causes the front autonomously to              
              develop regularly spaced fingers, each of which becomes a quartz               
              fiber.  The fibers produced by the morphological instability pierce            
              through decreasing Al contours produced by another instability (an             
              autocatalytic one, which is temporal), and grow by accretion of                
              conical "sleeves," their rims being forced to incorporate more Al              
              than their centers.  This causes the fibers to grow twisted.                   
                   This project will unravel the dynamics of agate                           
              crystallization -- a complex self-organization process with                    
              geochemical, crystallochemical, and petrologic significance well               
              beyond agates.  It will clarify also the geochemical factors that              
              control crystal morphology and authigenic-texture type in other                
              minerals and other low-temperature environments.
