Title       : Biochemistry of Fatty Acid Uptake in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9104646

Award Number: 9104646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul N. Black   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs ?C12 - C18!) traverse the cell                
              envelope of Escherichia coli by a high affinity, saturable, energy-            
              dependent process that requires the functional activities of at                
              least two genes, fadL and fadD.  The fadL gene encodes an outer                
              membrane-bound protein (FadL) that mediates transport across this              
              membrane layer.  The fadD gene encodes acyl CoA synthetase, an                 
              inner membrane associated enzyme that activates fatty acids                    
              concomitant with transport.  There is increasing evidence that a               
              low molecular weight periplasmic fatty acid binding protein and an             
              inner membrane-bound oleic acid binding protein also participate               
              in transport.  In the proposed study, site-directed, chemical-                 
              saturation, and deletion mutagenesis of the cloned fadL+ gene will             
              be used to distinguish biochemical properties associated with FadL:            
              LCFA binding, LCFA transport, bacteriophage T2 binding, and heat-              
              modifiability.  These studies will be augmented by the use of                  
              affinity labeled long-chain fatty acids to identify potential amino            
              acid residues of FadL involved in binding and transport, and to                
              characterize binding- and transport-deficient mutants.  The acyl               
              CoA synthetase gene (fadD) sequence will be determined followed by             
              mutagenesis experiments to evaluate the structural and functional              
              features of this enzyme required for this transport process.                   
                                                                                             
              The goal of this work is to provide an understanding of how long               
              chain fatty acids bind to and traverse the cell envelope of                    
              Escherichia coli.  In broad terms, the results of these experiments            
              will provide information describing the molecular basis of protein-            
              fatty acid interaction during transport and fatty acid activation              
              prior to metabolic transformation.
