Title       : Archean Sedimentation Adjacent To An Orogenic Belt-Examples From Zimbabwe With
               Implications For Archean Tectonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9104876

Award Number: 9104876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92295              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Eriksson kaeson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Limpopo Province in southern Africa is a high-grade                   
              metamorphic belt that represents the exhumed root of a continent-              
              continent collision zone.  Granite-greenstone terranes of the                  
              Zimbabwe Province, to the north, and Kaapvaal Province to the                  
              south, flank the Limpopo Province.  On the Kaapvaal craton, the                
              Witwatersrand Supergroup is interpreted as a foreland-basin fill,              
              representing the sedimentary response to collisional events in the             
              Limpopo orogeny.  A sedimentary succession of comparable lateral               
              extent, thickness, and lithology to the Witwatersrand Supergroup               
              is not present in the Zimbabwe Craton adjacent to the northern                 
              marginal zone of the Limpopo Province.  Instead, five local and                
              lithologically distinct stratigraphic successions of different age             
              are present in the greenstone belts.  At least four of these                   
              successions, developed in the lower and upper greenstones, are of              
              comparable age to the Witwatersrand Supergroup.  The absence of a              
              Witwatersrand equivalent in Zimbabwe raises several important                  
              questions regarding the evolution of the southern African Archean              
              in specific, and Archean tectonics and sedimentation patterns in               
              general:  1) What are the detailed characteristics of two of the               
              3.0-2.7 Ga Zimbabwean basins, including source-area composition,               
              source-area age, source-area location, sediment dispersal patterns,            
              depositional environments, basin configuration, basin evolution,               
              and tectonic setting?  2) What was the genetic relationship of the             
              Zimbabwe sedimentary basins with respect to the evolution of the               
              Limpopo orogeny?  3) Was the Limpopo orogeny of Pyrenean or                    
              Himalayan type?                                                                
                   A multidisciplinary approach, involving detailed field                    
              mapping, structural analysis, sedimentologic-stratigraphic                     
              analysis, and geochemistry, will be applied to two of the                      
              stratigraphic successions to address the above questions.
