Title       : NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Academic Industry- Relations Conference;
               Aquafredda di Maratea, Italy August 31-Sept 6, 1991.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9104009

Award Number: 9104009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Blanpied                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : August 1,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Etzkowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert I. Fusfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 5931      INTERNATIONAL INFO & ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award was made to support the foreign travel                              
              costs of eight U.S.resarchers to attend a NATO                                 
              Advanced Research Workshop (ARW) in Acquafredda,                               
              Italy.  The topic of the workshop is                                           
              "Academic-Industry Relations."  The                                            
              P.I., Dr. Henry Etzkowitz, is responsible for                                  
              organizing attendance at and participation in the                              
              workshop by top American researchers in this field.                            
              The aims of the ARW are to exchange information and                            
              stimulate new research in the areas of:                                        
              organizational innovations in academic-industry R&D                            
              alignments; science and industrial policy                                      
              intersections in regional, newly industrializing,                              
              and post-socialist contexts; and development of                                
              broadly accesible data bases for comparative                                   
              research.  The value of the workshop, which brings                             
              together researchers from all around the world, is                             
              to bring a large body of existing research results                             
              and knowledge to the attention of the most                                     
              pre-eminent investigators in the field of academic-                            
              industry research relations, revealing the                                     
              possibilities for combining their efforts                                      
              synergistically.  A great deal is already known,                               
              through experientially-based surveys and through                               
              structured, theory-based research studies, about how                           
              innovation occurs and knowledge is transmitted in                              
              academic-industry research interactions.  However,                             
              this body of knowledge has yet to be organized and,                            
              to the extent feasible, codified in ways that                                  
              would make it widely and easily accessible to the                              
              S&T community, both for implementation and further                             
              research.  Benefits to the U.S. will be in the                                 
              form of gaining knowledge of competing, and                                    
              different, approaches to university-industry                                   
              partnerships.
