Title       : Multiple Description Source Codes with Applications to Packetized Speech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9104566

Award Number: 9104566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vinay A. Vaishampayan vinay@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry D. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research is a study of the design of multiple description            
              source codes for correlated sources and for speech.  A multiple                
              description source code provides the receiver with two different               
              descriptions of the source sequence.  Hence, if one description is             
              lost, the other can be used to reconstruct the source.  It is also             
              desired that if both the descriptions do reach the receiver, the               
              performance is strictly better than if only one of the descriptions            
              were to arrive.  Thus the two descriptions must be different and               
              individually good.                                                             
                   The first objective is to study multiple description codes for            
              correlated sources.  This includes the design of good codes as well            
              as the derivation of performance bounds which are not currently                
              available in the literature.  The final goal is to design good, low            
              complexity multiple description codes for correlated sources.  The             
              second objective is to study the applications of multiple                      
              description source codes to speech transmission over packet-                   
              switched networks.  Packet losses are a significant detriment to               
              speech quality and multiple description source codes are a good way            
              to reduce performance degradations due to packet losses.  This                 
              research will investigate whether significant quality improvements             
              can be achieved by designing low bit rate waveform and vocoder                 
              based multiple description speech coders.
