Title       : U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research on Damage Evolutions and their Sensitivities
               during Metal Forming Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1992     
File        : a9104865

Award Number: 9104865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhijit Chandra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1467,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Abhijit Chandra of the University of Arizona               
              to collaborate in materials engineering research with Viggo                    
              Tvergaard of the Department of Solid Mechanics of the Technical                
              University of Denmark.  They share an interest in the forming of               
              metal and in understanding the processes that affect the properties            
              of the finished product.  In particular, their collaborative research          
              focuses on understanding the phenomenon of local instabilities                 
              generated by interactions of microdefects in a damage cluster.                 
              Professor Tvergaard has developed various models for damage                    
              evolutions in situations involving plasticity and creep.  Professor            
              Chandra has worked extensively on metal forming processes and on               
              design sensitivities of these processes.  This complementary                   
              expertise is combined very effectively in the proposed collaborative           
              research plan.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              During a metal forming process, the workpiece material is                      
              subjected to intense stress and deformation fields.  As a result, the          
              material undergoes large plastic strains and rotations in order to             
              produce new and desirable shapes of the workpiece.  However, the               
              stress and deformation fields may cause local instabilities that may           
              nucleate microscopic voids.  Growth of such defects results in                 
              degradation of the mechanical properties of the finished product,              
              and may even lead to its failure.  The results of the proposed                 
              research will be very helpful in designing forming processes that              
              avoid or minimize the development of this damage in the                        
              workpiece.
