Title       : Support of 7th International Conference on Partitioning in Aqueous two-phase
               Systems - Advances in Separations in Bio- chemistry, Cell Biology &
               Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1991       
File        : a9104385

Award Number: 9104385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeffrey Foltz                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Milton Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Separation methods by which biological materials may be                        
              isolated with great sensitivity and in large scale, while                      
              remaining in a nondenaturing environment, are of substantial                   
              interest in a variety of scientific disciplines.  Consequently                 
              the technique of partitioning in two-phase aqueous polymer                     
              systems is frequently the method of choice for both research                   
              and commercial purifications of proteins, nucleic acids, and                   
              cells.  The great potential of the method and interest in it                   
              is revealed by the publication in recent years of three books                  
              and hundreds of papers on partitioning and by the commercial,                  
              large-scale application of partitioning by several major                       
              companies in the U.S., Europe, and Japan.  As a result of the                  
              rapidly expanding development of partitioning techniques,                      
              international conferences have been held biannually since                      
              1979.  The 7th International Conference on Partitioning in                     
              Aqueous Two-Phase Systems will be held in New Orleans, June 2-                 
              7, 1991.  This is the first time in over a decade for the                      
              meeting to be held in the United States and it is expected to                  
              attract a group of leading scientists of varied disciplines                    
              and backgrounds.  The Conference participants are typically                    
              involved in a variety of biotechnical separation in addition                   
              to partitioning, and as a consequence the Conference includes                  
              sessions on: novel and competing separation technologies,                      
              gravitational effects on separation and related processes,                     
              biotechnical applications of PEG chemistry, and polymer-                       
              protein and polymer-surface chemistry.  The grant is used for                  
              partial support of travel, registration, and per diem.  At                     
              least two other federal agencies (NASA and ONR) and several                    
              industrial companies also partial support of this conference.
