Title       : Collaborative Research: An Integrated Seismic Experiment Across A Continental
               Rift: The Newark Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1991        
File        : a9104862

Award Number: 9104862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : January 5,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25753              (Estimated)
Investigator: John N. Louie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  This project involves the acquisition of a vertical seismic               
              profile integrated with a high-resolution reflection survey which              
              will provide both wide- and narrow-angle reflections from the                  
              climatic cyclostratigraphy recorded in the Triassic sediments of               
              the Newark Rift Basin, New Jersey.  The small amount of                        
              stratigraphic overlap between the core holes of the Newark Basin               
              Scientific Drilling Project further justifies the use of high                  
              resolution seismic profiling to effectively tie single formations              
              from one hole to another.  The best manifestation of the                       
              cyclostratigraphy occurs within the Lockatong and lower Passaic                
              formations.  Each will be sampled by only a single core hole, the              
              holes near Titusville and Pennington of Lamont's southern                      
              transect in Mercer County, New Jersey.  To trace facies                        
              variations amounting to changes in reflectivity and interval                   
              velocity between core holes requires the detailed velocity                     
              information and high resolution subsurface images that can be                  
              provided by VSP and high resolution surface seismic surveys.  The              
              velocities and reflectivities recorded by these surveys should                 
              correlate with lake depth index variations can be traced between               
              core holes using the high resolution surface seismic surveys to                
              evaluate the continuity of sequences between the core holes as                 
              well as changes in composite Van Houten cycle spacing and lake                 
              depth index with proximity to the eastern shore of the basin.                  
              Such controls will provide additional constraints for                          
              interpretation of the core data with respect to basin wide                     
              cyclicity.
