Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Aspects of Riccati Transformation, Invariant
               Manifold Approximation, and Connected Issues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1991 
File        : a9104564

Award Number: 9104564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Dieci dieci@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator will conduct research on some                  
              analytical and computational problems related to the Riccati                   
              transformation, the superstability phenomenon for integration of               
              stiff differential equations, and invariant manifold                           
              approximation.  This work involves (i) further study,                          
              implementation and software production of reliable algorithms for              
              integrating differential Riccati equations, (ii) using the                     
              differential Riccati equation to perform mesh-selection for stiff              
              systems of two-point boundary value problems, (iii)                            
              software production of a code for nonlinear two-point boundary                 
              value problems based on the Riccati method.  He will further                   
              study the so-called superstability phenomenon arising during                   
              adaptive integration of stiff differential equations, seeking                  
              efficient techniques that avoid the practical superstability                   
              occurrences and that can be incorporated into general purpose                  
              ordinary differential equation solvers.  Finally, he will                      
              continue working on numerical approximation of invariant                       
              manifolds, in fact on the numerical solution of the associated                 
              systems of hyperbolic partial differential equations.  This                    
              involves (i) approximation analysis for the nonlinear case, (ii)               
              efficient solution techniques (multigrid approaches) for the                   
              resulting linear systems, (iii) exploitation of the link with the              
              Riccati transformation.                                                        
                   Most realistic physical phenomena are modelled by                         
              complicated nonlinear systems of differential equations.                       
              Exact solution of these systems is hopeless, and numerical                     
              simulation is a necessity.  This work aims at producing reliable,              
              and rigorously justified, algorithms to solve some of these                    
              systems.  The intent is to produce software tools for the                      
              working scientist.  In particular, work on the Riccati equation                
              will be of value to people working in Games' Theory, Optimal                   
              Control and connected Engineering fields.  The work on so-called               
              stiff differential equations is useful in solving  systems                     
              having different time-scales, such as in chemical kinetics and                 
              aerodynamics applications.  Finally, the work on approximation of              
              invariant manifolds is useful in understanding the long-term                   
              behavior of nonlinear dynamical systems.  This has applications                
              in many areas of applied science.
