Title       : Sequence Elements Active in Alphavirus RNA Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9104054

Award Number: 9104054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Strauss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              To identify host-cell or viral ?proteins! that interact with                   
              conserved nucleotide sequence elements in the promotion of                     
              alphaviral RNA replication.  Four conserved nucleotide sequence                
              elements of 19 to 51 nucleotides may serve as promoters in the                 
              replication of viral RNA.  Mutational analyses of three of these               
              elements in Sinbis virus have shown that they are crucial for the              
              replication of the virus and have suggested that they are sites of             
              interaction with host-cell and viral proteins.  Three approaches               
              to identify host or viral proteins that interact with these                    
              elements will be used.                                                         
                                                                                             
              RNA binding will assay proteins from infected or uninfected cells              
              that interact with these sequences elements.  Short probes of viral            
              RNA that contain a conserved sequence element will be synthesized              
              in vitro and used to study the interaction of the sequences element            
              with proteins.  These interactions will be assayed by mobility                 
              shift analysis of the RNA probe.  UV crosslinking of bound proteins            
              to labeled probe can then be used to identify specific proteins                
              that interact with these probes.  Such proteins can be isolated and            
              sequence obtained in order to identify the nature of the protein.              
                                                                                             
              Many of the mutations introduced into the various sequence elements            
              render the virus temperature sensitive (ts) or otherwise highly                
              attenuated for growth.  Second site revertants of two such mutants             
              have been isolated and it is anticipated that second site                      
              revertants of other mutants can also be isolated.  The supperessor             
              mutations in such second site revertants are presumably changes in             
              viral proteins that interact with the sequence elements, and such              
              suppressor mutations will be mapped.  In this way it is hoped that             
              specific viral proteins that interact with a particular sequence               
              element can be identified.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Chimeric viruses between Ross River and Sindbis viruses will be                
              constructed.  In such chimeras, the proteins encoded by one virus              
              must interact with sequence elements of the second virus.  The                 
              properties of such chimeric viruses will allow us to probe the                 
              functions of the various domains and to determine the nature of                
              protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions.                                  
                                                                                             
              To determine the boundaries of and requirements of these conserved             
              nucleotide sequence elements for alphavirus RNA replication and the            
              effects of changes in these elements upon RNA replication.  We will            
              follow up our mutational analyses of Sinbis virus conserved                    
              sequence elements in two ways will be followed up by:                          
                                                                                             
              Construction and testing; mutations in Ross River virus conserved              
              sequence elements in order to compare the results of the same                  
              mutation in two different alphaviruses.  A comparative approach to             
              the study of alphavirus genomes is useful and informative and                  
              Sindbis and Ross River viruses differ in a number of interesting               
              ways that can be exploited in the study of virus RNA replication.              
                                                                                             
              Viral RNA replication by these mutants will be studied  in order               
              to further define the role of these sequence elements in RNA                   
              replication.  Utilization of truncated RNAs with mutations                     
              introduced into these sequences elements in an attempt to dissect              
              the role of these elements in promoting the synthesis of plus                  
              strand versus minus strand RNA will be undertaken. //
