Title       : Ribosome Synthesis Conference Cold Spring Harbor Sept 11-15,1991.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9104637

Award Number: 9104637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Ribsomes were among the first complex cellular components to                   
              be studied from a regulatory viewpoint.  As knowledge of the                   
              regulation of ribosome synthesis has increased, it is                          
              understood that ribosome synthesis involves the regulation of                  
              numerous processes, including transcription RNA processing                     
              RNA-protein interaction and nucleo-cytoplasmic communication.                  
              Furthermore, the synthesis of all the ribosomal components is                  
              coordinated and balanced with the production of many other                     
              cell constituents.  It is clear that the study of the                          
              synthesis of ribosomes is very important in its own right.                     
              In addition, the regulation of ribosome synthesis impacts on                   
              the synthesis of virtually every other cellular component,                     
              and responds to (or perhaps is a central component of) the as                  
              yet poorly elucidated regulatory networks which control cell                   
              growth proliferation and development in response to external                   
              stimuli.  The study of ribosome biosynthesis may therefore be                  
              one of the most promising approaches to an understanding of                    
              these larger regulator networks.  The molecular mechanisms                     
              which regulate ribosome synthesis have recently been partly                    
              elucidated in a few organisms, but many key elements of how                    
              regulation occurs remain either unclarified or undiscovered.                   
              New vitality has been injected into the field both by modern                   
              genetic and biochemical methodologies and by broadening the                    
              field to include a diverse set of organisms, each with some                    
              common and some unique characteristics of ribosome synthesis.                  
              This has led to rapid progress, but also to some                               
              fragmentation of the field.  The objective of the "Ribosome                    
              Synthesis" meeting is to bring together researchers working                    
              on aspects of ribosome synthesis ranging from transcription                    
              to assembly, in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribosome                       
              synthesis.  The integration of all aspects of ribosome                         
              synthesis will motivate each participant to reflect on the                     
              place of his or her work in the overall process and thus                       
              foster the interchange of ideas that will serve to focus                       
              models of ribosome synthesis in all species.
