Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Investigation of Exchange in the Caroline
               Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9412851

Award Number: 9412851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11730              (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Ayres wsayres@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412851  Ayres    Under the direction of Dr. William Ayres, Mr Christopohe 
              Descantes will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He  will conduct
              ethnographic, ethnohistorical and archaeological  research in the village of
              Gachpar, located on the Pacific island  of Yap, and at Ulithi, a coral atoll
              located off Yap's coast.  Ethnographic data indicates that in the Yap region,
              as in many  parts of the Pacific, extensive exchange networks existed to 
              distribute goods among resource poor islands and this exchange  network played
              a central role in the political organization of  island polities. In Yap the
              situation appears quite complex since  specific areas of the island maintained
              exclusive links with  individual outlying atolls. At an even finer level, these
               linkages appeared specified by individual family and lineage. Mr.  Descantes
              will carry out ethnographic and archaeological  fieldwork on both Yap and
              Ulithi. He will conduct interview and  excavation in the Yap village which, by
              tradition is linked  through trade to Ulithi. He will do similar work at Ulithi
              as  well. On this basis, he will determine what trading ties exist at  the
              present time and trace them backwards first through the  historical record and
              then, by means of excavated archaeological  material into the prehistoric past.
                 Archaeological data indicates that small and geographically  isolated
              Pacific islands were inhabited thousands of years ago.  While the original
              feats of navigation involved in this expansion  have long been recognized, less
              attention has been focussed on  the social, economic and political systems
              which permitted  sustained occupation of islands which were often lacking in 
              workable stone, clay and other essential goods. This research is  focussed on
              this topic. It is important because its deep  chronological perspective will
              permit one to examine how the  system developed and was maintained over
              millennia. The data  which M. Deschantes collects will be of interest to many 
              anthropologists. The proj ect will also assist in the training of  a promising
              young scientist.
