Title       : U.S.Bulgaria Cooperative Research Analytical and Computational Studies of
               Oscillations in Age-structured Population Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9412284

Award Number: 9412284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29441              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jia Li li@math.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5958,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412284  Li    This grant supports a US-Bulgaria Joint Cooperative Research 
              Project on "Analytical and Computational Studies of Oscillations  in
              Age-Structured Population Models" between Dr. Jia Li and Dr.  Mark J. Friedman
              of the Department of Mathematical Sciences of  the University of Alabama
              Huntsville, and Dr. Tanya Kostova of  the Laboratory of Numerical Methods of
              the Institute of  Mathematics of the Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria.  The
               topics of research will include analytical and computational  studies of
              oscillations in age-structured population models.  The  results of the study
              are expected to have an impact in both  mathematical and biological sciences,
              as the main goal is to  disclose the underlying mechanisms of the possible (and
              often  observed in nature) oscillatory behavior of the size of a single 
              population.  Understanding such mechanisms is one of the most  important
              questions in the theory of population dynamics.  The  collaboration will
              benefit both sides as the participating  researchers have close but different
              and complementary experience  in treating such models.  The research will focus
              on the spectral  analysis of the linearization of the age-structured model,
              which  is a nonlinear partial differential-integral equation, on its 
              simplifications in various forms, such as systems of ordinary  differential
              equations and equations with delay, and finally on  its general setting.  An
              important part of the project will be  numerical simulations and numerical
              tracing of bifurcating  periodic solutions.  All results will be given a
              suitable  interpretation for the natural sciences.    This project in
              mathematics fulfills the program objective of  advancing scientific knowledge
              by enabling leading experts in  Bulgaria and the United States to combine
              complementary talents  and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest
              and  competence.  ***
