Title       : Spatial Conflict in the Information Age
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9412592

Award Number: 9412592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9986               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Obermeyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3085

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412592  OBERMEYER       The impacts of new technologies frequently are far
              greater  and more complex than originally was anticipated when the 
              technologies were developed.  As a result, promoters of  technological
              innovations frequently make claims regarding the  significance of those
              innovations in realms far removed from the  specific activities directly
              related to the innovation.  Advocates of geographic information systems (GISs),
              for example,  have claimed that wide-spread adoption of GISs will minimize 
              locational conflicts by making a greater range of more accurate  and more
              current information available to conflicting parties.  This assertion has not
              been scientifically tested, however.  Researchers who have examined the sources
              and dynamics of  conflict among people and groups have identified two separate 
              bases of conflicts.  "Cognitive conflict" relates to conflicts  based on
              different interpretations of factual information.  Evidence exists that new
              information technologies like GISs often  facilitate resolution of conflict by
              helping conflicting parties  to operate from more similar knowledge bases.  In
              contrast.  "interest conflict" is based on differences in the values of 
              conflicting parties.  This Research Planning Grant for Women  Scientists will
              conduct a pilot study of methods designed to  examine the ways that underlying
              value differences affect the use  of GISs by conflicting parties.  Three case
              studies will be used  to examine an alternative hypothesis that holds that GISs
               increase rather than decrease conflict over land uses, because  the additional
              "facts" and analyses available through use of a  GIS are used selectively by
              the different parties to support  their own positions.  The three case studies
              consist of  examinations of financial redlining, electoral redistricting, and 
              distribution of public goods in legislative districts.  Each case  study will
              consist of identification of "key players" in the  controversy followed by
              telephone and face-to-face interviews   with those participants, during which
              special emphasis will be  placed on the role of GIS technology in the
              resolution or  continuation of conflict.       As a planning grant, the primary
              purpose of this award will  be to develop and refine research methods that can
              be used in a  more comprehensive study on this topic.  This pilot also will 
              yield more immediate benefits.  In addition to contributing to  new
              understandings of the specific cases under intensive review,  the project will
              enhance theoretical discussions of the forms and  roles of cognitive and
              interest factors in conflicts and the  social consequences of new information
              technologies.
