Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land Conservation as a Strategy for Sustainable
               Development: The North-South Environmental Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1994      
File        : a9412671

Award Number: 9412671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4571               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Lofland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    This  is  an  award  under the  Grants  for  Improving  Doctoral 
              Dissertation Research program.  It is a  study  of  the influence of developed
              countries on the establishment of  land   conservation   areas  and  policies  
              in   developing  countries.   The  research  will  be  conducted  through   a 
              combination of quantitative analysis of cross-national  data  on land
              conservation schemes and intensive analysis of three  case   study  countries: 
              Costa  Rica,  Kenya,  and  Brazil.  Interviews with key players in these
              countries as well as in  organizations based in the developed world will  be 
              carried  out  to  try  to  understand the sources  of  variations  in 
              willingness to establish land conservation areas.        Problems  of
              sustainable development in the developing  world  have  serious consequences
              for all of  humanity.   In  recent  years governments and organizations in the
              developed  world  have  tried  to  foster  sustainable  development  in 
              various  ways,  such  as  by encouraging  land  conservation  projects  in  the
               developing world.  Yet  we  have  a  poor  understanding  of  what  causes
              some  countries  to  respond  favorably to such proposals and others to reject
              them.  This  project, by examining responses to land conservation appeals 
              around  the  world as well as in three case study countries,  will promote
              understanding of this vital topic.  In addition  to the scientific gains to be
              achieved by the research, this  award  will materially assist a highly
              promising student  in  completing  research  for the Ph.D. dissertation.   Thus
               it  contributes to the future scientific manpower of the  nation  and  the
              thorough training of the next generation of  social  scientists.  This project
              will also contribute to the  Human  Dimensions of Global Change research
              initiative.
