Title       : Nanostructures in Multiple Quantum Well Optical Waveguides and Microcavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9412772

Award Number: 9412772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph T. Boyd jboyd@babbage.ececs.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Steckl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard E. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412772  Boyd  The principle aspects of the proposed research are the
              fabrication  of quantum wires, optical channel waveguides, and microcavity 
              structures and optical characterization of their properties.  FIB-  induced
              compositional mixing of MQW regions will be a primary  fabrication technique,
              while time-resolved and spatially-resolved  photoluminescence is the main
              technique to be performed for  evaluating the quality of these structures. 
              Since these  nanostructures are directed at enhancing nonlinear optical 
              interactions and improving semiconductor laser performance, we  expect to
              characterize nonlinear optical effects resulting from  quantum wires and
              microcavities and to determine the impact of FIB-  fabricated microcavity
              structures on semiconductor lasers.    Microcavity structures are finding
              advantageous use in vertical  cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSELs) and have
              considerable  potential for the formation of Fabry-Perot bistable switches.  As
               a part of the proposed research, we will be applying FIB processing 
              capability to the fabrication of these structures.  The direct  write
              capability of FIB processing (mixing and milling) is expected  to provide
              significant improvement in device isolation and pn  junction formation.    The
              high resolution properties (~50 nm) of the FIB system and its  capability to
              direct write patterns onto samples will allow us to  fabricate several
              waveguide structures which will elucidate  nonlinear optical effects, including
              nonlinear distributed feedback  gratings, directional couplers, and
              Mach-Zehnder interferometers.   We expect to demonstrate all-optical switching
              with these  structures which will be characterized by low switching powers. 
              ***
