Title       : Eco RI DNA Methyltransferase: Catalytic and Recognition Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1996      
File        : a9412078

Award Number: 9412078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert O. Reich reich@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9412078  Reich  The information content of DNA is expanded in almost all
              organisms by  methylation of adenine (N6) or cytosine (C5 and N4). DNA
              methylation is  involved in the control of tissue specific and developmentally 
              regulated gene expression; the protection of host (bacterial) DNA  against
              endonuclease cleavage; DNA repair; aging; and genetic  imprinting. The study of
              two bacterial DNA methyltransferases is  proposed: EcoRI N6 adenine
              methyltransferase, which methylates the  second adenine in GAATTC, and BamHI N4
              cytosine methyltransferase,  which methylates the first cytosine in GGATCC. The
              ready availability  of the genes and large quantities of homogeneous protein
              provides the  basis for the structure-function analyses to be performed. The
              general  goal is to understand the molecular details of sequence-specific DNA 
              methylation sufficiently to design novel biocatalysts, enzyme "mimics",  and/or
              modify the sequence-specificity of the target enzyme.  Two specific aims are
              detailed. The first is to identify structural  features of the EcoRI
              methyltransferase or its substrate, and to a  lesser extent the BamHI
              methyltransferase, that are essential for  catalysis. The second aim is to
              determine the three-dimensional  structure of the EcoRI or BamHI
              methyltransferase and their  corresponding protein-cofactor as well as protein
              DNA-cofactor  complexes using X-ray crystallographic analyses of the wild type 
              proteins as well as point and deletion mutants. This structural  information
              will aid our understanding of past structure-function  studies with the EcoRI
              methyltransferase as well as provide the basis  for future studies aimed at
              elucidating sequence-specific DNA  modification.  %%%  These experiments are
              designed to characterize bacterial DNA methyltransferases. These enzymes 
              modify unique DNA sequences by methylating adenine and cytosine. Structural
              characterization using  X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance is
              proposed. Also portions of the enzymes  which contact the  DNA will be
              identified using laser cross linking and mass spectrometry. Functional 
              characterization will largely be through protein engineering and protein
              modification experiments. The  goal of this research is to obtain a molecular
              understanding of how these enzymes modify unique sites  within DNA.
              Sequence-specific DNA modification is a universal biological process which has 
              practical applications in the field of molecular biology.  ***
