Title       : Representational Granularity in the Philosophy of Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9412895

Award Number: 9412895
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Manders   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Does the way one writes something in mathematics make any theoretical
              difference?   This is a question that  Dr. Manders is addressing in this
              research.  Representational differences have been regarded as of little
              theoretical significance in the philosophy or foundations of mathematics. 
              Differences of notation or language have been seen as of merely practical
              interest, as long as they can be bridged by inference-reserving translations.  
               Dr. Manders aims to identify features of representation central to conceptual
              function in mathematics, and assign them a philosophical role.   Notably, he is
              studying contrasts in "representational granularity" between content-linked
              representations;  roughly, these are differences among representations such as
              photographs, diagrams, formulae, and text, as to how they break up contents
              they share into individually representable pieces.  He hopes to show how
              granularity differences underlie the function of concepts, generality, and
              proof; and thus should share center stage in the philosophical picture of
              intellectual understanding.  It would follow that philosophy of mathematics, in
              order to get its sights on mathematical understanding, must engage mathematical
              practices in a way that is sensitive to these features of mathematical
              representation.  Doing so promises to re-involve philosophy of mathematics with
              current mathematical practice and with the history of mathematics.    Dr.
              Manders argument uses case studies:  an analysis of Descartes' geometry, and
              subsequent geometrical practices in which algebraic representation
              predominates; and a contrasting analysis of diagram-based geometrical
              practices.  He wants to show how strengths and weaknesses of several such
              practices as vehicles for the understanding may be understood from grain size
              differences between their respective representations.
