Title       : Knowledge-based Clustering, U.S.-Indo Collaboration Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9412209

Award Number: 9412209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7613               (Estimated)
Investigator: M.Narasimha Murty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst of Science
	      
	      Bangalore, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5919,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9412209  Murty    Description:  This project is to support  collaboration by Dr.
              Anil K. Jain of the  Department of Computer Science at Michigan  State
              University, and Dr. M. Narasimha Murty of  the Department of Computer Science
              and  Automation at the Indian Institute of Science  in Bangalore, India.  The
              two scientists will  work jointly in the area of knowledge-based  clustering.  
              The main focus of the research  will be the following topics: incorporate 
              domain knowledge to obtain more meaningful  clusters; investigate grouping of
              labelled  objects for efficient representation and rule  generation; and
              develop tools to assist a  potential user in selecting an appropriate 
              clustering algorithm for a given problem.     Scope:  Cluster analysis attempts
              to assess the  interaction among patterns by organizing the  patterns into
              groups or clusters such that  patterns within a cluster are more similar to 
              each other than patterns belonging to different  clusters. The results can be
              used to initiate  hypotheses about the data.  The method is  popular in pattern
              recognition, computer  vision, machine learning, biology, psychiatry, 
              psychology, marketing, and information  retrieval.  The collaboration by these
              two  highly competent scientists should advance the  techniques used and lead
              to better utilization  of the method.  ***
