Title       : Bulk and Interface Bonding in Ceramics and Intermetallics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9412146

Award Number: 9412146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Spence spence@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian-Min Zuo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Spence  9412146    A three year program of research is proposed of atomic 
              bonding in crystals, at interfaces and at defects.  Ceramics  and intermetallic
              compounds will be studied using a  combination of ab-initio quantum molecular
              dynamics  computations, self-consistent calculations and experimental 
              measurements of bond charge distributions by quantitative  convergent beam
              electron diffraction method.  The Zeiss  Omega energy-filtering electron
              microscope at the Arizona  State University center for High Resolution Electron
               Microscopy will be used for the experimental work.  Principal Investors
              propose a new technique based on the  specular electron beam reflected from a
              metal-ceramic  interface in the transmission geometry for reflection  imaging,
              microanalysis and bonding studies of buried  interfaces.  This work is
              collaborative with C.P. Flynn.  For perfect crystals, in which bonds have been
              "seen" for  the first time only recently,  Principal Investors propose  bond
              charge distribution measurements in titanium-aluminum  and a series of ionic
              crystals in order to test the accuracy  of self-consistent computations based
              on the local density  approximation.  Measured bond distributions will be
              compared  for titanium-aluminum with and without  manganese doping,  which is
              found to reduce brittleness.  In ferroectric  crystal Principal Investigators
              plan comparisons of charge  transfer between titanium and oxygen in strontium
              titanate  and isostructural barium titanate oxygen in order to  understand why
              one is ferroelectric and the other not.  %%%  The proposed research seeks to
              investigate the origins of  atomic bonding in crystals, at interfaces and
              defects.  Ceramics and intermetallic compounds will be studied using a 
              combination of theoretical calculations and experimental  measurements of bond
              charge distributions by quantitative  techniques.  ***
