Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Responses of Motorists and the Neighborhoods
               They Drive Through to the January, 1994 Los Angeles Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9412901

Award Number: 9412901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7011               (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Mark dmark@geog.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412901  MARK       The January 1994 earthquake in Los Angeles destroyed parts 
              of four major freeways. This event presents a unique opportunity  to explore
              the impacts of such disruptions on both motorists who  used those freeways and
              on neighborhoods that receive the  displaced motorists. Due to modified
              commuting patterns, members  of different ethnic and socioeconomic groups are
              necessarily  interacting in ways that they did not interact before. White 
              middle and upper income commuters are now travelling surface  streets in
              predominantly lower income and ethnically African  American and Hispanic
              neighborhoods. Preliminary evidence  suggests that significant interactions
              between commuters and  residents of these neighborhoods are occurring and that
              these  interactions are changing in intensity over time, suggesting that 
              contact is stimulating improved relations bewteen these groups.  This study
              will be based on three forms of data collection.  Commuters will be identified
              via license plate numbers and sent a  sequence of mailed questionnaires.
              Neighborhood residents and  businesses will be interviewed in person. Finally,
              systemmatic  observations of the interactions along major arterials will be 
              undertaken in order to identify the nature of those interactions  and to
              corroborate information collected by interviews and  surveys.       Documenting
              the nature of changes in attitudes and behaviors  between these different
              social groups will have broad  implications for understanding basic attitudes
              and attitude  changes brought about by new levels of interaction in a racially 
              and economically polarized, and geographically segregated, urban  society. The
              research will further provide insight into the  impact of disasters on travel
              behavior of residents which should  prove useful in planning for such events.
              As a doctoral  dissertation research award, this project will also provide 
              support to enable a promising student to establish a stong  independent
              research career.  ***
