Title       : International Collaboration for the Study of Fast Capillary Discharge Plasmas as
               Efficient Sources for X-Ray Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9412916

Award Number: 9412916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29902              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge J. Rocca rocca@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412916  Rocca  Important existing and emerging applications require the 
              development of efficient and compact sources of x-ray  radiation.  We propose
              an international collaboration to  combine experimental and theoretical efforts
              in the study of  the hot plasma channels produced by fast capillary  discharges
              for the development of efficient sources of both  coherent and incoherent soft
              x-ray radiation.  The proposed research is motivated by results of  recent 
              experiments conducted at Colorado State University, that  confirm that very
              fast excitation of capillary channels with  current risetimes of approximately
              10ns can generate dense  plasma columns of small diameter with electron
              temperatures  of a few hundred eV utilizing currents that are more than an 
              order of magnitude smaller than those employed to obtain hot  plasmas in
              Terawatt pulse power machines.  Results include  the observation of emission
              from the 3p-3s laser candidate  transitions of neon-like calcium in 1.5 -2.5mm
              diameter  capillaries at currents as low as 40kA.  Such capability for 
              efficiently generating plasma columns of small (200um)  diameter by direct
              discharge excitation could provide a new  route towards compact and efficient
              soft x-ray lasers. Also,  the direct transfer of electrically stored energy
              into  reproducible hot capillary plasmas of small diameter and  could result in
              a cost efficient incoherent x-ray source.  The proposed cooperative research
              will combine capillary  discharge experiments conducted at Colorado State
              University  with a detailed theoretical analysis of the radiative  properties
              of capillary discharge  plasmas, which will be  based on elaborate
              magnetohydrodynamic and radiation  transport codes developed at the Lebedev
              Physics Institute.  The comparison of spatially and time resolved soft x-ray 
              spectra from capillary plasmas operating in a new fast  discharge regime with
              state of the art MHD/atomic physics  calculations is expected to provide an
              increased  understanding of these plasmas and  the necessary guidance  for
              their development into efficient practical sources of  coherent and incoherent
              soft x-ray radiation.
