Title       : Acquisition of a Dilution Refrigerator and Superconducting Magnet System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9412584

Award Number: 9412584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen M. Goldman goldman@physics.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Matching funds are provided for the acquisition and the  construction of a
              unique facility for the study of  superconducting films and structures in
              magnetic fields at  ultralow temperatures. The instrument consists of a high 
              cooling power dilution refrigerator, capable of achieving  temperatures below 5
              millikelvin, a 7-tesla horizontal/8.5-  tesla vertical vector magnet system,
              and associated pumps,  power supplies, and gas handling system needed for the 
              operation of the refrigerator and magnet system. Since many  of the
              investigations involve the study of films prepared by  deposition onto
              substrates held at low temperatures, the  equipment will be built into an
              existing ultrahigh vacuum  growth chamber. This will be done in a manner which
              permits  insitu deposition of films onto cold substrates, but which  also
              retains the option of free-standing operation of the  refrigerator and magnet.
              Funds also are provided for the  purchases of a nuclear orientation thermometer
              which will  serve as a primary temperature standard, and a dc SQUID  system
              which will be configured in a voltage-measuring mode  to gauge transport
              properties at very low current  excitations. The equipment would be used to
              extend the  measurement of properties of superconducting films and  structures
              in high magnetic fields (7 to 14 tesla) to  ultralow temperatures (below 0.005
              kelvin). The facility  would be used to investigate the quantum properties of 
              selected electronic systems in the limits of ultralow  temperatures and two
              dimensions. For such systems, under  appropriate conditions, quantum
              fluctuations are more  important than thermal fluctuations, and many systems 
              exhibit quantal rather than thermal phase transitions. The  particular
              interests are in insulator-to-superconductor  transitions in both ultrathin
              films and junction arrays, the  macroscopic quantum tunneling of vortices in 
              superconductors, and the critical fields of reduced  transition temperature
              superconductors. These studies have  important implicati ons and applications
              in developing and  characterizing new technologically significant materials.
