Title       : The Object Data Bank: A Collaborative Project Proposal to Provide a Standardized
               Realistic Stimulus Set of Common Objects for Experimental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9412456

Award Number: 9412456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67214              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Tarr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              TARR  This object databank is intended as a collaborative project among
              experimental psychologists to develop a set of standardized stimulus materials
              depicting familiar common objects. The ultimate goal of the project is to make
              available to the research community a set of 300-500 photorealistically
              illuminated and shaded objects. Each object will be developed using
              3-dimensional computer-aided design (CAD) modeling techniques and will be
              rendered using state-of-the-art raytracing. A given object will be available in
              several standard formats for researchers to use in generating their own
              stimulus images without the need of duplicating the time-intensive modeling
              required for even a single object. To facilitate researchers who need only high
              quality images but not specific control of lighting, textures and colors,
              objects will also be available as collections of already rendered images, each
              object depicted in realistic colors at a minimum of 12  3-dimensional
              viewpoints generated by 30 degree rotations around the vertical axis.   The set
              of objects will initially be based on the widely used set of 2-dimensional line
              drawings of objects introduced and distributed by Snodgrass and Vanderwart
              (1980). This set of familiar common objects has been used in many different
              experimental settings and has provided ease of stimulus preparation and some
              stimulus standardization between differing research paradigms. The goal is to
              begin by creating 3-dimensional analogs of each item in the Snodgrass and
              Vanderwart set -- this provides the added advantage of offering some previously
              collected norm data about object categories, as well as some basis for
              comparison with earlier studies. To illustrate some of the many potential
              applications of this new set of objects, several proposed experiments are
              included from the areas of object perception , visual memory, scene
              recognition, neuropsychology of object recognition, neuropsychology of memory,
              clinical assessment of attentional disorders. Many of the proposed st udies
              would be impossible without realistic images of common objects. It is expected
              that the stimulus set will have far wider applications than even this broad
              range of disciplines, the common theme being that highly realistic visual
              stimuli can only enhance the ecological relevance of current paradigms, as well
              as make available new paradigms that were previously unrealizable.    ***
