Title       : Heterogeneous Chemical Reactions in the Upper Troposphere and Lower Stratosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9412445

Award Number: 9412445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor A. Somorjai somorjai@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold S. Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Through laboratory studies these researchers will conduct a  systematic
              search for new important heterogeneous reactions in the  upper troposphere and
              lower stratosphere; that is, heterogeneous  reactions other than those
              recognized to occur in the Antarctic  spring.  They will measure the surface
              coverages and compositions  of selected trace species on the surfaces of water
              ice (ICE),  nitric acid trihydrate (NAT), and supercooled sulfuric acid/water 
              (SA/W) solutions.  These surfaces will be exposed to trace  atmospheric species
              one at a time, two at a time and in some cases  three at a time in order to
              investigate reaction-enhanced surface  adsorption as well as single-species
              surface coverages.  The plan  is to study these surface compositions under
              experimental  conditions similar to those present in the upper troposphere and 
              lower stratosphere.  These experiments will employ the surface  science
              techniques of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) for  the determination of
              the elemental composition of the surface and  the oxidation states, (and
              therefore the bonding) of the surface  chemical species, Auger electron
              spectroscopy (AES) for the  determination of the elemental composition of the
              surface, and  quadrapole mass spectroscopy (QMS) for identification and 
              monitoring of the gas phase chemical species.  In conjunction with  these
              experiments, through use of chemical thermodynamics combined  with the
              composition and temperature data provided by the Livermore  two-dimensional
              atmospheric model, these researchers will determine  the locations and times
              that various chemical reactions are the  thermodynamically capable of
              undergoing heterogeneous catalysis at  noon and midnight, during June and
              September, at altitudes of 5 to  35 km, and from pole to pole.  By combining
              these two novel lines  of study they seek to identify candidates for new
              heterogeneous  atmospheric reactions and suitable catalysts for such reactions.
                Reactants of interest include atmospheric trace species such  as  sulfur
              dioxide (S02), hydrogen peroxide (H202), Chlorine (Cly)  molecules, and NOy
              molecules.  One specific research task will  emphasize the +3 oxidation state
              of nitrogen N(III), which is  significant in urban smog, but is apparently not
              important in  stratospheric models and measurements.  N(III) species may be a 
              significant reservoir for active NOx, a sink for stratospheric NOy,  a catalyst
              for activating HC1, and a source of atmospheric OH  radical.  Through such
              laboratory studies, they hope to locate  where in the atmosphere N(III)
              chemistry is important and  investigate previously unidentified heterogeneous
              reactions that  occur under the conditions present in the upper troposphere and
               lower stratosphere.
