Title       : LMER: A Comparative Study of the Transport & Transformation of Materials From
               Rivers Through the Land-sea Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9412089

Award Number: 9412089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3024216            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Wiegert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Hodson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alice G. Chalmers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Ann Moran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence R. Pomeroy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1316,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9412089  Wiegert    This project will study the transport and transformation of
              inorganic and organic materials carried from the land into the sea by the five
              major coastal rivers of Georgia.  Each river differs in landscape
              characteristics, geological setting, flow rate, inorganic and organic loading,
              and pH, but they are confined within a 120 mile segment of coast and, thus,
              share similar temperature, rainfall, and tidal regimes.  These rivers offer a
              unique opportunity for the comparative ecological study of the impact of the
              land, via rivers, on the nearshore ocean and of the ocean, through tidal
              flooding, on the riparian and ocastal wetlands.    The first pahse of these
              studies will focus on 1) measuring the hyprodynamic characteristics of the
              rivers and estuaries that are necessary for understanding and quantifying the
              flux of materials and 2) measuring chemical and physical changes in
              concentrations and bioactivity of constituents as they pass through distinct
              communities.  A series of laboratory and field experiments to further extend
              knowledge of the interaction of land, river, sea and riparian and coastal
              wetlands are also planned.    Modeling will be an integral part of all phases
              of the work.  Simple one-compartment models will be used to guide the selection
              of samples and sites for the component measurements.  Multicomponent, mosaic
              and landscape/watershed models will be used to integrate all phases of the work
              on fluxes and modifications.  Important parameters will be identified on the
              basis of model sensitivity analysis and  appropriate data gathered to reduce
              the error in parameter evaluation.    Specifically, measurements will be made
              it the kinds, amounts, and metabolic activity of materials carried from above
              the land/sea margin to the near coastal zone. Associated with the is effort,
              the hydrodynamic processes repsonsible for transport will be addressed.  Field
              experimetns will be done to ascertain fate of materials as water is displaced
              out of the estuary onto and off of the  major vegetational subsystems. 
              Laboratory experiment/analysis will be em;ployed to examine details of material
              processing that cannot be observed or measured in the field.  Materials studied
              will include the suspended load of inorganic particles, the dissolved compounds
              of nitrogen, phosphorous (both inorganic and organic forms) and silica, and the
              organic carbon compounds.      Results will proved useful at several levels,
              from that of  basic research in marine science, through coastal zone
              management, to the level of global change, predicting impact on the interaction
              of land and sea in the boudary area regarded as the land/sea margin.
