Title       : Anatomical data for a dynamic phonetic model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1994      
File        : a9412668

Award Number: 9412668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35446              (Estimated)
Investigator: Osamu Fujimura fujimura.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412668  Fujimura                                 ABSTRACT    This one-year
              project constitutes a preparatory data installation for  a computational
              simulation of the speech production process, in  particular the tongue movement
              in speech utterance. The simulation of  this process is one of the components
              of a new computational model of  phonetic implementation. It describes a
              syllable-based organization of  speech. It computes articulatory gesture
              patterns and resulting  articulatory (and based thereon acoustic) signals. In
              the last  component of this model, called signal generator, the speech organs, 
              centering around the tongue, under muscle contraction control, move to  produce
              speech signals in a new dynamic 3-dimensional finite-element  model.       In
              the one-year project, new tongue data will be analyzed and  incorporated into
              this finite element computational framework. This  work will be carried out
              principally by Mr. Chao-Min Wu, currently a  graduate student in the
              Bioengineering Program at OSU, whom the PI  advises for a PhD dissertation.    
                The specific tasks of the research project are (1) to supplement  tissue
              boundary data of the tongue and other oral structures, which  are obtained from
              MRI head scans of several subjects, with internal  muscle structure data which
              are available in detailed anatomical  drawings, and (2) to construct a basic
              finite element model of the  tongue and adapt it for each subject and then to
              the tongue shapes in  different vowel articulations, by a method of nonuniform
              geometrical  mapping. The model designs will be improved by successive 
              approximation through comparing their transforms for available MRI  data from
              task (1).        The data created in this project will be available for use by 
              researchers in phonetics in general, and will be useful for any theory  of
              phonetics. The anatomical data to be produced along with the newly  developed
              software will be made available also for any other tongue  modeling and similar
              articulatory studies.  ***
