Title       : RESEARCH EQUIPMENT GRANT: Wavelength Tunable Wide Bandwidth Modulated Laser
               Source for All-Optical Networks and Optoelectronic Device Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9412357

Award Number: 9412357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33697              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Blumenthal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl M. Verber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nan Marie Jokerst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412357  Blumenthal  The Microelectronics Research Center (MiRC) and School of
              Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology will
              purchase a continuous wavelength tunable, ultra-wide bandwidth modulated, 1.55
              micron center wavelength laser system which will be dedicated to support
              research in engineering.  The equipment will be used for several research
              projects, including in particular: I) the investigation of bandwidth
              limitations in wavelength division multiplexed all-optical networks, II)
              characterization of wavelength division multiplexed based components fabricated
              in the Georgia Tech MiRC, in particular wavelength division multiplexers and
              demultiplexers and resonant enhanced cavity photodetectors, and III)
              characterization of components for high-speed, widebandwidth optical
              communications including optical amplifiers, photodetectors, photonic switches,
              and filters used in all-optical and optical communications networks.  The
              proposed equipment is key to the ongoing effort at Georgia Tech in wavelength
              division multiplexed optical communications, all-optical networking, and device
              integration.  Optical networks, in particular all-optical networks, have the
              potential to form the basis for the future national communications
              infrastructure. Critical research issues include designing and constructing
              state-of-the-art networks that have high probability for advanced development,
              and development, and fabrication of highly integrated, low cost, integrated
              circuit compatible wavelength division multiplexed devices. The proposed
              equipment will allow the researchers to study the effects of combining multiple
              optical WDM devices in a networking environment.  It will also allow the
              investigators to quantify effects that limit the number of user and geographic
              distances over which these networks to quantify effects that limit the number
              of user and geographic distances over which these networks can operate. 
              Finally, the critical characterization of low cost, high performa nce devices
              for all optical and optical networks will be performed with the proposed
              equipment.
