Title       : Robust WDM: A Wavelength Tolerant Local-Area Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1996 
File        : a9412944

Award Number: 9412944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $629400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anura P. Jayasumana jayasuma@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henryk Temkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9412944  Jayasumana  A novel WDM local-area network will be constructed, that
              greatly eases practical constraints related to the precision and stability of
              the channel wavelengths.  It is anticipate that the effort will result in the
              demonstration of:     a scalable, robust, fiber-optic WDM architecture with an 
              innovative medium access scheme relying on dynamic  wavelength selection by the
              individual nodes, and     a novel integrated WDM receiver and companion 
              multiwavelength laser sources.    In the robust WDM network proposed here any
              two nodes requiring a link will select a currently unused portion of the
              wavelength spectrum.  The receiver will then dynamically lock onto the precise
              wavelength used rather than tuning to a preassigned fixed wavelength channel. 
              The proposed receiver, using integrated high-speed winner-take-all electronic
              circuitry, can find an lock onto the optical signal, 10s of nanometers wide, in
              times on the order of intelligent, adaptive receivers able to handle changing
              and distorted dens WDM channels.  Precise wavelength trimming, either in the
              device fabrication or during operation is not required for either transmitters
              or receivers.  However, the concept is easier to implement for WDM source
              arrays with stable wavelength increments. The proposed endeavor combines
              expertise in laser sources, intelligent receivers, fiber optic system
              implantation, architecture and protocols to establish a well-integrated and
              cohesive research program.  This program aligns perfectly NSF HPCC effort.  The
              NSF component of HPCC includes "..design and development of heterogeneous and
              distributed scalable parallel computing systems, ... early prototyping of
              hardware and software systems, ... and optical communications systems and
              devices".  This precisely the thrust of the research program proposed here.    
               ***
