Title       : Programmable Blind Adaptive Multivariate Filtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9412732

Award Number: 9412732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185650             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Gardner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In wireless communications, including cellular communication  systems, spread
              spectrum overlay systems, and signals intelligence  applications, the
              degradation caused by rapidly time-varying  multipath and unknown cochannel
              interference can be reduced by  adaptive spatial filtering using antenna
              arrays.  This research is  pursuing a flexible framework for adapting a spatial
              filter without  using a training signal, array calibration data, or knowledge
              of  spatial characteristics of the desired or interfering signals.  It  is
              derived from two conceptually different perspectives: canonical  correlation
              analysis from multivariate statistics, and the  conditional maximum likelihood
              problem for a data-derived training  signal obtained from a user-programmable
              transformation of the  received data.  The transformation can be programmed by
              the user to  sort and separate the received signals on the basis of the 
              differing degrees to which they exhibit one or more user-selected  statistical
              properties.  Many such useful transformations are being  examined.  The
              performance of the new method is being investigated  analytically and by
              computer simulations to quantify its  capabilities of signal separation,
              multipath mitigation, and  interference rejection.  Preliminary results suggest
              that the new  method can converge very quickly to yield signal estimates that
              are  comparable to those obtained by the MSE method that uses perfectly  known
              training signals.  More generally, the objective of this  research is to
              develop and evaluate a new and very general approach  to programmable blind
              adaptive multivariate filtering that has  broad application to sensor array
              processing in addition to  wireless communications.
