Title       : Engineering Faculty Internship: Evaluation of a Continuous Improvement Model in
               a Shared Responsibility Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9412648

Award Number: 9412648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pius J. Egbelu                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Currie kcurrie@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9412648  Currie       The objective of this project is to evaluate the
              continuous  improvement models at the Saturn Corporation in Spring Hill, 
              Tennessee.  Under the project, the process in which information is  gathered,
              analyzed, and conclusion reached under the continuous  improvement model will
              be evaluated according to standard  engineering design practices.  The
              effectiveness of teams of  workers to generate alternatives and make consensus
              based decisions  will be evaluated by observations and involvement by the
              project  team.  Interview with team members from both union and management 
              will be conducted concerning the adequacy of training received and  recommended
              changes to improve the effectiveness of the system.   Additional tasks to be
              performed under this project include the  evaluation of the transfer of
              recommendations to work units for  implementation, documentation and evaluation
              of the effectiveness  of communication and group dynamic process, evaluation
              and  documentation and incentives and motivation of team members and  their
              work unit members to accept recommended improvements, and  corporate policies
              encouraging increased productivity.       The potentials for this project
              include the strengthening of  the understanding of continuous improvement by
              the students and  faculty involved in the project.  Valuable insights will be
              gained  into engineering practices and management philosophy under  continuous
              improvement programs.  Similarly, the outcome of the  project will help Saturn
              Corporation and other similar  manufacturing organizations on how to refine
              continuous improvement  models and consequently, develop strategies to maximize
              the  benefits from such program.
