Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Co-management and Conservation in the
               Philippines: Community - State Differentiation, Conflict and Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1994   
File        : a9412673

Award Number: 9412673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise P. Fortmann fortmann@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Program.  This study will undertake a critical examination of co-management
              processes as they are unfolding in three indigenous forest communities in the
              Philippines.  It seeks to understand the conditions under which co-management
              arrangements lead to outcomes characterized by biological sustainability,
              social equity, and self-determination for communities.  Theoretical issues
              include how stratification and power affect resource management practices.  The
              principal research methods are resource appraisal, censuses, semi-structured
              interviews, participant observation, and secondary data analysis.  %%%   This
              research will contribute to sociological understanding of community
              differentiation, resource partitioning, common property management,
              state-locality interactions and the conditions for cooperation or conflict.  It
              will also improve the knowledge base for policy decisions concerning resource
              management and the environment.  In addition to the scientific gains to be
              achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a highly promising
              student in completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation.  Thus it contributes
              to the future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of
              the next generation of social scientists.
