Title       : Solar Wind-Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling Using Incoherent Scatter,
               Magnetometer, and Other Coordinated Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9412390

Award Number: 9412390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir O. Papitashvili papita@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Robert Clauer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for a three year effort to  investigate the
              electrodynamic coupling between the solar wind, the  Earth's magnetosphere, and
              the ionosphere.  Investigations focus  upon the high latitude polar cap and the
              region around the polar  cleft.  In open models of the magnetosphere, the cleft
              is the  dayside boundary between open and closed geomagnetic field lines.  
              There is considerable evidence that, within the cleft region, the  effects of
              the full range of solar wind - magnetosphere -  ionosphere coupling phenomena
              can be observed, including: Birkeland  currents, strong electric fields and
              plasma drifts, rapid motions  of small scale field-aligned current structures,
              particle  energization within localized regions, intense ionospheric heating, 
              etc.  The proposed research is directed toward investigations of  the cleft and
              its dynamic behavior in response to variations in the  solar wind and
              interplanetary magnetic field (IMF).  Fundamental  questions center around the
              identification of ionospheric  signatures of phenomena which occur at the
              magnetopause or  magnetospheric boundary layer and which relate to solar wind -
               magnetosphere interactions.  Processes such as reconnection, the 
              Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, impulsive plasma penetration, the  magnetopause
              response to dynamic pressure variations or sudden  changes in IMF orientation
              all produce dynamic variations which  couple electrically to the conducting
              ionosphere via field-aligned  currents.  It is propose to undertake a variety
              of incoherent  scatter radar observations and the coordinated analysis of these
               data with combinations of magnetometer array data, a variety of  satellite
              data, as well as data from other Greenland ground  instruments such as the
              imaging riometer, all sky camera, etc. to  investigate both large scale and
              small scale high latitude  electrodynamic phenomena which are thought to be
              associated with  the coupling of energy and momentum from the solar wind to the
               magnetosphere and ionosph ere.
