Title       : Dissertation Research: Monoamine Neurotransmitters as Factors in Behavioral
               Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1997   
File        : a9412077

Award Number: 9412077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9965               (Estimated)
Investigator: David O. Norris david.norris@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              The vertebrate neuroendocrine system, using information  derived from both
              internal and external environments,  controls development, growth, and
              reproduction.  The brain  integrates this information and secretes
              neurotransmitters  and neurohormones to alter pituitary function and bring 
              about endocrine based events and behavioral changes.  Such  changes are very
              important in mediating major life events  that help animals adapt to
              environmental changes.  Because  of the varied modes of reproduction that exist
              in teleost  fishes, fishes are a useful system to look at how both the 
              internal and external environments influence sex  determination and sexual
              behaviors.  One particularly useful  mode of reproduction is a sexual
              plasticity known as  sequential hermaphroditism where an individual can begin 
              life as one sex, reproduce as that sex for at least one  breeding season and
              subsequently undergo sex reversal and  reproduce as the opposite sex.  Such a
              change is accompanied  by drastic changes in behavior.  This system allows for 
              investigation into the role of the brain in sex  determination and sex-specific
              behavior.  The purpose of the  proposed research is to identify changes in
              monoamine  neurotransmitters in the brains of a protogynous coral reef  fish
              (Thalassoma duperrey) throughout the process of sex  reversal and in relation
              to daily, semi-lunar and annual  influences.  Because there are relatively few
              vertebrates  that exhibit a natural sex reversal once sexual maturation  has
              been achieved, this system is an excellent model in  which to look at changes
              in behavior and neurochemistry that  accompany sex reversal and possible
              control mechanisms for  such a reversal.  This work will contribute to a better
               understanding of the relationship of neural control  mechanisms for sex
              specific behaviors.  By using animals  which can act as both sexes in one
              individual at different  times in the life history, one can gain a better 
              understanding of how changes in sexual behavior may be  controlle d in other
              animals, including humans.  In addition  the presence of diandry (two different
              male phenotypes, one  being a male throughout the life history and the other
              being  first female and then male) offers the opportunity to  compare behaviors
              of two different types of males.  The  proposed work will provide information
              on the changes in  monoamines associated with sex reversal and accompanying 
              behavioral changes as well as some insights into possible  cause-effect
              relationships.  This system provides a unique  opportunity for the study of
              neural correlates of sex  determination and sexual behavior.
