Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of an Overhead-Rail Cobot for Intelligent Material
               Handling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1998 
File        : a9760906

Award Number: 9760906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Meer meer@comoco-inc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Burns  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cobotics, Inc.
	      2504 Gross Point Road
	      Evanston, IL  60201    847/425-1200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 6840,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project submitted by
              Collaborative Motion Control, Inc. will result in an innovative prototype
              intelligent materials handling system.  The prototype will incorporate a
              conventional overhead rail system, to which a cobot (`collaborative robot`)
              component has been added.  Cobots do not enhance human strength or replace a
              human operator, but rather provide virtual `guiding` surfaces to help a human
              operator maneuver a payload.  The human part of the team supplies all motive
              power, while the cobot interfaces to a computer.  The cobot's physically
              passive design confers a degree of intrinsic safety.  The ease of manipulations
              that cobots provide translates into fewer injuries and reduced worker's
              compensation costs, issues of tremendous concern in the material handling
              industry.  In addition to ergonomics, cobots benefit productivity (speed) and
              quality (avoiding collisions).  Research objectives include design of a
              sufficiently robust continuously variable transmission (CVT) joint, which is
              the core mechanical element of a cobot.  A riser interface for the
              specification of smooth virtual constraint surfaces will be developed.  Control
              software that was developed for a laboratory environment will be pointed to an
              industrial microcontroller.   Commercial applications include automobile
              assembly, textile mills, and other industries in which human workers are
              essential, yet mechanical assist devices are needed.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
