Title       : SBIR Phase I: Treatment of Organically Contaminated Water with Short Wavelength
               Ultraviolet Light
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9760405

Award Number: 9760405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond B. Schaefer psandt@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Phoenix Science & Tech Inc
	      11 School St.
	      North Chelmsford, MA  018632109    978/251-9537

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9760405  Schaefer    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project addresses the need for cost effective water treatment systems. 
              Ultraviolet (UV) water treatment is attractive because contaminants are
              destroyed, unlike filtration techniques that produce toxic byproducts.      The
              use of UV water treatment systems is limited by electricity cost for lamp
              power.  This project uses a new UV lamp with three times higher efficiency than
              the industry standard.  Furthermore, initial research indicates that the
              shorter wavelength UV spectrum of the new lamp both increases oxidation rates
              and reduces the amount of oxidant for many organic molecules.    The project
              objectives are to engineer a new lamp with practical lifetime and use it to
              research the water treatment process using the new lamp's short wavelength
              spectrum while minimizing the quantity of oxidant.    The project team includes
              a lamp manufacturer to support lamp engineering and a UV water treatment
              company to support controlled organic destruction testing.  The results will
              serve to establish the feasibility of a water treatment process based on the
              new lamp, and are intended to lead in Phase II to refinement of the lamp and
              water treatment process, a prototype, field demonstrations and
              commercialization in Phase III.    A successful project will result in the
              commercialization of UV lamps and a new UV based water treatment process that
              will supersede existing commercial UV groundwater systems.  A new system would
              be cost effective for cleaning up pink, gray, bilge and other high
              concentration organic water contamination problems.  For groundwater
              applications where commercial UV systems already exist, water treatment costs
              will decrease by large increments.  Furthermore, the new system has potential
              as a replacement for chlorination.  ***
