Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Issue Development, Exploration and Analysis System (IDEA) to
               Support Group-Based Environmental Decision-Making for Brownfields Redevelopment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1997  
File        : a9760360

Award Number: 9760360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Moore geochoice@cyberspace.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geo Choice Inc.
	      7817 235th Place NE
	      Redmond, WA  980537977    425/836-8624

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 1352,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Geo Choice Inc.
              will determine the merit and feasibility of a computer-based issue development,
              exploration, and analysis system (IDEAS), a software tool to support
              brownfields redevelopment decision-making.  Brownfields are typically urban
              areas that are currently abandoned and unattractive for redevelopment because
              of the implications of environmental contamination from past industrial
              activities.  To identify and select the areas to clean up, decision-makers must
              address many issues which have environmental, health, social, and economic
              dimensions.  The problem is further complicated by the amount of information
              that must be considered, and the number of people involved in the decision
              process that leads to `clean` sites.  Spatial decision support systems (SDSS)
              are a relatively new technology, based on geographic information systems, that
              are useful for weighting criteria and selecting alternatives; however, they are
              not effective for group-based problem structuring to generate these criteria
              and alternatives.  IDEAS technology will extend current SDSS software
              capabilities to help groups work together to define and structure geographic
              problems and solutions.   With brownfield sites, numbering at least in the tens
              of thousands, effectively removed from the market, the supply of amenable to
              development properties is curtailed.    To spur redevelopment, the federal
              government has taken the lead to provide programs and funding to bring the
              stakeholders together, at the local level, to address these problems
              creatively.  The development, exploration and analysis system (IDEAS) proposed
              here would be valuable to decision makers involved in brownfield projects,
              enhancing the shared understanding of participants at all stages of
              decision-making.  Other possible applications include any locational
              decision-making involving multiple criteria and alternatives such as
              environmental impact assessment, transportation improvement, health-care
              resource allocation, and commercial real-estate site selection.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
