Title       : SBIR Phase I: High-Temperature Fluidized Bed Reactor for Producing Silicon
               Carbide Coated Activated Carbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1997  
File        : a9760204

Award Number: 9760204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Atwater jatwater@urcmail.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Umpqua Research Co.
	      P O Box 609
	      Myrtle Creek, OR  974570102    503/863-7770

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                       ***                     970204                   
              Atwater    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes
              development of a high-temperature fluidized bed reactor (HTFBR) based process
              for the production of a homogeneous and integral high surface area silicon
              carbide (SiC) coating on activated carbon.  The primary application of this new
              material will be as a catalyst support for use in gas phase and aqueous phase
              heterogeneous catalytic processes for the deep oxidation (mineralization) of
              organic environmental contaminants.  For destruction of airborne or waterborne
              contaminants, current catalyst supports such as silica, alumina, titania,
              zirconia and ceramic monoliths yield catalysts with relatively low activities
              due to inadequate surface areas for deposition of catalytic nuclei. High
              surface area activated carbon supported catalysts have been prepared with
              extremely high levels of activity but unacceptably short  useful lives
              resulting from degradation.  In contrast, silicon carbide is a material with
              excellent chemical, thermal, and mechanical stability characteristics.  It is
              anticipated that a catalyst support combining the desirable features of high
              surface area, mechanical stability, and resistance to chemical attack will
              result from the formation of a thin SiC coating over an activated carbon
              surface.    The primary commercial opportunity will be the manufacture and sale
              of supports suitable for oxidation catalysts needed for environmental
              remediation applications.  However, carbon supported catalysts are used
              extensively in petroleum refining and chemical processing industries.  It is
              anticipated that many new applications for the novel catalyst support will
              arise, because of its excellent qualities of hardness, strength, high surface
              area, and superior chemical, thermal, and mechanical stability.    ***
