Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of Low-Cost Single-Stage Superconducting Quantum
               Interference Device (SQUID) Array Amplifiers for High-Resolution Particle and
               X-Ray Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9760541

Award Number: 9760541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Masoud Radparvar masoud@hypres.com                       http://www.hypres.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : HYPRES, Inc.
	      175 Clearbrook Road
	      Elmsford, NY  10523    914/592-1190

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9134,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9760541  Radparvar    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project addresses the development of a wide-bandwidth SQUID-based amplifier
              chip for cryogenic particle detectors.  A novel approach for implementing a
              wide bandwidth and inexpensive SQUID readout scheme was recently proposed and
              demonstrated by Welty and Martinis at NIST.  This SQUID amplifier chip
              integrates a single analog SQUID coupled to an array of SQUIDs.  The firm is
              presently producing and marketing this SQUID amplifier system with associated
              room temperature electronics which exhibits a sensitivity of better than 2
              pA/(Hz and bandwidth of 2 MHz, dissipates approximately 1W), and has low cost. 
              To improve upon the bandwidth, a single-stage version of the SQUID amplifier
              chip integrated from 144 analog SQUIDs was recently designed, fabricated, and
              evaluated.  This project proposes to assemble and demonstrate a complete
              amplifier system based on this single-stage SQUID chip and to continue its
              optimization for better noise characteristic and current/magnetic sensitivity. 
              This system enables a more efficient application of the SQUID amplifiers to
              x-ray and particle detector readouts.   In developing the two-stage SQUID array
              amplifier system for commercialization, the firm collaborated with Dr. John
              Martinis (NIST), Professor Blas Cabrera (Stanford University), and Dr. Richard
              Welty (formerly with NIST).  These collaborative efforts will be continued to
              ensure development of a system suitable for x-ray and particle detector
              applications.    The availability of such low-cost SQUID amplifiers  would
              result in their use for nearly all high energy physics research experiments,
              high-resolution x-ray spectroscopy, imaging detectors, particle identification
              systems, biomagnetometry for the mapping of brain functions, and detection of
              corrosion and cracks in aircraft.  ***
