Title       : SBIR Phase I: Improved Mixed Oxide Catalysts for Treatment of Offgas Removal of
               NOx
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9760050

Award Number: 9760050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleonora M. Witteles witc@juno.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : World-wide Innovative Tech
	      P.O. Box 4722
	      Palos Verdes, CA      310/541-9934

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9102,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9760050  Witteles    The Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project
              will develop a mixed oxide and/or superlattice of iron/chromiun/zinc/copper as
              a selective catalyst for destruction of NOx, in offgas of high temperature
              combustion processes: MLLW, power plants, factories, automotive vehicles.  This
              improved catalyst will replace more expensive, less efficient vanadia/titania
              catalysts used for stationary applications and less durable, less effective
              zeolitic-copper catalysts used in automotive vehicles.  Such a catalyst,
              imported by DOE from the Former Soviet Union, evaluated for destruction of the
              offgas NOx in the Plasma Arc Process in MLLW, was shown to be more effective
              than vanadia/titania.  We will improve the reduction properties and efficiency
              of the catalyst by introducing a novel deposition process for the mixed oxides
              through use of our proprietary WIT-TIFIDTM deposition process and its superior
              properties.  In addition we will investigate the feasibility of replacing the
              mixed oxides with a superlattice structure of the oxides for a more
              homogeneous/uniform coating.  'Me advantages/disadvantages of the two
              structures will be evaluated.  During Phase II mixed oxides and/or superiattice
              catalysts will be produced and a laboratory bench test will be tested and
              evaluated.  During Phase III we will test our catalysts in MLLW, power plants
              and automotive vehicles.    The accomplishment of the goals set in this program
              will advance the efforts on behalf of environmental management of mixed low
              level waste sites (MLLW), stationary pollutants (power plants and factories)
              and mobile pollutants (automotive vehicles), by providing for a more effective,
              more durable, less expensive selective reduction catalyst for the destruction
              of oxides of nitrogen, an objectionable pollutant produced in high temperature
              combustion processes in the above mentioned industries.  ***
