Title       : SBIR Phase I: Construction and Expression of Synthetic Spider Silk Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1997   
File        : a9760257

Award Number: 9760257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Hinman mhinman@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WyoBiGen
	      635 Howe Rd
	      Laramie, WY  820706885    307/721-4107

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1168,5371,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will lead to
              production of materials for use as synthetic tendons and ligaments.  The
              materials are spider silk proteins which exhibit strengths of the order of
              Kevlar or steel yet have the elasticity of nylon.  Use of synthetic fibers will
              be advantageous because: a) spider silk is nonimmunogenic so implants will not
              need to be taken from other tissues of the same patient, b) the fibers are
              stronger than natural tissues but still elastic, and c) the fibers are not
              degradable by biological systems and will not erode in the patient.  WyoBiGen
              will produce significant quantities of spider dragline silk proteins from
              genetically engineered genes.  The first protein produced will be major
              ampullate spider silk 2 protein.  WyoBiGen will construct and express a second
              synthetic gene, major ampullate spider silk 1.  Development of a new strategy
              for synthetic gene construction allows blending of various properties, such as
              strength, elasticity, and toughness, by joining structural domains of the
              native silk genes.  Objectives will be pursued simultaneously and generation of
              fibers from these materials will be pursued in our laboratories, as well as
              those of companies who have requested these materials from WyoBiGen.  The first
              applications will be artificial ligaments and tendons due to the unique blend
              of strength, elasticity, nonimmunogenic nature, and toughness of the spider
              silk proteins.  Light porous films for tissue reinforcement or drug delivery
              are also possible.  Other applications of this unique material are airbags,
              seatbelts, climbing gear, composite material reinforcements, and textiles.  A
              list of eighteen major companies who have already requested these proteins or
              the fibers to develop their own applications is included.  This award is
              supported by the Small Business Innovation Research Program and the
              Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
