Title       : SBIR Phase I: Low Cost, High Precision Fiber-Optic Sensor System for
               Infrastructure Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9760443

Award Number: 9760443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore S. Shultz eos@eo-sciences.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Electro-Optical Sci Inc
	      1 Bridge Street
	      Irvington, NY  105331543    914/591-3783

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1442,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***  9760443  Shultz    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will attempt to develop a fiber optic sensor system for automated collection of
              data needed in monitoring infrastructure health.  It incorporates two advances
              in wavelength sensing technology.  Distributed arrays of In-Fiber Bragg Grating
              sensors have demonstrated high-sensitivity, long-term monitoring capabilities
              at affordable costs.  By translating induced displacement into frequency shift,
              Bragg-sensors provide an optical alternative to electronic devices.  They are
              used for precise measurements of displacements due to mechanical or other
              processes.  The firm's proprietary technology for precision optical-wavelength
              (frequency) measurement is well suited for use in precision estimation of
              wavelength shifts of arrays of Bragg sensors.  Integration of the firm's
              receiver with Bragg sensors provides simultaneous measurements on 10 sensors
              per fiber, with a dynamic range of 3 orders-of-magnitude.  Accuracies
              equivalent to a few micro-strain at sampling rates of 10 KHz appear to be
              achievable.  The proposed architecture provides a low-cost monitoring system
              using a programmable switching element.  This allows one set of the more costly
              system elements to be used sequentially to sample large arrays of hundreds of
              sensors.  Bcause wavelength is the basic measurement parameter, these sensors
              can be variably spaced and different measurement types can be intermixed along
              the same Fiber-Optic cable.    Successful development of the proposed system
              will provide the basis for a high-performance, affordable, fiber-optic sensor
              system with broad commercial application in the areas of. environmental
              monitoring; nondestructive evaluation and monitoring of civil structures; and
              for use in "smart" composite structures.  ***
