Title       : SBIR Phase I: Low-Frequency Sonochemistry -- A Cutting Edge Industrial
               Processing Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1997  
File        : a9760510

Award Number: 9760510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Farrar lcfarrar@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montec Research
	      P. O. Box 4167
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/723-2222

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5371,9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to
              demonstrate the capability for resonant-sonic technology to enhance and/or
              enable homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical processes and establish the
              resonant-sonic operating conditions that cause the observed chemical reaction
              enhancements.  The project will characterize resonant-sonic machine design and
              operational features, as well as associated process(es) for continued
              development in Phase II, where the application of a resonant-sonic process on
              one commercially important chemical process will be demonstrated at
              intermediate scale. The technology has  already been  demonstrated in the
              laboratory to produce highly energetic cavitation in liquids and slurries at
              low frequencies.  It can be applied for industrial scale homogeneous and
              multiphase processing, and has the potential to greatly increase reaction
              rates, decrease reaction temperatures and pressures and/or reduce reagent
              concentrations to affect a wide range of chemical reactions.   The market
              potential for this technology is immense, and includes the pulp, food,
              petrochemical, chemical, waste processing, manufacturing, mining, and metals
              refining industries.  The technology can be used to greatly reduce the cost and
              environmental impact of industrial scale heterogeneous chemical processes.  
              This award is supported by the Small Business Innovation Research Program and
              the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
