Title       : SBIR Phase I: Reliable, Low Cost Support System for Flywheel Energy Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1997  
File        : a9760228

Award Number: 9760228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Imlach jiice@alaska.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Imlach Consulting Eng
	      460 Falke Court
	      Anchorage, AK  995041064    907/337-8954

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will explore
              Flywheel Energy Storage (FES) systems as an alternative to batteries for
              electrical energy storage in remote, cold environments.  Use of renewable
              energy sources in wind and solar power is complicated by a lack of suitable
              storage.  Batteries are typically heavy and expensive to transport; have
              limited life, require warmth for effective operation; and pose disposal
              problems at the end of their life.  FES may offer higher energy densities,
              unlimited life, relative insensitivity to low temperatures, and absence of
              toxic compounds.  Due to the high rotational speeds, flywheels require magnetic
              bearing support, but active magnetic bearings require power supplies and
              control electronics that reduce storage efficiency and present failure points
              and maintenance needs.  Passive magnetic bearings are a better choice for
              stationary FES systems but have been difficult to manufacture and suffer from
              low damping.  Phase I will develop a passive bearing system that is easier, and
              less expensive to manufacture.  The flywheel and its damping systems would
              allow these new bearings to be applied to stationary FES systems.  The
              commercial applications fall into three classes: alternative energy storage,
              utility load leveling, and uninterruptible power applications.  Solar electric
              systems are thought to be a growth market in which FES has advantages over
              conventional batteries.  Utility load leveling applications would result in
              cost savings in maintenance and peaking power facility costs.  Uninterruptible
              power supplies may also be a growth market.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
