Title       : SBIR Phase I: Hand-Held Environmental Monitors for Initial Site Characterization
               of Volatile Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9760633

Award Number: 9760633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross C. Thomas eltron@eltronresearch.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eltron Research, Inc.
	      4600 Nautilus Court South
	      Boulder, CO  803013241    303/530-0263

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1472,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9760633  Thomas    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will develop a hand-held environmental Monitor, which employs a four-component
              microsensor array of chemiresitors, for initial Site characterization of
              volatile organic compounds (VOCs).  This solid-state device is designed to
              generate characteristic response patterns that arise from key analytes and
              mixtures from fuels, cleaning solvents, and aromatic hydrocarbons.  The VOCs
              are identified and quantified by analyzing the unique response produced by the
              microsensor array using a pattern recognition algorithm integrated with the
              environmental monitor.  For example, conducting particles dispersed within
              polymer films provide a basis to detect trace concentrations of organic vapors
              by measuring resistance changes that occur to these materials as they swell. 
              Previous research studies have demonstrated that it is possible to correctly
              identify and quantify a model group of VOCs using chemiresistor arrays
              manufactured with these types of materials.  This technology has the following
              advantages: (1) integratable into small, inexpensive systems, (2) high
              sensitivity and reliability to detect VOCs, (3) low power requirements, and (4)
              immunity to shock and vibration.  Successful completion of this project will
              significantly impact the use of gas microsensors for environmental applications
              by developing a low-cost system to reliably identify and quantify the presence
              of VOCs.    The proposed hand-held analytical instrument, which employs a
              microsensor array of chemiresistors, provides a basis to monitor the presence
              of gas-phase analytes and mixtures from fuels, cleaning solvents, and aromatic
              hydrocarbons.  These low-cost systems are designed for environmental
              applications to reliably detect potentially hazardous environments.  ***
