Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Integrated Computer Aided Design (CAD) Package for Rapid Design
               and Analysis of Optoelectronic Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9760323

Award Number: 9760323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98874              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Weitzman pweitzman@conceptseti.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concepts ETI Inc
	      4 Billings Farms Road
	      White River Junction, VT  05001    802/296-2321

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5371,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a development
              effort to show the feasibility of an integrated  Opto-Electronic Computer Aided
              Design (OECAD) package incorporating the below elements.  Such an integrated
              package will support the goals of both the government and commercial high-speed
              communications industries by allowing substantially accelerated development of
              advanced optoelectronic components.  Computer Aided Design (CAD) tools have
              played a critical role in the spectacular advancements over the last three
              decades in the area of microelectronics.  CAD tools for optical circuit design
              are in a far less advanced state than their microelectronic counterparts. 
              Optical circuits and networks have shown exceptional promise for providing
              rapid, secure and precise delivery of information.  However, optoelectronics
              has not yet reached its potential, due in part to a lack of significant
              development and simulation tools.  With the expected growth of optoelectronic
              (OE) components including transmitters, receivers and amplifiers and at 22%
              annually, efficient, accurate and inexpensive CAD of OE circuits is required. 
              The U.S. competitiveness in these endeavors hinges on swift implementation by
              an American company.  High-performance, user-friendly software will be critical
              to success.  This award is supported by the Small Business Innovation Research
              Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
              (EPSCoR).                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
