Title       : SBIR Phase I: IR and Abrasion Protective Inorganic Coatings for Polycarbonates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1997  
File        : a9760940

Award Number: 9760940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Jan Hwang jhwang@ccvd.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CCVD dba MicroCoating Tech
	      5315 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
	      Chamblee, GA  303412107    678/287-2400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9760940  Hwang    A superior coating system improving the optical and
              mechanical properties of transparent face protective equipment is needed. 
              Present visors are prone to scratching and/or cannot tolerate direct flame
              impingement.  'Fire novel approach described in this proposal uses an open
              atmosphere CVD technique to apply an inexpensive, hard, flexible gold based
              silica thin film coating system to enhance the abrasion, flame resistance and
              overall duration and visual acuity of polymer based transparent visors.  The
              reflective properties of the gold should also show improvement in the IR
              reflective properties of the system.  mct' will determine the optimal coating
              system, which may be a nanolaminate, to provide the properties needed for face
              protective equipment.    All work will be based on previous coating development
              of metals, silica and other advanced materials using the open atmosphere CCVD
              process.  This process is both low cost and production friendly, and offers the
              capability to deposit high quality thin films onto large complex shapes for
              this application.  Silica and metal coatings have been successfully deposited
              onto polycarbonate substrates using CCVD processing at MCT.  A support letter
              from an industry leader in the development of protective equipment for
              firefighters is included in the proposal; the letter expresses a strong
              interest in the proposed approach.  ' 'he experience and skills of this company
              will be instruments  in attainment of the objectives of this project.    By
              developing a new coating process for transparent plastics, it is possible to
              extend the applications beyond optical coatings to light blocking applications,
              metallization of electronic packaging, compact discs and light weight wave
              guides, all of which can then use low density inexpensive bulk polymers. 
              Collectively, these areas present a multi-hundred million opportunity.  With
              recent Phase III funding from its first Phase 11, MCT has demonstrated the
              capability to effectively utilize SBIR fun ding.  ***
