Title       : SBIR Phase I: Investigation of Conductive Diamond Materials for Apertures in
               Electron and Other Particulate Beam Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9760379

Award Number: 9760379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99859              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald N. Wallmark gwallmark@igraph.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Image Graphics Inc
	      917 Bridgeport Avenue
	      Shelton, CT  064844624    203/926-0100

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9760379  Wallmark         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will investigate electrically conductive synthetic diamond as a base
              material for high performance, ultra-fine beam controlling and spot size
              defining apertures. Scientific, industrial, commercial, medical and military
              instruments employing electron and other particulate beams require beam
              defining and controlling apertures.  Historically, these apertures have been
              made of platinum, molydenum, tungsten or metal foil.  When apertures less than
              10 microns are bombarded with high particulate densities in vacuum, they limit
              system performance.  Limitations include: reduced beam currents to prevent 1)
              aperture base material meltdown and 2) spot size degradation due to erosion
              and/or feathering of the aperture. Metal aperture manufacturing technology
              cannot produce apertures smaller than 10 microns with tolerances of typically
              +/-0.2 microns that can withstand high density particulate bombardment.  While
              the proposer has demonstrated the feasibility of using gold coated,
              nonconductive diamond as a base material, the comparatively fragile conductive
              coating reduces the dimensional integrity and lifetimes of these apertures.
              Knowledge gained will improve aperture performance and reliability, resulting
              in higher resolution, higher throughput, and greater reliability of electron
              and other particulate beam systems.         This knowledge will also lead to
              the development of an innovative material technology for apertures having
              important commercial value in many diverse fields.    The successful completion
              of this phase will lead to the evolution of an innovative material technology
              for apertures having commercial value to the electronic imaging instrument
              industry and other industries requiring chemically inert, ultra-fine apertures
              capable of withstanding repeated bombardment of high particulate emissions
              densities, thermal cycling and exposure to atmosphere without degradation. 
              Typical among these industries are sate llite reconnaissance imaging, aerospace
              instrumentation, medical imaging, CD mastering, optical digital storage,
              cinematography, printing and publishing, cartography and micro-machining.  ***
