Title       : SBIR Phase I: Comparative and Experimental Embryology Multimedia Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1997   
File        : a9760800

Award Number: 9760800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57200              (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Neas jneas@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Biomedical Imaging Tech
	      9875 Widmer
	      Lenexa, KS  66215    913/362-0644

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9145,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Biomedical Imaging
              Technology, Inc. is for creation of a CD-ROM, to teach comparative and
              experimental embryology to college students in zoological and veterinary
              sciences.  The dynamic and integrated processes of development are difficult to
              learn or teach through textbooks.  Computers, however, portray change very
              well.  The proposed CD-ROM will have a complete text describing normal
              development of invertebrate and vertebrate animals and the experiments that
              elucidate the processes of development.  The software package will include
              videos, animations, color photographs, illustrations, and microscopic images of
              organisms common in laboratory courses.  Hypertext linkage will enable students
              to study concurrent development of different organ systems or similar
              developmental stages in different organisms.  Project development involves
              writing text, scientific illustration, photomicrography, handling living
              materials, and processing of computer images, videos, and animations.  The
              incorporation of processed data will entail programming with Microsoft Visual
              Basic and HTML.   The primary target market includes four-year educational
              institutions, faculty members in biological fields, and undergraduate and
              graduate students with life science majors.  Public libraries, progressive
              secondary schools, and other interested individuals supplement this annually
              renewable customer base.  The commercial prospects of this project are further
              enhanced by the form and substance of the comprehensive computerized curriculum
              proffered.  In keeping with the trend of institutions to move their curricula
              onto the Web, both multimedia web-based and CD-ROM versions will be produced. 
              In accordance with the importance of subject of embryology in educational
              institutions throughout the world and with the fact that English remains the
              dominant language in science, international as well as U.S. sales are
              anticipated to be strong.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
