Title       : SBIR Phase I: Affordable Braille Display Using Novel Microactuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9760377

Award Number: 9760377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick J. Lisy lisy@orbitalresearch.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Orbital Research Inc
	      673 G Alpha Drive
	      Cleveland, OH  441432140    440/449-5785

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1138,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I program from Orbital Research,
              Inc. will improve the yield on microelectrochemical (MEMS) devices for a
              Refreshable Braille Display System (RBDS).  MEMS technology has the potential
              to provide ten rows of Braille text for the same price as the current cost of a
              single row display.  As the MEMS devices are the major cost of the display,
              device yield becomes the most important factor in the ultimate cost of the
              product.  This program will evaluate several designs and fabrication techniques
              to reduce the overall cost of the Refreshable Braille Display System.  These
              improved actuation mechanisms are required to provide more Braille cells per
              display to emulate a sheet of Braille text and/or the computer monitor.  This
              device will more effectively access computer based information, enhancing
              educational and research opportunities for visually impaired and also visually
              and hearing impaired individuals.  The anticipated array of Braille dots will
              make available an entire page of computer screen information either from a
              computer spreadsheet, the Internet, or CD-ROM in the most appropriate Braille
              code.  This device will allow visually impaired users to skim documents and
              access links such as those encountered while surfing the Internet.   The
              proposed Refreshable Braille Display System (RBDS) technology is designed to be
              compatible with any 386 computer unit, and it will include software which will
              make the system compatible with all Braille codes.  Future trends toward a
              paperless society will make refreshable Braille display systems imperative for
              the over 500,000 visually impaired individuals in the United States.  Finally,
              a large market exists for other spin-off microactuator technologies such as
              microsatellite propulsion systems, smart surfaces for aircraft, earring perfume
              dispensers, automotive fuel additive systems, televisions with odorants
              (smell-o-vision), and virtual reality goggles with olfactory inputs.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
