Title       : SBIR Phase I: Using Hidden Markov Models to Track Human Targets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9760988

Award Number: 9760988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ChT Engineering Systems
	      HC89-69, PO Box 228
	      Hermosa, SD  577440228    605/394-2458

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 0000,1260,5371,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
              feasibility Of implementing a novel multi-sensor data fusion technique for low
              cost target tracking.  Literature suggests that Hidden Markov Models
              significantly out perform other methods of multiple target tracking when
              ambiguous detections, noise, and clutter are present.  The primary objective
              here is to demonstrate the feasibility of utilizing Hidden Markov Models to
              track human targets.  The target tracking problem can be viewed as one of
              developing a model that minimizes the difference between the model's estimate
              of the target coordinates {Xout(t), Yout(t)} and the actual coordinates given
              by {Xactual(t), Yactual(t)}.  In practice, this must be done simultaneously for
              a varying number of independent targets.  However, this Phase I effort will
              focus on single target tracking and leave multiple target tracking to the
              subsequent Phase II project.  Portable code used to implement models in Phase I
              will be incorporated in a microprocessor-based system following multiple target
              refinement in Phase II.  Synthesized sensor data will be used initially to
              develop tracking models.  These data will then be supplemented with measured
              data from ultrasonic sensors, in order to further refine the tracking model.   
              Direct applications of the human tracking system include video surveillance for
              security, safety, and human or animal behavioral observation systems.  With
              spotlight attachments the device will provide an illuminated path for remote
              search and rescue operations, emergency evacuation in poorly lit buildings,
              crime deterrence, and night surveillance tracking of escaping prisoners.  This
              system will also be well suited as a supplement to a video target tracking and
              identification system.  This award is supported by the Small Business
              Innovation Research Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
              Competitive Research (EPSCoR).                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
