Title       : SBIR Phase I: Virtual Atmospheric Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9760520

Award Number: 9760520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn E. Van Knowe glenn@meso.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MESO Inc
	      185 Jordan Road
	      Troy, NY  121807618    518/283-5169

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from MESO, Inc.
              addresses the opportunity to utilize advanced atmospheric simulation technology
              for teaching atmospheric and related earth sciences at the university, high
              school and middle school levels and for use at weather forecasting training
              centers and by the general public.  The overall objective is to provide
              students at various educational and experience levels with a mechanism to
              develop problem solving skills as they learn about the earth-atmosphere system.
               This will be accomplished by developing a software system, termed the Virtual
              Atmospheric Laboratory (VAL), that will allow students to easily conduct and
              analyze realistic atmospheric experiments involving complex solar, terrestrial
              and atmospheric dynamical interactions.  The secondary objective is demonstrate
              feasibility of running the experiments on a low-cost desktop computer making
              this educational tool available to every student  The VAL will be an
              integration of several technological components, including: (1) sophisticated
              physics-based atmospheric numerical models; (2) visualization tools which
              permit the user to interactively examine and animate complex multidimensional
              datasets; (3) graphical user interfaces which allow the user to easily navigate
              through and control complex computer programs; and (4) hypertext instructional
              databases which permit the user to pursue threads of knowledge through the use
              of words and phrases which are linked to other parts of an instructional
              database or even other databases.  The Phase I research will (1) evaluate a
              conceptual VAL prototype in an actual university-level instructional setting;
              (2) establish the educational objectives and functional design for the
              fully-functional VAL for a broad range of educational levels; and (3) determine
              the computational feasibility of hosting the VAL on a low-cost computational
              platform.  A successful completion of the Phase I research will develop a
              working prototype on a UNIX workstation, demonstrate the computational
              feasibility on Windows- and Macintosh-based platforms and illustrate the
              instructional utility of the VAL concept in order to provide the foundation for
              the development of the a more sophisticated fully-functional VAL in Phase II.  
              The primary commercial application for the Virtual Atmospheric Laboratory will
              be as an educational tool used by middle schools, high schools, colleges,
              universities, government weather forecasting training centers, and government
              and commercial `field` weather forecasters.  Other VAL applications which have
              potential to generate commercial revenue include use as:  (1) a low-cost
              research tool and data generator for meteorologists and non-meteorologists
              investigating atmosphere-related problems; (2) a home atmospheric laboratory
              for weather hobbyists and general science enthusiasts; and (3) a real-time high
              resolution local weather forecast system.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
