Title       : SBIR Phase I: Theory and Simulation of Dense Phase Granular Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1997   
File        : a9760886

Award Number: 9760886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yansi Zhang yzhang@xi.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Hydrodyn Inc
	      P O Box 1403
	      Princeton, NJ  085421403    609/683-1515

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
              application of a generalized kinetic theory to describe the dense, quasistatic,
              regime of granular materials and the development of a computational tool for
              engineering design and control applications.  Dense phase granular materials
              play important roles in the energy, metallurgical, food/agricultural,
              pharmaceutical and chemical industries.  There are significant environmental
              ramifications of granular flows as well.  The research effort here will be
              based on a statistical mechanical approach using nonlinear response theory arid
              the projection operators methods extended to apply to systems which do not obey
              detailed balance.  New macro-fields, which describe structure, will be
              introduced in order to close the equations of motion.  In parallel, molecular
              dynamics codes will be developed to test and improve the modeling work. Full
              macroscopic equations of motion and an efficient molecular dynamics (MD)
              simulation code for dense phase granular flows are anticipated as the main
              results of this project.  Applications will be made to vibrated and sheared
              systems as prototype cases.  The product to be developed is intended to replace
              inaccurate empirical estimation with a predictive tool that should find
              applications throughout the granular material processing industries.  In
              particular, applications include the design of high-performance devices that
              manufacture, store and transport granular materials.  The market for a
              successful software product could reach $10million per year within 3 - 5 years.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
