Title       : SBIR Phase I: Micro-Sensor Module for Seismic and Infrastructure Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1997   
File        : a9760647

Award Number: 9760647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Clark bclark@home.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Integrated Micro Instrumnt
	      2140 Shattuck Avenue, Suite 205
	      Berkeley, CA  94704    510/548-4293

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***  9760647  Clark    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will involve development of a micromachined-accelerometer based Micro-Sensor
              Module for use in seismic testing and infrastructure monitoring applications
              ranging from earthquake studies to active structure control.  The heart of the
              module will be a triad of miniature, inexpensive, low-power accelerometers. 
              Built-in serial bus and wireless communication capability will be included. 
              Integrated Micro Instruments was formed from the core DARPA-sponsored Berkeley
              Sensor & Actuator Center (BSAC) design team which produced some of the first
              integrated microaccelerometers.  This work has resulted in a medium performance
              micro-sensor module with signal processing on a thumbnail sized silicon chip. 
              These proven sensor architectures will be combined with a deep trench
              micromachining technology developed at BSAC.  The extremely thick structures
              will dramatically increase sensitivity and hence improve performance. 
              Integrating circuits with these sensors will allow temperature compensation,
              filtering, exceptional miniaturization, and digital output.  The goal of Phase
              I is to prove that micromachining can produce sensors and sensor systems with
              the performance required for seismic and infrastructure monitoring.  Complete
              mechanical sensor and electrical circuit design will verify feasibility and
              allow rapid fabrication of functional devices in Phase II.    Market research
              firms forecast inexpensive, micromachined inertial sensors to command a market
              of over one billion dollars with unit sales in the tens of millions by the year
              2000.  High volume commercial applications such as automotive safety, virtual
              reality, 3-D computer mice, and machine monitoring already incorporate
              miniature sensors which can be vastly improved using this technology.  The high
              performance micro-sensors envisioned open new frontiers such as augmented GPS
              navigation, general aviation, robotics, and platform leveling.  Integrated
              Micro Instruments has be en approached by venture capitalists and a military
              contractor continuing the very high level of commercial interest.  ***
