Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Face Identification System Using a Novel 3D Camera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1997   
File        : a9760613

Award Number: 9760613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Geng gene@genextech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Genex Technologies, Incorp
	      10605 Concord Street, Suite 500
	      Kensington, MD  208952504    301/962-6565

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 6840,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project
              from Genex Technologies, Inc. is to investigate the feasibility of building,
              for the first time, an automatic 3D Face-ID (3D-FID) system with sophisticated
              3D face matching capability using a novel 3D camera.  What is meant by 3D
              camera is an electronic 3D imaging device that is able to produce digital 3D
              profile measurement of a human face in one snap shot.  Unlike the conventional
              Face-ID system that use only 2D gray-scale images, the 3D face image available
              in Genex Technologies' system provides accurate geometric information that
              makes the Face-ID much more accurate and efficient.  The human face is a
              three-dimensional (3D) object, and each face has its unique 3D surface profile.
               The 3D features and surface profile on a human face can be used for a rapid
              and accurate face identification (Face-ID).  Due to lack of low-cost 3D imaging
              devices and effective 3D Face-ID algorithms, however, almost all existing
              Face-ID systems use only 2D gray-scale face images as their input.  The 2D
              images are inherently vulnerable to changes in light condition and face
              orientation, because they cannot preserve the 3D geometric structure of a face.
               This fundamental restriction greatly limits the capability of current Face-ID
              systems in effectively performing face recognition functions.  As a result, the
              match-rate for existing Face-ID systems in real-world applications is very low
              (below 90%).  The key components of the proposed 3D-FID system include (1) a
              novel 3D camera that is able to acquire both 2D and 3D facial images in
              real-time; (2) software based on an efficient 3D face identification algorithm;
              (3) 2D and 3D facial image database; and (4) a user-interface.   The commercial
              market for automatic face identification systems is sizable, and applications
              are numerous, including those in both military and civilian areas.  Security
              and ATM machines can use Face-ID to verify the identity of bankcard users,
              saving millions of dollars in false claim of cardholdership.  Computer access
              control can use a Face-ID system instead of password to grant authority for
              computer usage.  Law enforcement agents can use a Face-ID system to preselect
              and nail down fugitives based on their images.  Military can use the Face-ID
              system to control access to restricted areas.  Valuable properties such as cars
              or boats could use the 3D-FID system to identify their owners.  The low cost 3D
              camera can also be used for many other applications, such as manufactured parts
              inspection, robotics, autonomous vehicles, and virtual reality.  The rapid
              advances in video-conferencing and interactive television further broaden
              possible applications of 3D imaging technologies.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
