Title       : Pathogenesis of Device-Related Infections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9396286

Award Number: 9396286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart L. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Deane F. Mosher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Proctor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Bacterial infections often accompany biomedical implants and                   
              indwelling catheters.  These infections are resistant to                       
              treatment and they persist and recur until removal of the                      
              prosthetic material.  The aim of this cross-disciplinary project               
              is to understand the pathophysiology of implant-device related                 
              infection, and to develop materials that are tailored to reduce                
              bacterial adhesion and are resistant to infections.  Cell-binding              
              protein studies will determine the role of preadsorbed proteins,               
              monoclonal antibodies and receptor-deficient mutants of the                    
              infectious agent on staphylococcal adhesion and neutrophil                     
              activation.  Novel polymers with different physicochemical                     
              properties will be synthesized in order to examine how these                   
              properties influence staphylococcal and neutrophil adhesion.                   
              These studies should aid the development of materials that are                 
              resistant to infection, leading to the safer use of implant                    
              devices for many surgical applications.
