Title       : Philippine Plant Inventory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1993   
File        : a9396144

Award Number: 9396144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin C. Stone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Botanical Rsch Instof TX
	      509 Pecan Street
	      Fort Worth, TX  761024060    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In collaboration with botanists of the Philippines National               
              Museum, Drs. Sy Sohmer and Benjamin Stone of Hawaii's Bishop                   
              Museum are initiating an intensive plant collecting program                    
              throughout the Philippines, as phase one of a comprehensive                    
              inventory of the estimated 10,000-12,000 species of ferns,                     
              conifers, and flowering plants of that tropical island nation.                 
              The plant collections of the National Herbarium, virtually                     
              destroyed at the end of World War II, will be augmented                        
              significantly, and U.S. and European botanists will aid in the                 
              identification and study of the thousands of new specimens.                    
              Scientists from the University of the Philippines are also                     
              participating in this biodiversity inventory.                                  
                   As specimens begin to accumulate from field teams throughout              
              the country, staff at the Philippines National Museum will enter               
              information into computer databases modeled upon similar ones                  
              implemented at the Bishop Museum.  Initial priority for field                  
              collecting is being given to forested regions under consideration              
              for protection or otherwise of interest to conservation agencies.              
              The inventory will also be of use to resource managers and others              
              who must have up-to-date knowledge of species identity,                        
              geographical distribution, local uses and names, and ecological                
              condition--common, rare, or extinct--for the plants of the                     
              Philippines.  A published identification guide to the plants is                
              one of the long-term goals of the collaboration.
