Title       : System Identification and Adaptive Control Using Neural Networks - Creativity
               Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1992   
File        : a9396008

Award Number: 9396008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Harris trh@vuse.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   An important aspect of control system design is system                    
              identification. Once the parameters of the systems are identified,             
              a controller can be designed to meet a set of design                           
              specifications. However, when there is a large range of                        
              uncertainties in an existing system model, a controller added to               
              a plant would not perform as expected. In this case, an adaptive               
              control scheme may be used, but using a learning parameter                     
              identification scheme might yield a better solution. Neural network            
              techniques seems to offer a powerful solution to this problem.                 
              Therefore, by using a neural network to learn what the parameters              
              of a complicated system are, a controller can be designed to keep              
              a good performance level.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
                   The proposed research project would involve using a neural                
              network to identify the parameters of a system so that a better                
              controller can be designed. The objective of this research is to               
              obtain a better estimate of the parameters of any given system.                
              After a mathematical model is identified, a controller can be                  
              designed. The neural network would continually learn about the                 
              system so that the model obtained will be correct.
