Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Localization & Regulation of Cell Adhesion
               Molecules & Substrate Adhesion Molecules During Development & Regeneration of
               the Neuromuscular Sys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1993 
File        : a9396077

Award Number: 9396077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald M. Edelman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative studies between Dr. Gerald               
              Edelman and his research group at the Neurosciences Institute,                 
              Rockefeller University and Dr. Francois Rieger, Unite de Recherche             
              de Biologie et Pathologie Neuromusculaires, Centre National de la              
              Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France.  Dr. Edelman, a Nobel Prize             
              winner and eminent researcher in the proposed topic, has                       
              collaborated successfully with Dr. Rieger in the past.                         
                                                                                             
              The neuromuscular system is a complex supracellular structure                  
              composed of a number of different cell types:  sensory and motor               
              neurons, Schwann cells, muscle cells, fibroblasts, and various                 
              support cells.  The development, maintenance, and physiological                
              functions of the neuromuscular system depend upon specialized                  
              structures, including the neuromuscular junction, the myotendinous             
              junction, and the nodes of Ranvier.  In previous research Drs.                 
              Edelman and Rieger showed that three glycoproteins involved in                 
              cell-cell adhesion are localized to these privileged sites and                 
              vary in amount and distribution during development and regeneration            
              of neuromuscular contacts:  the neural cell adhesion molecule,                 
              N-CAM, the neuron-glia cell adhesion molecule,  Ng-CAM, and                    
              cytotactin, an extracellular matrix protein.  The localization of              
              these molecules was altered in mutant animals with various cellular            
              defects and antibodies to N-CAM blocked the appropriate                        
              reinnervation patterns after injury, inhibiting reformation of                 
              synapses at old synaptic sites and allowing for extrasynaptic                  
              nerve-muscle contacts.  The patterns of expression of these                    
              molecules correlate with those of other neuromuscular proteins,                
              including acetylcholinesterase, and voltage-dependent calcium                  
              channels.  During the next phase of collaboration, the                         
              investigators will examine the detailed basis for the localized                
              pattern of expression of adhesion molecules and neuromuscular                  
              proteins, focusing particularly on cytoskeletal interactions.  They            
              will also use cDNA clones specific for muscle forms of N-CAM to                
              transfect cells and produce transgenic animals.  These joint                   
              experiments would be difficult to accomplish in either laboratory              
              alone.  The expertise of Dr. Rieger and his colleagues in electron             
              microscopy, neurophysiology and mutant strains of mice will                    
              complement the expertise of Dr. Edelman and his group in the                   
              isolation and characterization of cell adhesion molecules,                     
              molecular biological techniques, fluorescence microscopy and the               
              production and screening of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies.              
              These studies should provide new insights into the formation and               
              maintenance of structures crucial to muscle function, as well as to            
              their aberrations in muscle disease and dysfunction.
