Title       : The Geography of Mitochondrial DNA and Protein Evolution in North American Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1993     
File        : a9396152

Award Number: 9396152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 16,  1993     
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Zink   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Geographic variation refers to the widespread phenomenon of               
              variation within the range of species.  Understanding the origin               
              and maintenance of such variation is a primary goal of attempts                
              to understand the evolutionary process itself.  This project is                
              designed to clarify evolutionary processes that shape the                      
              geography of intraspecific genetic variation in three                          
              codistributed species of birds, namely, the Fox, Song, and                     
              Chipping sparrows.  In morphology, these species exhibit both                  
              marked geographic differentiation (Fox and Song sparrows) and                  
              phenotypic uniformity (Chipping sparrow) in their continent-wide               
              distributions.  In samples of birds taken throughout the range of              
              each species, genetic differentiation in mitochondrial DNA                     
              (mtDNA) and a series of genes that encode soluble proteins,                    
              called allozymes will be measured.  Such descriptive data on                   
              genetic variation within species provide a foundation for                      
              understanding the origin and evolutionary significance of                      
              geographic variation, and its relationship to the process of                   
              adaptation and speciation.  Examination of genetic data is                     
              crucial because evolution ultimately occurs at this level in                   
              populations.  By examining genetic variation in samples of these               
              three species, it will be possible to determine if geographic                  
              distance alone or "vicariant" events in earth history (such as                 
              the formation of mountain ranges) play a primary role in                       
              geographic differentiation, the initial step in evolutionary                   
              divergence.  No studies of avian genetic variation within and                  
              among codistributed species have been conducted on the                         
              geographic, continent-wide scale of the proposed study.  This                  
              study will provide the most detailed information on avian                      
              population genetic structure yet  available, for both proteins                 
              and at the level of the genetic code itself, (mt)DNA.  The use of              
              three species that occur over the same range increases the                     
              statistical power of interpreting patterns of variation.  The                  
              results will offer significant insight into the evolutionary                   
              process in general as well as the birds under study.
