Title       : Empirical Applications of Strategic Bargaining Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1993      
File        : a9396180

Award Number: 9396180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kennan jkennan@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project continues a line of research on bargaining behavior.              
              The specific purpose of this study is to apply recently developed              
              strategic theories of bargaining with private information to data              
              on wage settlements and strike duration.  The broader aim of this              
              research is to develop a theoretical framework which is                        
              consistent with the facts, and which can eventually lead to                    
              systematic empirical analyses of important policy issues in                    
              collective bargaining.  Some of these policy issues include the                
              treatment of eligibility for unemployment compensation and other               
              welfare benefits for striking workers, and proposals to mandate                
              cooling off periods before a strike can commence.                              
                                                                                             
              The core of the research is a model of repeated negotiations in                
              which the firm has private information which includes both                     
              transient and permanent components.  This model will be applied                
              to a sequence of labor contracts negotiated by each bargaining                 
              pair with a view to explaining empirical results showing that                  
              strike incidence and duration in the last contract negotiation                 
              have a substantial effect on whether a strike occurs in the                    
              current negotiation.  The model will be tested with a sample of                
              U.S. and Canadian labor contracts.
