Title       : Award For Creativity in Engineering for Kimberlee Wallace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9396242

Award Number: 9396242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 16,  1993      
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory F. Payne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Secondary metabolites are compounds which are produced by the             
              cell but are not required for the growth of the cell. Examples of              
              commercially important secondary metabolites include the                       
              antibiotics, pigments, and fragrances. Due to the limited knowledge            
              of the complex pathways from which these compounds are produced,               
              traditional methods for improving productivity have involved                   
              empirical techniques. In early years, these empirical strategies               
              resulted in exponential productivity increases; however, currently             
              these techniques are less successful, resulting in annual                      
              productivity increases of only a few percent. To obtain greater                
              productivity improvements, rational techniques must be developed               
              based upon knowledge of intracellular rate limitations to                      
              biosynthesis.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
                   The purpose of this study is to examine the intracellular                 
              environment and determine the rate limitation to secondary                     
              metabolite production. The investigator proposes to examine                    
              regulation at three levels. First, levels of a key pathway enzyme              
              will be quantified to determine if enzyme availability is a                    
              limitation to biosynthesis. Second, precursor supplies will be                 
              examined to determine if the flux of metabolites through the                   
              pathway limits production. Third, the effect of reaction                       
              endproducts on biosynthesis will be examined to determine if                   
              intracellular levels inhibit production.
