Title       : Designing at the Functional Level of Abstraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9396052

Award Number: 9396052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farrokh Mistree farrokh.mistree@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In the early stages of a design project, it is especially                 
              important to be able to represent, at a high level of abstraction,             
              the functional requirements of the system being designed.  This                
              makes it possible for the design team to arrange and rearrange the             
              essential functional components rapidly.  This also offers a means             
              to explore the feasibility of different system configurations and              
              to pose and answer "what-if" questions before the design is frozen.            
              Similarly, if one is able to model processes associated with                   
              manufacture, then in a like manner, the feasibility of different               
              manufacturing systems can be explored.  It is well known that                  
              design for manufacture tools are implementable and useful once the             
              design of a component is known.  But what if it is necessary to                
              address the issue of design for manufacture very early, for                    
              example, when only the function is known?  At present, this remains            
              an open question.  If the tools for modeling function and                      
              manufacturing processes at the function level of abstraction are               
              developed then it should be possible to pose and answer "what-if"              
              questions that occur at the function-manufacture interface.                    
                   The development of the means to include manufacturing                     
              considerations in design when only the functional requirements are             
              known is the focus of this research.
