Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Hybrid Breakdown During Hyperosmotic Stress in
               the Copepod Tigriopus calfornicus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1993    
File        : a9396166

Award Number: 9396166
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Brazeau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Isolated conspecific populations of organisms come to encompass                
              unique genetic allele complexes through processes such as local                
              adaptation, random drift and mutation.  When these populations                 
              are brought together in the laboratory the hybrid organisms                    
              often exhibit reduced fitness (ie. hybrid breakdown).  Though                  
              hybrid breakdown has been a long standing observation in biology,              
              little progress has been made in understanding the genetic                     
              mechanisms which underlie the processes. This project will                     
              investigate, on a genetic and molecular level, hybrid breakdown                
              between naturally occurring populations of the intertidal copepod              
              Tigriopus californicus.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Like most marine crustacea and many other marine invertebrates,                
              T. californicus adjusts the levels of free amino acids (FAA) in                
              response to salinity changes.  Specifically, proline synthesis                 
              from glutamate is induced by hyperosmotic stress.                              
              Interpopulation crosses yield F2 hybrids which are unable to                   
              accumulate proline in response to hyperosmotic stress (though                  
              parental and F1 hybrids can).  Using heterologous probes and/or                
              functional complementation in Escherichia coli auxotrophs the                  
              genes involved in proline synthesis in T. californicus will be                 
              isolated and characterized.  These genes will then be used to                  
              examine the molecular and genetic mechanisms which underlie                    
              hybrid breakdown in response to hyperosmotic stress.
