Title       : PYI: Development of an Integrated Developmental and Evolutionary Model for a
               Marine Organism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9396004

Award Number: 9396004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171136             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Emlet   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Emlet, working at the University of Southern California,                   
              will address the question of how development and natural                       
              selection interact during evolution.  He plans to create the                   
              first integrated developmental and evolutionary model for a                    
              marine organism, which could provide insights into why some                    
              organisms have diversified while others have not, as well as                   
              how environmental changes effect short and long term changes in                
              organisms.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Using a sea urchin species as a model organism and techniques                  
              he developed to infer mode of larval development in fossil                     
              urchins, Dr. Emlet will determine if the places and times that                 
              a particular type of larval feeding evolved correspond with                    
              environmental conditions that are expected to select for this                  
              type of development.                                                           
                                                                                             
              He will also analyze the functional consequences of changes in                 
              shape and patterns of larval ciliation on swimming performance.                
              This experimental work will be the first to determine                          
              quantitatively the functional requirements for developmental                   
              processes which are modified during evolutionary changes in                    
              mode of development.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Combining historical and functional approaches may show how and                
              when natural selection acts through environmental change or                    
              functional morphological requirements to control developmental                 
              patterns.  Historical analyses may also show whether                           
              developmental patterns influence evolutionary success, measured                
              as diversification rate.
