Title       : Dynamic Synthesis and Processing of High Temperature Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1994      
File        : a9396132

Award Number: 9396132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $633400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naresh N. Thadhani naresh.thadhani@mse.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research has three principal focal areas connected with the               
              theme of dynamic stress application and high rate chemical                     
              reactions, as follows: (1) shock-induced chemical reactions (with              
              controlled recovery experiments, mechanistic modeling, and time-               
              resolved reaction-rate measurements) and synthesis of novel and                
              metastable materials; (2) dynamic compaction of powders to form                
              metal-, intermetallic-, and ceramic-matrix composites; controlled              
              shock-induced and post-shock thermally-induced reactions to tailor             
              and optimize matrix-reinforcement interface characteristics; (3)               
              combustion processing by self-propagating chemical reactions in                
              powder mixtures, followed by high energy rate densification and                
              reaction sintering.  The research is performed at New Mexico Tech.             
              (shock-induced chemical reactions and synthesis), Los Alamos                   
              (modeling), Sandia (shock-wave facilities, modeling), Cal. Inst. of            
              Tech. (shock-tailoring of interfacial reactions in composites), and            
              UC-San Diego (combustion synthesis, dynamic densification and post-            
              shock processing) .                                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              This is an excellent area of research, where the research has                  
              potentially high pay-off with the capability to produce new                    
              materials.  Modeling of the process variables is needed to permit              
              the scaling up of the process to larger sizes and more complex                 
              shapes.
