Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9396247

Award Number: 9396247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Romanelli romanele@gunet.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to Dr. Elaine Romanelli under the                  
              National Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator                  
              Awards program.  The objectives of this program are to provide                 
              research support to the Nation's most outstanding and promising                
              young science and engineering faculty.  The awards are intended                
              to improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to                     
              respond to the demand for highly qualified science and                         
              engineering personnel for academic and industrial research                     
              and teaching.  Dr. Romanelli has already made significant                      
              research contributions to the field of Organization Theory, and                
              has the potential to become a leader in academic research and                  
              education.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This award will allow the investigator to pursue her research                  
              interest relating to the origins, processes, and outcomes of                   
              entrepreneurship in high technology industries.  Much of Dr.                   
              Romanelli's career research focuses on the organizational                      
              backgrounds of founders of biotechnology research and product                  
              development firms.  These studies will illuminate the dynamic                  
              underpinnings of entrepreneurial processes in industries.                      
              In particular, better understanding of industry and                            
              organizational conditions that "produce" entrepreneurs will lay                
              an important groundwork for analysis of when and why new firms                 
              are founded, as well as their impact on changes in industry                    
              competitive structures over time.
