Title       : PYIA: Effects of Earthquake Fault Rupture on Geotechnical Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9396190

Award Number: 9396190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Bray bray@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The phenomenon of earthquake fault rupture                                     
              propagation through overlying soils is quite                                   
              complex and is not well understood at this                                     
              time.  An improved understanding would assist                                  
              in siting and in designing critical facilities                                 
              constructed in regions where soils overlie                                     
              potentially active faults.  For example, a                                     
              number of earth dams have been constructed                                     
              over potentially active faults.  Furthermore,                                  
              significant ground movements can occur on                                      
              subsidiary fault planes several miles from the                                 
              main fault rupture.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The objective of this project is to develop                                    
              improved models and analytical procedures,                                     
              suitable for use by practicing engineers                                       
              investigating the effects of a boundary                                        
              displacement on overlying particulate media.                                   
              This investigation integrates knowledge in the                                 
              fields of geology, seismicity, numerical methods,                              
              physical modelling and geomechanics.                                           
                                                                                             
              Well-documented fault rupture case histories,                                  
              and the results from small-scale model tests,                                  
              can provide physical evidence of the                                           
              mechanism whereby a soil mass responds to an                                   
              underlying tectonic movement.  The aim is to                                   
              develop soil models, incorporating both pre-                                   
              failure and post-failure soil behavior, for                                    
              implementation within computational methods.                                   
              This includes the development of three-                                        
              dimensional procedures - which can be                                          
              validated by the three-dimensional physical                                    
              model tests - to study strike-slip fault                                       
              movements.  Given the inherent shortcomings                                    
              in applying a continuum-based approach to the                                  
              analysis of failure in a soil mass, discrete                                   
              element techniques require further                                             
              development.  Another goal is to support the                                   
              analytical procedures through an exploration of                                
              methods for characterizing critical soil                                       
              properties, such as the hydraulic conductivity                                 
              along newly-formed shear fractures in earth                                    
              materials.
