Title       : Echo Suppression in the Cochlear Nuclear Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9396231

Award Number: 9396231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Wickesberg rwickesb@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              To enable a listener to localize a sound source, the auditory                  
              system suppresses echoes that result from reflections of the sound             
              off nearby objects.  Psychoacoustic experiments have provided                  
              evidence that some of this suppression occurs within a group of                
              nerve cells--the cochlear nuclear complex--which is the first                  
              integrative stage in the auditory system.  Anatomical and                      
              physiological experiments on brain slices that include the cochlear            
              nuclei have identified neurons in the upper portion of the cochlear            
              nuclear complex that are candidates for mediating the echo                     
              suppression effect.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The major purpose of these experiments is to examine,                          
              physiologically, the suppression of echoes in the cochlear nuclear             
              complex and to determine whether the suppression is due to the                 
              candidate neurons.  Microelectrode recordings are made from single             
              neurons to various sound stimuli to study the effects of echo                  
              suppression, since even though echos are suppressed for                        
              localization of a sound, they do make a contribution to perception             
              of the sound. Responses of neurons to pairs of stimuli will be                 
              recorded to determine whether and under what conditions the                    
              response to a second click is suppressed by the first. Also,                   
              responses will be recorded from different neurons in the lower                 
              cochlear nucleus to determine whether there are neurons that do not            
              show echo suppression.
