Title       : FAW: Molecular Mechanisms of Glial-Guided Neuronal Migration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9396078

Award Number: 9396078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Hatten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With a Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers from the               
              National Science Foundation, Dr. Mary Hatten will continue to                  
              study the developmental mechanisms of neuronal-glial interactions              
              in the central nervous system.  The primary goal of this research              
              is to elucidate the genetic and molecular genetic regulation of                
              neuronal migrations in the developing mammalian brain by                       
              employing molecular biological methods and mutant mouse models.                
              An in vitro model system for mouse cerebellar cells has been                   
              developed in Dr. Hatten's laboratory to define the cellular and                
              molecular mechanisms of migration.  Mutant mice with phenotypic                
              defects, expressed by the weaver gene, in glial-guided migration               
              will be utilized to analyze the genetic regulation of migration.               
              A novel adhesion ligand, astrotactin, has been identified to                   
              mediate neuron-glia binding and will be used to describe the                   
              molecular components of migration.  Functional studies indicate                
              that glial-guided neuronal migration utilizes astrotactin rather               
              than neural cell adhesion molecules.  The expression of this                   
              ligand will be examined in other brain regions, such as the                    
              hippocampus, cortex and subcortical regions and astrotactin cDNAs              
              will be used to clone astrotactin and related genes from cDNA                  
              libraries of other brain regions.  This work will provide                      
              information on the sequence of astrotactin, its structure,                     
              function and homology with known proteins.
