Title       : Evolution of the Naticid Gastropod Predator-Prey System: A Test of the
               Hypothesis of Escalation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1992       
File        : a9396021

Award Number: 9396021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia H. Kelley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1551      STRATIGRAPHY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study will test the hypothesis of escalation by examing              
              the history of the naticid gastropod predator-prey system.                     
              Vermeij has suggested that increased severity of biologic hazards              
              and, in turn, aptations to such hazards characterizes the                      
              Phanerozoic.  This hypothesis is controversial and requires                    
              testing by systematic collection of data.  We will analyze the                 
              development of the naticid predator-prey system in the context of              
              this hypothesis of escalation.  A comprehensive survey of Gulf                 
              Coastal Plain Cretaceous and Paleogene molluscan assemblages will              
              be conducted within the theoretical framework of the Kitchell et               
              al.  (1981) energy maximization model of naticid predation.  The               
              survey will determine whether temporal trends in drilling                      
              frequencies occurred and whether naticid-prey interactions                     
              differed early in the history of the group compared to later.                  
              Temporal patterns in behavioral stereotypy (selectivity of                     
              drillhole site and prey size and species) and in relative                      
              effectiveness of predator and prey will be determined.                         
                                                                                             
              Analysis of predation on and evolution of several prey lineages                
              will explore and process of predator-prey evolution.  We will                  
              examine whether escalation is a macroevolutionary phenomenon or                
              occurs within lineages and (if it occurs) what processes are                   
              involved.
