Title       : Molecular Basis of Nitrogen Fixation and the Ecological Success of the Marine
               Cyanobacterium Trichodesmium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9396240

Award Number: 9396240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan P. Zehr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The ecological success of the blue-green bacterium Trichodesmium               
              species suggests that this cyanobacterium possesses unique                     
              characteristics that confer an ecological advantage in the warm,               
              nutrient-poor waters of tropical and subtropical oceans.                       
              Furthermore, this filamentous cyanobacterium without heterocysts               
              dominates the free-living nitrogen (N2) fixing cyanobacterium found            
              in the open ocean.  It is also the only nonheterocystic                        
              cyanobacterium that fixes molecular nitrogen in the light, while               
              evolving oxygen through photosynthesis.  Results from previous                 
              studies on the molecular biology of Trichodesmium have provided a              
              firm basis for studying its genetic, biochemical, and ecological               
              aspects.  This project addresses three important issues of                     
              Trichodesmium biology and ecology.  First, what is the genetic                 
              variability among Trichodesmium populations with different colony              
              morphologies?  Second, what mechanisms are involved in its ability             
              to maintain oxygen-sensitive nitrogenase activity while evolving               
              oxygen?  And third, is the ecological success of Trichodesmium due             
              to its reduced susceptibility to virus infection that is related to            
              extensive modification of Trichodesmium DNA?  These issues will be             
              addressed from biochemical and molecular approaches, using                     
              molecular probes and antisera developed earlier for Trichodesmium              
              populations.//
