Title       : Majority and Minority Influence: An Attempt at Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9396057

Award Number: 9396057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127522             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Crano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACTS                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              This project is designed to answer important questions that have               
              arisen in research on minority influence.  "What constitutes a                 
              minority?"  "Is minority influence merely a special case of more               
              general social influence processes?" are two such issues.  Three               
              series of studies are presented: Series I focuses on the meaning of            
              minority, the influence of task subjectivity/objectivity, and the              
              need for closure; Series 2 with the controversy surrounding                    
              minority influence effects on perceptual judgments; Series 3 with              
              an extension of the initial results into the realm of persuasion,              
              with special emphasis on source, message, and sleeper effects and              
              the impact of cognitive load on influenceability.  The research                
              makes use of findings which suggest that people are differentially             
              susceptible to in-group or out-group influence as a consequence of             
              the objectivity/subjectivity of judgments.  The project has the                
              potential to clarify important issues in minority/majority                     
              influence, and to integrate past findings by highlighting the                  
              relevance of cognate theories (social comparison, social                       
              identification), whose utilization will create a more comprehensive            
              and general model of social influence.
