Title       : New Organic Molecules with Unusual Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1993  
File        : a9396269

Award Number: 9396269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence T. Scott lawrence.scott@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The principal focus of this research program is the synthesis                  
              and study of previously unknown cyclic, polycyclic and                         
              polymeric organic compounds in which multiple acetylenic units                 
              can communicate electronically with one another, either through                
              space (homoconjugatively) or via intervening heteroatoms or                    
              cyclopropanes. Specifically, the acetylenic-containing                         
              synthetic targets are the first phosphocarbon cage molecules,                  
              the first thiocarbon rings, tri-element cage molecules (C,P,S),                
              thiocarbon polymers, 4- and 5-sided spirocyclopropyl                           
              homoconjugated cyclic polydiynes, the 5-sided spirocyclopropyl                 
              homoconjugated cyclic polyacetylene with only one alkyne unit                  
              per side and a C(60)H(36) cage molecule. Such compounds should                 
              display a variety of unusual electronic properties which will                  
              be studied along with other structural features.                               
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. Lawrence T. Scott of                 
              the Department of Chemistry at the University of Nevada - Reno.                
              The unknown cyclic organic compounds which will be synthesized                 
              should display a variety of unusual electronic properties. An                  
              understanding of the structural requirements for electron                      
              delocalization in carefully designed molecules of this sort and                
              the consequences thereof should prove valuable in the rational                 
              design of new organic materials capable of conducting and/or                   
              storing electricity.
