Title       : ROW: Infants' Understanding of Auditory Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1995     
File        : a9396020

Award Number: 9396020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. LaGasse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bradley Hospital
	      1011 Veterans Memorial Highway
	      Providence, RI  029155061    /   -

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent studies have shown that infants predict the outcome of                  
              moving objects in complex events from visual information.                      
              Typically, infants see the surfaces and obstacles that the object              
              will encounter and part of the action sequence itself.  The purpose            
              of this research is to explore whether infants can also use                    
              auditory cues to interpret physical events.  The research will                 
              focus on two questions:  (1) Can a moving object be localized by               
              auditory cues alone?  (2) Can the appearance of an object be                   
              anticipated by auditory cues?  The goal of the planning activities             
              is to develop and pilot test events in which auditory cues specify             
              the movement or appearance of an object.  Infants' reaching                    
              behavior in the dark will index their prediction of the location               
              and availability of the object.  Infants at 6.5 and 8.5 months of              
              age will participate in the pilot studies.  Events to be tested                
              include a ball falling down stairs, a sounding object rotating on              
              a turntable, and the operation of a jack-in-the-box toy.  The first            
              two events will emphasize localization, while the last event will              
              explore the signalling function of sound.   Evidence that infants              
              can reason about events from auditory cues would support theories              
              of cognitive development that posit early or even innate knowledge             
              about the behavior of objects in the world.  Further, methodologies            
              that document infant cognition can provide diagnostic tools for                
              early detection of cognitive deficits.
