Title       : Active Construction and Application of Conceptual Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1996   
File        : a9396205

Award Number: 9396205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 14,  1993       
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Van Heuvelen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Research during the last two decades has shown that                            
              conventional physics instruction fails to alter student                        
              alternative conceptions (misconceptions), to improve their                     
              problem-solving expertise, and to help students form a coherent                
              knowledge structure that can be effectively accessed when                      
              needed. Recent experiments in physics education show that we                   
              can do much better.  In these experiments, students are active                 
              participants in constructing their own knowledge and in                        
              developing expert-like strategies to solve standard and complex                
              problems.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              In this project, two new sets of active learning aides are                     
              being constructed and evaluated, including a set of Concept                    
              Construction Experiments and a set of Experiment Problems.                     
              These activities are being used in lecture, recitation, and                    
              laboratory instruction in large introductory physics classes                   
              for engineers and science majors.  The kits are being                          
              integrated with previously developed active learning pencil-                   
              and-paper activities into a coherent program of physics                        
              instruction called OCS (Overview, Case Study) Action Physics.                  
              An Active Learning Student Study Guide and Laboratory Manual                   
              are being prepared to supplement a conventional textbook. A                    
              coordinated effort is being made to help students construct                    
              their own conceptual models, to develop the individual skills                  
              needed to use those models to solve complex problems, and to                   
              help students organize this knowledge (conceptual and                          
              procedural) into a coherent structure that can be accessed                     
              effectively.  Previous and current work have shown considerable                
              promise for this method of instruction.
