Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1990      
File        : a9007808

Award Number: 9007808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Jackson jackson@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator is engaged in research in various areas of               
              set theory.  One of his main ongoing research interests concerns               
              the theory of the model L(R) with the axiom of determinacy.  The               
              sets of reals in L(R) form a far-reaching extension of the                     
              projective sets, and the goal of obtaining a more or less                      
              complete theory of this model with the axiom of determinacy                    
              (which is a natural strong set theoretic axiom for this model) is              
              one of his central interests.                                                  
                   Secondly, he is working on problems connected with the                    
              theory of equivalence relations in ZFC.  Recently, R. Dougherty,               
              A.S. Kechris (who introduced the term "descriptive dynamics" for               
              this area) and the investigator obtained some results which                    
              suggest the beginnings of a possible classification for the Borel              
              equivalence relations with countable classes.  There are many                  
              open problems here, such as identifying a canonical cofinal                    
              hierarchy of equivalence relations.                                            
                   Thirdly, some problems of descriptive set theory of a more                
              classical nature have arisen recently.  D. Mauldin and the                     
              investigator have recently obtained a non-uniformization type                  
              result for co-analytic sets.  There are open problems here, such               
              as how far these results can be extended in ZF, as well as other               
              problems in descriptive set theory which he will work on.                      
                   Finally, he would like to devote some time to problems which              
              have arisen from the inner model theory for large cardinals, such              
              as questions about iteration trees.                                            
                   There is nothing more basic in mathematics than set theory.               
              It is arguable that the natural numbers (0,1,2,3,...) are no more              
              fundamental.  For this reason it is perhaps surprising to find                 
              questions about these fundamental objects under active                         
              investigation and to see that even the choice of axioms for a                  
              theory of sets is controversial.
