Title       : RUI:Equity-Efficiency Trade-Offs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9007953

Award Number: 9007953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55177              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Campbell decamp@malthus.morton.um.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              A social welfare function is a formula for aggregating conflicting             
              individual preferences into a social preference scheme to be used              
              for collective decision making.  The formula should satisfy basic              
              demographic values or axioms.  K.J.Arrow received the Noble prize              
              in part for his proof of the Impossibility Theorem, i.e., that it              
              is impossible to construct a social welfare function consistent                
              with basic assumptions of equity and economics.  The Impossibility             
              Theorem has survived many attempts to restore consistency by                   
              weakening these axioms.  Unlike other treatments of the                        
              Impossibility Theorem which simply seek to extend standard theorems            
              in welfare economics, the investigator has developed methods for               
              exploiting the algebraic and topological structure of the standard             
              allocation models to obtain very general insights into public                  
              choice.  For example, the investigator proved recently that the                
              social welfare function is either completely unresponsive to                   
              individual preference or there is some individual who is denied any            
              share in the economy's private goods at every turn.  The project               
              continues to investigate social choice in economic environments                
              under weaker transitivity assumptions, in models with public and               
              private goods, under less demanding and more realistic preference              
              revelation desiderata, and in intergenerational social choice                  
              models.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The contribution of this project comes from developing a new way               
              of looking at the question of providing an axiomatic foundation for            
              public decision making.  The investigator has already succeeded in             
              proving new theorems about the trade-offs between equity and                   
              efficiency in the types of economic settings found in real-world               
              public policy problems.  Further development of this promising                 
              approach is warranted because the new methods will provide useful              
              tools for analyzing collective choice and substantial new insights             
              into many economic problems.
