Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: An Advanced Visualization Environment for the
               Study of Interfacial and Bioengineering Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1990       
File        : a9007126

Award Number: 9007126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paulette Clancy pc@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Research programs in the areas of thermodynamics, biophysics                   
              and                                                                            
              materials processing make extensive use of interactive                         
              computer graphics to help analyze computer simulation data by                  
                                                                                             
              a visualization of the physical processes at work.  Most of                    
              the projects use an atomic-level description of the physical                   
              system coupled to an appropriate statistical mechanics-based                   
              simulation technique (Molecular Dynamics or Monte Carlo) to                    
              produce files containing the positions of all the atoms or                     
              molecules in the system.  These data files are then analyzed                   
              using interactive computer graphics.  The impact of a computer                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              graphics analysis strongly influences projects such as the                     
              design of liquid crystalline polymers, the stability of                        
              proteins against denaturation and the design of new materials                  
                                                                                             
              such as rapidly solidified metal alloys, as described in the                   
              proposal.  In a number of applications, particularly                           
              interfacial phenomena, the ability to make a videotape of the                  
                                                                                             
              process is invaluable.  Interfacial phenomena may involve                      
              capillary condensation in pores, membrane fusion or Molecular                  
                                                                                             
              beam Epitaxy of semiconductor materials, but all profit by the                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              visualization offered by an approximation of real-time motion                  
                                                                                             
              of the substances under different conditions.  High-                           
              performance graphics workstations linked to an appropriate                     
              video imaging system are used to bring about this                              
              visualization.
