Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships and the Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism in Chaenopsid
               Blennies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1990   
File        : a9007311

Award Number: 9007311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Hastings   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Scientists have long been interested in the factors responsible                
              for the evolution of differences in the sexes.  Knowledge of such              
              mechanisms of evolution within species also provides insight                   
              into the divergence of species which in turn contributes to our                
              understanding of the diversification of life.  This project will               
              study the evolution of sex differences in chaenopsid fishes, a                 
              group of tropical marine blennioid fishes.  Prior research on the              
              genus Coralliozetus has revealed that many of the differences in               
              males and females evolved in a single event in which the                       
              development of females became truncated.  Similar changes in the               
              timing of development are known for other organisms, yet have                  
              rarely been implicated in the divergence of the sexes.  The                    
              precise developmental mechanisms responsible for this divergence,              
              whether a slowing or an early cessation of development in                      
              females, will be determined by describing the development in both              
              sexes of these and related species.  The role of this                          
              morphological change in the ecology of these fishes will be                    
              studied by testing a hypothesized behavioral shift in habitat use              
              of females.  Habitat shifts by one sex are poorly documented and               
              represent an important, but recently overlooked, cause for the                 
              evolution of sex differences.  The generality of these results                 
              will be tested in a similar study on the equally dimorphic                     
              chaenopsid genus Emblemaria.  This research is unique in                       
              integrating systematics, developmental biology and behavioral                  
              ecology in the study of sex differences.
