Title       : REU: Accomplishment-Based Renewal: Biomolecular Systematicsof Primates and Other
               Eutheria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9007056

Award Number: 9007056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85011              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris Goodman mgoodwayne@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry L. Slightom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State U Sch of Med
	      
	      Detroit, MI  48202    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   DNA nucleotide sequences have emerged as the most convincing              
              source of information concerning evolutionary relationships among              
              species, genera, and higher level taxonomic groups.  Dr. Morris                
              Goodman has been a leader in this field of molecular evolution,                
              and he proposes continued analysis of gene sequences among                     
              primates and other mammalian groups.  This research will help to               
              clarify relationships within the primates, and between primates                
              and their closest non-primate relatives.  Dr. Goodman will also                
              investigate the possible correlation between the rate at which a               
              lineage evolves, the mutation rate in that lineage, and the life               
              span of organisms in that lineage.                                             
                   The proposed research will attract broad attention from                   
              vertebrate zoologists, anthropologists, and molecular                          
              geneticists.  A more robust genealogy of mammals will encourage a              
              wide range of research projects in ecology, behavior, and                      
              biogeography, to name a few relevant fields.
