Title       : State-To-State Reaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1990        
File        : a9007939

Award Number: 9007939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Zare zare@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Professor Richard N. Zare is supported by a grant from The                     
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to study state-to-state                
              reaction dynamics using a combination of molecular beam and                    
              laser spectroscopic techniques.  This research is of                           
              fundamental importance in understanding the physics underlying                 
              simple chemical transformations at the molecular level.                        
                                                                                             
              The objective of Zare's research program is to obtain quantum                  
              state-specific information on the dynamics of elementary                       
              gas-phase chemical reactions.  This is accomplished through the                
              synthesis of molecular beam and laser spectroscopic methods.                   
              Beam techniques permit the study of isolated molecules and the                 
              investigation of reactive encounters, one collision at a time.                 
              Laser techniques permit the preparation of reagents (state                     
              selection) and the interrogation of reaction products (state                   
              detection).  Special emphasis is placed on experiments that use                
              a tunable infrared source or stimulated Raman pumping for                      
              preparing reagents in individual rovibronic states and use                     
              tunable UV sources for the quantum-state-specific detection of                 
              molecular and atomic products.  State-to-state information                     
              gathered in this manner enables chemists to understand how                     
              reactions occur by relating detailed observations to scattering                
              calculations carried out on realistic potential energy surfaces                
              that describe the forces experienced by reagents and products                  
              during a chemical transformation.
