Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: A Combusting Flowfield Imaging System for the
               Study of One- and Two-Phase Reacting Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1990     
File        : a9007731

Award Number: 9007731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall B. Long long-marshall@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell D. Smooke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alessandro Gomez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A Combusting Flowfield Diagnostic System is to be purchased                    
              for probing the spatial characteristics of one- and two-phase                  
              reacting flows.  The system consists of three major                            
              components:  (1) a Nd:YAG laser capable of high pulse energies                 
              to illuminate the reacting flow under study, (2) a high                        
              resolution, solid-state camera to detect the scattered laser                   
              light, and (3) a supercomputer workstation with hardware                       
              dedicated to real time two-and three-dimensional graphics                      
              operations to control the laser and detectors, analyze and                     
              display the measured data, and perform computational tasks                     
              currently done at supercomputer centers.  Some specific                        
              experiments which will be performed with this equipment are as                 
              follows:  (1) measurement of species concentrations and                        
              temperatures in laminar premixed and nonpremixed flames;  (2)                  
              measurement of the temperature field and its full three-                       
              dimensional gradient at 106 points within a cross section of a                 
              turbulent flame;  (3) determination of the species inside a                    
              burning droplet using stimulated Raman scattering or coherent                  
              anti-Stokes Raman scattering;  (4) simultaneous spectral and                   
              spatial imaging of fuel droplets, which will allow the                         
              determination of size and chemical makeup of several particles                 
              in a single laser pulse; and  (5) study of the burning of                      
              micron-sized solid particles in a range or aggregation regimes                 
              by electrospray techniques.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The potential impact of laser diagnostic measurements and                      
              computational methods on combustion research is great.  By                     
              performing measurements in two or three dimensions, the                        
              characteristics of large-scale structures can be determined                    
              and the interaction between the fluid motion and the chemistry                 
              studied.  The cooperative experimental and computational                       
              effort will benefit both portions of the research.
