Title       : Characterization of a Xenopus Homeobox Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1992        
File        : a9007410

Award Number: 9007410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence D. Etkin lde@notes.mdacc.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas MD Anderson Ctr
	      1515 Holcombe, Box 202
	      Houston, TX  77030    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Both genetic and molecular analyses of Drosophila have clearly                 
              demonstrated that homeobox containing genes are intimately                     
              involved in the establishment of the body plan. Using molecular                
              probes from Drosophila the vertebrate homeobox containing gene                 
              counterparts were isolated. However, there is no clear evidence                
              demonstrating that the homeobox containing genes play a similar                
              role in vertebrates. This proposal is focused on analyzing the                 
              function of a maternally expressed homeobox containing gene,                   
              X1Hox 2, in the frog Xenopus laevis. Dr. Etkin's preliminary data              
              show that the X1Hox 2 mRNA is localized in the animal hemisphere               
              in full grown oocytes and that destruction of the maternal mRNA                
              by injection of  antisense oligodeoxynucleotides results in a                  
              specific defect in the neural tube.  Dr. Etkin hypothesis is that              
              this gene plays a fundamental role in the regulatory gene                      
              hierarchy in early Xenopus development.  He will test this                     
              hypothesis by accomplishing the following specific aims: 1)                    
              define the spatial and temporal pattern of expression of the                   
              X1Hox 2 gene using in situ hybridization, RNase protection                     
              assays, and immunostaining of the protein in tissue sections and               
              whole mounts 2) analysis of how this gene is regulated during                  
              development by examining the role of cell cell interactions and                
              autoregulation on its expression, as well as characterizing the                
              putative target genes that the X1Hox 2 gene product may activate               
              at the gastrula stage and 3) determine the function of the X1Hox               
              2 gene using several approaches including a novel combination of               
              antisense oligodeoxynucleotide injection, maturation, and                      
              fertilization of oocytes in vitro.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The analysis of this gene and its product will be important in                 
              the formulation of basic principles of how homeobox containing                 
              genes function in the establishment of the vertebrate body plan.
