Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Equipment for Macromolecular and Aggregate
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1990       
File        : a9007191

Award Number: 9007191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benny D. Freeman benny_freeman@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rey T. Chern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruben G. Carbonell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter K. Kilpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold B. Hopfenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Department of Chemical Engineering at North Carolina State                 
              University has a strong research program in the areas of                       
              applied polymer and colloid and interface science.  In order                   
              to sustain the momentum of this program and indeed provide for                 
              new and innovative research, upgrade and replacement of                        
              existing equipment is essential.  This proposal requests funds                 
              to upgrade an aging differential scanning calorimeter (DSC)                    
              with a modern, computer-controlled expandable unit capable of                  
              extending measurements to high pressure and suitable for                       
              expansion to include other polymer and colloid                                 
              characterization tools.  To justify the acquisition of this                    
              equipment, three research projects are described. These                        
              projects involve the use of the new DSC apparatus for probing                  
              thermal transitions in (1) the prototypical equilibrium                        
              organic glass amber, (2) novel phthalate-based polymers, and                   
              (3) transitional surfactant liquid crystalline phases.  The                    
              phthalate-based polymers exhibit so-called sorbent-induced                     
              plasticization at high pressures and thus a cell for                           
              performing high pressure studies is also requested as part of                  
              the new DSC acquisition.  With this new equipment, the                         
              interdisciplinary research program in colloid, polymer, and                    
              interface science here in Chemical Engineering at North                        
              Carolina State University should remain strong and vital in                    
              the years ahead.
