Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Fourier Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9007599

Award Number: 9007599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Fefferman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Mathematical research on problems involving the application               
              of harmonic analysis to partial differential equations will be                 
              carried out under this award.  The work falls into three groups,               
              the first of which concerns the Zygmund conjecture on multiple                 
              parameter families of rectangles.  It was long believed that the               
              k-parameter maximal function should have boundedness properties                
              depending only on the parameter k and not on the dimension of                  
              the underlying space.  That this was not necessarily the case                  
              was shown by F. Soria in 1986.  Since this maximal function is                 
              central to any multi-dimensional differentiation theory, it is                 
              still of interest to find what the correct formulation of the                  
              bound on the maximal function should be.                                       
                   A second line of investigation concerns product singular                  
              integrals, a theory which developed from the one-variable theory               
              only after the investment of considerable effort (the natural                  
              one-dimensional generalizations failed to carry over).  Work is                
              now progressing on the goal of showing that singular integrals                 
              can be expressed as pointwise limits of multiply truncated                     
              singular integrals.                                                            
                   Finally, work in partial differential equations will                      
              concentrate on elliptic equations defined in a ball in Euclidean               
              space.  If the coefficients of the elliptic part of the operator               
              are bounded and measurable, and the boundary values are required               
              to be in one of the Lebesgue spaces, there are (somewhat                       
              surprisingly) cases where the equation has no solution.  The                   
              question of existence has attracted the attention of many                      
              mathematicians over the past decade.  What is now evolving are                 
              methods of determining existence in terms of the proximity of the              
              operator to other operators for which the Dirichlet problem can                
              be solved.  This work will continue along the same line except                 
              that the domain under consideration will be unbounded.                         
              Significant differences arise in this setting, even for elliptic               
              operators with smooth coefficients.
