Title       : Symposium: Physiological and Developmental Aspects of Gene Action in Plants:
               Annual Meeting of the Botanical Society of America; August 12-16, 1990,
               Richmond, Virginia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1990      
File        : a9007549

Award Number: 9007549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1990   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3652               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard O. Phinney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Botanical Soc of America
	      
	      Ames, IA  50011    /   -

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Botanical Society of America has arranged a half day                       
              symposium on the "Physiological and Developmental Aspects of Gene              
              Action in Plants". The symposium will be held at the annual                    
              meeting of the Botanical Society of America in Richmond,                       
              Virginia, between August 12 and August 16, 1990. This symposium                
              represents part of the Genetics Section's effort to encourage                  
              communication on modern approaches (including molecular genetics)              
              to research in botany. The speakers are internationally known for              
              their modern approaches to problems in higher plants. All five                 
              are excellent speakers. They are leaders in their respective                   
              disciplines. Each speaker has agreed to participate. each speaker              
              will be given 45 minutes presentation time plus 15 minutes for                 
              discussion. The organizer (Phinney) will introduce each speaker                
              and also summarize the overall purpose of the symposium to the                 
              audience. The speakers and the titles of their talks are as                    
              follows: 1) Tim Nelson (Yale University) "Patterns of Development              
              in C4 Leaves"; 2) Ian Sussex (University of Calif., Berkeley)                  
              "Gene Expression During Meristematic Development"; 3) Scott                    
              Poethig (University of Pennsylvania) "Genetic Regulation of Phase              
              Change in Maize"; Tom Guilfoyle (University of Missouri) "Auxin                
              Regulated Gene Expression"; Judith Verbeke (University of                      
              Arizona) "Cell Determination in Higher Plants".                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This symposium will be a valuable opportunity for botanical                    
              researchers to have access to some of the exciting developments                
              in molecular genetic aspects of plant science that could                       
              directly affect their own research.
