Title       : Spatial and Temporal Analysis of Species Abundance and Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1990      
File        : a9007450

Award Number: 9007450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12513              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Glenn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Understanding the distribution and abundance of species both              
              within and between communities has been one of the primary goals               
              in community ecology.  Although much research has focused on                   
              within community patterns, there has been a new emphasis on                    
              factors associated with regional distribution and abundance.                   
              Recently, Hanski (1982) proposed a dynamic regional distribution               
              model based on island biogeography from which he derived the                   
              core-satellite hypothesis.  The core-satellite hypothesis                      
              predicts a bimodal frequency distribution in which species tend                
              to occur at all similar sights in a region (core species) or they              
              tend towards extinction (satellite species). This model contrasts              
              with others which predict a unimodal distribution of species in a              
              region.  This project will test the unique aspects of Hanski's                 
              model in comparison to other models (Levins 1969, Brown 1984) by               
              analyzing and adding to plant distribution data from the Konza                 
              Prairie Long-term Ecological Research Site.  General questions                 
              include: is the regional distribution of plant species bimodal?                
              Do species shift from core to satellite categories and vice                    
              versa?  Does grazing effect the pattern of bimodality in plant                 
              communities?                                                                   
                   Preliminary research indicates that prairie vegetation is                 
              dynamic over the short term, and that species regional and                     
              temporal distributions are bimodal as predicted by the core-                   
              satellite model.  This project will provide the first real test                
              of this important model using spatial and temporal data, in                    
              combination with a large-scale field experiment from a single                  
              site.  A suite of plant surveys will augment long-term                         
              distributional data on prairie plants, and provide the primary                 
              basis for model testing.  Data generated as part of large-scale                
              trails on grazing and fire disturbance will provide a unique                   
              opportunity to validate the model experimentally and test the                  
              role of intermediate levels of disturbance inustructuring plant                
              communities.  Overall, this research has clear implications for                
              understanding factors affecting the structure, dynamics, and                   
              distribution of plant species within and between grassland                     
              communities.
