Title       : Evolution and Control of Microstructure in Spray Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9007392

Award Number: 9007392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George F. Keyser                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Lawley lawleya@duvm.ocs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diran Apelian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Osprey spray deposition process is an attractive                           
              alternative technology to manufacture net or near net shape                    
              components.  The process entails atomization of a liquid                       
              stream of metal into a spray of molten droplets which                          
              subsequently impinge and consolidate on a substrate to                         
              produce a homogeneous deposit.  The overall objective of                       
              this research proposal is to predict and control the                           
              evolution of microstructure during solidification in the                       
              spray deposition process.  The study will develop a model                      
              for the microstructure formation during solidification in                      
              spray, the integrating the interaction of micro- and                           
              macroscopic solidification events.  Initially, experimental                    
              and analytical studies will be performed in order to                           
              quantify the size, number and spatial distribution of the                      
              generated nuclei.  Concomitantly, the solidification of the                    
              spray deposit will be modeled, taking into account the                         
              growth kinetics of dendrite tips and solute balance at the                     
              scale of the grain size.  Evaluation of the microstructure                     
              will also be analyzed as particle coarsening during liquid                     
              phase sintering.  Utilizing the overall model for evolution                    
              of microstructure from the first phase of the program, the                     
              study will be extended to design and tailor alloy                              
              compositions to produce the required microstructures and                       
              properties in components for specific applications.
