Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Differentiation in the Middle Period in the Valle
               de la Plata, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1990     
File        : a9007628

Award Number: 9007628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the supervision of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Jeffrey Blick, a              
              graduate student in the University of Pittsburgh Anthropology                  
              Department, will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  For              
              many years Dr. Drennan has conducted archaeological research in                
              the Valle de la Plata region of Columbia, an area noted for its                
              impressive prehistoric sculptured stone figures.  He has linked                
              these to the development of complex chiefly societies.  Mr. Blick              
              will examine one stage of this process in detail.  Focussing on                
              the Middle Period which dates from 0-850 A.D., he will examine                 
              ceramics from existing surface collections and conduct soil                    
              phosphate testing as well as extensive survey to locate intact                 
              sites.  He will then excavate four to six residential areas to                 
              recover household information.  These individual households will               
              then be compared to examine potential differences in wealth and                
              economic stratification.                                                       
                                                                                             
              In recent years many archaeologists have focussed on the question              
              of how complex societies develop and the role which emerging                   
              social inequality plays in this process.  Archaeological data                  
              make it clear that differences in prestige existed since limited               
              numbers of large and impressive burial structures are known to be              
              associated with this time period and these indicate differences                
              in individual status.  It is not known, however, whether these                 
              also reflect variation in individual wealth, and Mr. Blick's                   
              excavation of residential units will provide relevant data.                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  First, it will                
              increase our understanding of how complex societies originally                 
              developed.  Second, it will provide information of interest to a               
              large number of archaeologists who study the culture history of                
              Middle and South America.  Finally, it will assist in the                      
              training of an extremely promising young scientist.
