Title       : Electron-beam Analyses of Individual Particles: Applicationsto Atmospheric
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1994      
File        : a9007796

Award Number: 9007796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Buseck  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan H. Fink jon.fink@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is a project to determine the chemical and                           
              morphological characteristics of individual particles from                     
              tropospheric aerosols of remote areas in the Artic, North                      
              Atlantic, and Equatorial Pacific.  Such particles in the                       
              planetary boundary layer and mid-troposphere are important                     
              because of their impact on the solar radiation balance, climate                
              stability, and the global dispersion of natural and pollutant                  
              material.  Analyses will be performed with automated electron-                 
              beam instruments.  Methods developed over the past decade allow                
              one to study large numbers of particles and to determine particle              
              types, concentrations, and size distributions.  The resulting                  
              data will be used to address current issues in atmospheric                     
              aerosol research.  To be investigated are:  (a) generation,                    
              fractionation, and reactions of marine aerosol particles; (b)                  
              production of natural, non-sea-salt sulfate particles; and (c)                 
              sources, transport, and fates of other particle types, both                    
              natural and anthropogenic.                                                     
                                                                                             
                   Automated particle analysis will be performed using a                     
              scanning electron microscope and an electron microprobe.  As a                 
              secondary task, the structure and composition of complex                       
              submicron particles will be investigated at high spatial                       
              resolutions using transmission electron microscopy, both by                    
              imaging and by chemical analysis.  The proposed studies, taken                 
              together, will provide fine-scale data about the chemical                      
              compositions, morphologies, and internal structures of a wide                  
              variety of individual particles.  These data, in turn, will                    
              provide important insights into aerosol particle origins,                      
              chemical reactions, dispersion, and ultimate fates. //
