Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Regularity Problems for Variational Integrals and
               Quasiregular Mappings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9007946

Award Number: 9007946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tadeusz Iwaniec tiwaniec@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   There are two main themes to be followed in this project.                 
              One concerns questions of regularity involving quasi-regular                   
              mappings.  These are mappings of the plane or higher dimensional               
              space in which distortion of small sets such as discs is                       
              controlled in a measurable way.  The maps are not required to be               
              univalent (quasi-conformal) and they are characterized as                      
              solutions of systems of elliptic partial differential equations                
              (of degenerate type).  One of the primary concerns in the study                
              of quasi-regular mappings is that of finding estimates on the                  
              growth of such mappings as well as characterizing extremal                     
              mappings subject to given boundary conditions.  In two                         
              dimensions, one is eventually led to the complex Hilbert                       
              transform.  Various regularity results depend on estimates of the              
              norm of this transform, specifically the p-th power norm.  Work                
              will be done on sharpening estimates for the norm.                             
                   A second line of investigation will focus on variational                  
              energy integrals of classes of functions whose stationary points               
              are  quasi-conformal.  In particular, work will be done in                     
              estimating energy integrals over subsets of a given domain in                  
              terms of the  energy integral over the full domain, multiplied by              
              a power of the measure of the subset. The best value of the power              
              remains to be determined.  At this time, the only known results                
              are in the  case where the domain is a solid disc or ball.
