Title       : Adaptation to Sedentism in Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1991 
File        : a9007928

Award Number: 9007928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Benfer BenferR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Benfer and                
              his colleagues conducted multi-year excavations at the site of                 
              Paloma, located on the desert coastal plain of Peru.  The site                 
              dates from the pre-ceramic period and documents the emergence of               
              the earliest sedentary communities in this region of the world.                
              The inhabitants, although they relied on hunted and gathered                   
              foods, were able to develop a secure enough subsistence base to                
              maintain what appear to be permanent settlements.  In the course               
              of excavation, Dr. Benfer and colleagues opened large areas and                
              uncovered both full storage pits and house remains.  These proved              
              extremely rich in both floral and faunal materials.  They also                 
              uncovered large numbers of well preserved - often mummified -                  
              burials.  Because of the extreme desertic conditions which                     
              resulted in this excellent preservation, the Paloma site provides              
              unique insight not only into the subsistence adaptations of the                
              inhabitants but also into their biological response.  Through                  
              excavation at other sites, the team has also been able to set                  
              Paloma into a broader geographic and chronological context.                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Benfer will now conduct analyses and limited fieldwork to                  
              allow final publication of the results.  A brief field season                  
              will permit additional - and necessary - stratigraphic                         
              correlation.  Faunal and floral samples will be analyzed and                   
              radiocarbon dates obtained.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will allow                 
              the final and definitive publication of an extremely important                 
              archaeological site.  It will provide insight into the process                 
              which led to the sedentization of previously mobile hunting and                
              gathering groups and, thus, shed light on the process which led                
              to the development of complex societies.  Finally, because of                  
              graduate student involvement, it will assist in the training of a              
              young scientist.
