Title       : Craniofacial Development in Eutherian and Metatherian Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9007480

Award Number: 9007480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen K. Smith kksmith@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The most significant differences between eutherian                        
              (placental) and metatherian (marsupial) mammals involve their                  
              modes of reproduction and development.  Metatherians are born at               
              a premature state relative to eutherians, and complete                         
              development while attached to the teat, nursing.  The                          
              evolutionary consequences, advantages and disadvantages of these               
              metatherian and eutherian strategies form the basis of an                      
              extensive literature.  Yet, most details on the differences in                 
              morphological development are unknown.  The proposed study will                
              examine development of craniofacial features in metatherians and               
              eutherians and is intended to form the first part of a long term               
              study of craniofacial development in mammals.                                  
                                                                                             
                   The focus of this specific project is on a detailed                       
              comparison of craniofacial development in two species,                         
              Monodelphis domestica (Didelphidae, Marsupialia), and                          
              Meoscricetus auratus (Rodentia).  These are hypothesized as                    
              representative taxa for the two groups.  Data on rate of                       
              development, on sequence of differentiation, and on coordination               
              of developmental events will be collected for both species.                    
              Focus will be on the bones, muscles and nerves of the head.                    
              These data will then be applied in a preliminary manner in                     
              phylogenetic comparisons in order to assess the generality of                  
              patterns observed in these representative taxa and to form                     
              hypotheses on appropriate characters for further examination of                
              the polarity of developmental events in placental and marsupial                
              mammals.
