Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Electronic Band Structures andChemical Bonding in
               Mixed Organic/Organometallic Charge Transfer Salts and Phosphate Tungsten
               Bronzes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1990 
File        : a9007963

Award Number: 9007963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm H. Chisholm   (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9239,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Electronic Band Structures and                    
              Chemical Bonding in Mixed Organic/Organometallic Charge                        
              Transfer Salts and Phosphate Tungsten Bronzes                                  
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable US scientists and engineers to                         
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award is for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Malcolm H.                       
              Chisholm to support a 12 month post-doctoral visit by Dr.                      
              James D. Martin to France to work with Dr. Enric Canadell of                   
              the Universit de Paris-Sud on "Electronic Band Structures                      
              and Chemical Bonding in Mixed Organic/Organometallic Charge                    
              Transfer Salts and Phosphate Tungsten Bronzes."  The synthesis                 
              of new solid state materials with predictable physical                         
              properties is presently a major challenge for chemists.                        
              Central to achieving this goal is an understanding of how                      
              electronic structures are related to specific crystal                          
                                                                                             
              structures of a material.  Dr. Martin proposes to examine the                  
                                                                                             
              electronic structures of organic/organometallic charge                         
                                                                                             
              transfer salts and phosphate tungsten bronzes.  Calculation                    
                                                                                             
              of the band structures and Fermi surfaces of the respective                    
                                                                                             
              solids is expected to provide fundamental understanding of                     
                                                                                             
              the relationships between crystal structures and physical                      
                                                                                             
              properties.  Large and complex unit cells of solids make the                   
                                                                                             
              consideration of all orbital interactions quite difficult.                     
                                                                                             
              For this reason, the perspective of "molecules in solids"                      
                                                                                             
              will be used to identify features of the crystal structures                    
                                                                                             
              essential for the description of specific electronic                           
                                                                                             
              properties.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
                                                                                             
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
                                                                                             
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
                                                                                             
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
