Title       : Survey of Mexican Plant Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9007869

Award Number: 9007869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : April 30,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Arntzen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Main Campus
	      
	      College Station, TX  77843    409/845-3211

NSF Program : 5931      INTERNATIONAL INFO & ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              An essential criterion for assessing fruitful areas of science and             
              engineering cooperation between U.S. and foreign investigators is              
              the probability that long-term relationships beneficial to the                 
              U.S. communities can be established.  A key provision in the                   
              Mexican government's science policy is to support the development              
              of a few key fields in science and technology, one of which is                 
              plant biotechnology.  Moreover, the existence of species in                    
              Mexico that are not indigenous to the United States can provide                
              unique research opportunities for U.S. scientists.                             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Arntzen's plan to make an in-depth assessment of the                       
              capabilities at existing Mexican centers of research in this                   
              field will be of considerable value in advancing scientific                    
              cooperation in an important and unique area that Mexico has                    
              targeted for support.  He will lead a team comprised of three                  
              other U.S. plant biotechnologists to three research sites in the               
              country to meet with Mexican investigators and to determine the                
              feasibility of research cooperation on specific projects.  They                
              may also begin to develop detailed plans for cooperative research              
              if they determine that such plans would be in the best interests               
              of U.S. research efforts in plant biotechnology.  Following the                
              visit, Dr. Artnzen will prepare a written assessment of Mexican                
              capabilities in the field that will be made available to the                   
              relevant research community in the United States in the expectation            
              that that report will provide a broader basis for planning                     
              cooperative research projects with Mexico.
