Title       : Persistence in a Saltmarsh Insect Community: Experiments with Local Extinctions,
               Dispersal, and Colonization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1991       
File        : a9007429

Award Number: 9007429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : July 1,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189295             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Strong   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Stiling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Local populations of the gall midge Asphondylia borrichiae                
              Rossi and Strong apparently become extinct and are re-established              
              by immigrants frequently, as indicated by our work with this new               
              species of fly.  Patches of the sole host plant, sea oxeye daisy               
              (Borrichia frutescens) are all small and discrete.  There are no               
              vast "mainland" patches, and gall-midge populations contributing               
              colonists to locally extinct populations are about the size of                 
              those that have become extinct.  The investigator posit that this              
              is a true "metapopulation" system (sensu Levins 1970), in which                
              persistence is due to recolonization after local extintion among               
              roughly even-sized patches.                                                    
                   Parasitoids are a major threat but are spotty in their                    
              effects.  In excess of 95% parasitism occurs in some sea oxeye                 
              patches, while other patches have much lower rates.  Patches with              
              temporarily low parasitism rates are likely to provide immigrant               
              to extinct local midge populations.                                            
                   Three sets of experiments will assess metapopulation                      
              dynamics.  (1) Forced extinction of midges in natural sea Oxeye                
              patches and (2) creation of new patches in salt marsh will                     
              indicate the role of natural immigration in persistence.  (3) New              
              patches of sea oxeye daisy, created in bayou areas far inland                  
              from natural midge population, will permit comparisons of                      
              persistence, with and without parasitoids, in the absemce of                   
              midge immigration.  This investigation will yield critical                     
              information regarding scales of interactions important to many                 
              biological system    //
