Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1990     
File        : a9007255

Award Number: 9007255
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Wentworth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships               
              are awards to recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the                     
              mathematical sciences.  These awards are a means of contributing               
              to the future vitality of the scientific effort of the nation.                 
              As researchers in the mathematical sciences expand their                       
              interactions with other disciplines, and as the interplay                      
              increases between the various areas of mathematics itself,                     
              opportunities for postdoctoral research and training are becoming              
              increasingly important.  The fellowships are designed to permit                
              awardees to choose research environments that will have maximal                
              impact on their future scientific development.  The fellowship is              
              designed to provide 24 months of support divided into 18                       
              academic-year months and 3 periods of two summer months.  The                  
              recipient may choose (1) the Research Fellowship option which                  
              allows for full-time support for any 18 academic-year months in a              
              three-year period, in intervals not shorter than 3 consecutive                 
              months or (2) the Research Instructorship option which allows the              
              18 months of academic year support to be taken as 9 months of                  
              full-time support and 18 months of half-time support.  Not more                
              than two months of summer support from this Fellowship may be                  
              received in any calendar year.                                                 
                   Richard Wentworth will receive his doctoral degree from                   
              Columbia University and will pursue research in the area of                    
              determinants of Laplace operators and metrics on Teichmueller                  
              space, under the guidance of Arthur Jaffe at Harvard University                
              and Irving Kaplansky at the Mathematical Sciences Research                     
              Institute.
