Title       : Habitat Selection and the Ecological Consequences of Life History Evolution in
               Daphnia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1992       
File        : a9007597

Award Number: 9007597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Tessier tessier@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mathew A. Leibold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Numerous studies document substantial genetic variation                   
              among and within populations of the same species.  Research                    
              intothe nature of this variation has discovered important                      
              ecological differentiation among populations and even among                    
              genotypes within the same population.  The P.I.'s propose to                   
              examine the significance of this within-species, genetic                       
              variation to the ecological interactions of competition.                       
              Their system is the plankton community of small lakes in                       
              southwestern Michigan.  Two species of zooplankton (Daphnia                    
              pulicaria and D. galeata  mendotae)are dominant herbivores that                
              coexist i these lakes via vertical habitat partioning.  The                    
              investigations have documented large genetic variance within                   
              populations of one of these species and have preliminary evidence              
              that it represents ecological specialization via                               
              habitatselection.  The P.I.'s 1) more broadly test this                        
              hypothesis 2) describe the ecological and genetic trade-offs that              
              maintain intra-specific habitat specialization, and then 3)                    
              experimentally determine the ecological consequences of this                   
              variation to interspecific competition and to community response               
              to predation.  The results should be broadly applicable to many                
              ecological communities.                                                        
                   The proposed work will contribute to undergraduate,                       
              graduate, and postdoctoral training in aquatic ecology and                     
              evolutionary biology.  The grant would fund one postdoctoral                   
              scholar to work with the P.I. on merging issues of community                   
              ecology and life history evolution.  Two different Ph.D                        
              candidates will be involved in the proposed work, providing them               
              with training in both the laboratory and field (electrophoresis,               
              culture techniques, field manipulations, etc.).  We will involve               
              undergraduate students at three levels; REU's, field help, and                 
              formal course work.  In the past the P.I. has selected students                
              from smaller universities that have restricted research                        
              opportunities for undergraduate (1989 REU's were Jennifer Welser               
              University of Vermont; Andrew Young - Swarthmore College).  These              
              students conduct their own, spin-off projects from the grant.  In              
              each year one undergraduate field assistant is hired (Jennelle                 
              Marceau in 1989).  Finally, the P.I. teaches courses in Limnology              
              (Summer), Ecology & Evolution (Fall), and Quantitative Methods                 
              (Spring).  Undergraduate in these courses are provided an                      
              opportunity to get involved in the P.I.'s research.
