Title       : Phylogeny of Saxifragaceae and Relationships in Rosales Using rbcL Sequence
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1993     
File        : a9007614

Award Number: 9007614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Soltis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Evolutionary or genealogical relationships in flowering                   
              plants are often poorly understood at taxonomic levels above the               
              rank of genus.  These difficulties presumably reflect the more                 
              frequent occurrence of convergent or parallel evolution in                     
              morphological characters at higher taxonomic levels.  Although                 
              numerous examples of this exist, one of the most problematic is                
              the Saxifragaceae family, including the gooseberries, hydrangeas,              
              and saxifrages.  As originally defined, this family consists of a              
              diverse array of herbaceous and woody plants distributed                       
              throughout the world and placed into 15-17 subfamilies.  Little                
              agreement exists among plant systematists regarding the                        
              circumscription, taxonomic rank (subfamily, family), or                        
              relationships of these various groups.  The taxonomic complexity               
              involved in dealing with the Saxifragaceae also requires a                     
              thorough analysis of the large order Rosales, of which it is a                 
              member.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                   It has become clear in recent years that DNA sequence                     
              comparisons can be particularly helpful in determining                         
              evolutionary relationships at higher taxonomic levels.  Dr.                    
              Douglas Soltis of Washington State University is studying                      
              nucleotide sequence variation among a large sample of species of               
              Saxifragaceae, focusing upon the photosynthesis-related gene                   
              rbcL.  A broad analysis of rbcL sequence data will help clarify                
              relationships within Saxifragaceae and in conjunction with data                
              being generated in several other laboratories will contribute to               
              determination of phylogenetic affinities among the rosalean                    
              dicots.  The resulting phylogeny will then provide an                          
              evolutionary framework for interpreting change in morphological                
              and chemical characteristics of these plants, and for informing                
              their historical biogeography.
