Title       : Mechanisms of Plant-Herbivore Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1992       
File        : a9007125

Award Number: 9007125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184900             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. David Tilman tilman@lter.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The P.I.'s intend to explore the mechanisms of interaction                
              among terrestrial plants and their herbivores, including both                  
              direct interactions (e.g. herbivores consume plants) and                       
              indirect interactions (e.g. herbivores may affect the outcome of               
              plant competition by increasing soil nutrient concentration).                  
              previous studies of old field grasses and herbs and their major                
              herbivores, grasshoppers, at their study site in central                       
              Minnesota indicate that (1) plants are limited by and compete for              
              soil nitrogen, (2) grasshopper reduce plant abundance and affect               
              plant species composition, and (3) grasshoppers are limited by                 
              and compete for plant food.  Based on these studies, the                       
              investigators propose three experiments to show how these                      
              interactions link together:                                                    
                   (1) garden experiments in which the effects of different                  
              plants on soil nitrogen, plants on other plants, grasshoppers on               
              plants, grasshoppers on nitrogen, and grasshoppers on other                    
              grasshoppers will be measured separately and in combination on                 
              plots where soil nutrients, plant species composition, and                     
              grasshopper densities will be controlled,                                      
                   (2) field experiments in which densities of six grasshopper               
              species will be manipulated to look at these same potential                    
              effects in a natural community, and                                            
                   (3) laboratory feeding experiments in which grasshoppers                  
              will be fed different plant species and their preference and                   
              physiological responses measured.                                              
                   These experiments will measure the mechanisms and strength                
              of direct and indirect plant - herbivore interactions under                    
              controlled conditions, determine the role of herbivore diet                    
              selection in these interactions, and determine the importance of               
              these interactions in a real community containing the same plant               
              and grasshopper species.  This study may be the first to address               
              all three goals in a single, relatively simple, system.  The                   
              results will provide a foundation for predicting the outcome of                
              these interactions and consequently, the structure of plant and                
              herbivore communities.                                                         
                    //
