Title       : TECHMAN: Organizing the Tasks in Complex Design Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9007062

Award Number: 9007062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Office Automation Assistant             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Whitney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Eppinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Wandmacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Charles S Draper Lab Inc
	      555 Tech Square
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    /   -

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9287,
Abstract    :
                   This research is aimed at organizing complex design projects              
              in order to perform faster product development.  A variation of                
              Steward's design structure matrix is used to represent both the                
              sequence of and the technical relationships among the many design              
              tasks to be performed.  These relationships define the "technical              
              structure" of a design project.  Analytical techniques to find                 
              alternative sequences and definitions of the design tasks will be              
              developed, offering opportunities to speed development progress                
              by improved coordination and information transfer.  These                      
              algorithms will consider the technical structure of a project in               
              order to identify which tasks should be resequenced and which                  
              tasks should be redefined or split into smaller sub-tasks to                   
              avoid development bottlenecks.  These techniques will be                       
              developed into a strategy for design management which can                      
              significantly reduce the overall project complexity by                         
              reorganizing the few critical tasks.  It is expected that this                 
              research will benefit not only new design tasks that have never                
              been structured before but also long-standing, often repeated                  
              design tasks that may have drifted into poor organization                      
              patterns over many years.
