Title       : Flow Regime and the Structure and Productivity of Macroinvertebrate Communities
               in Tropical Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9007845

Award Number: 9007845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard W. Sweeney bwsweeney@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Denis Newbold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos L. De La Rosa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research focuses on the ecological and evolutionary                  
              significance of flow regime to macroinvertebrate communities in                
              tropical dry forest streams of Costa Rica.  Pristine tropical                  
              watersheds are ideal sites for testing the effects of flow on                  
              stream communities because the confounding effects of seasonality              
              in temperature and photoperiod and high silt and sediment load                 
              associated with most temperate streams are absent, and many                    
              pristine small streams with perennial flow regimes are available               
              for study.                                                                     
                   The research will quantify macroinvertebrate community                    
              structure and the life history characteristics and production of               
              all widespread and common species of macroinvertebrates in riffle              
              habitat of six perennial streams.  The study will focus on                     
              temporal changes in these parameters in response to prolonged (6               
              month) periods of both constant (dry season) and elevated (wet                 
              season) flow as well as to short-term flood flaws during the wet               
              season.  The central hypothesis of the study is that: stream                   
              macroinvertebrate communities are not oversaturated with species               
              (in the absence of disturbance) and may be capable of                          
              withstanding long periods of abiotic stability without loss of                 
              diversity, i.e. there is no "paradox of the stream benthos".                   
                   The principal objectives of this research project are to:                 
              (1) quantify seasonal variation in the relative abundance and                  
              species composition of macroinvertebrates and test the utility of              
              flow as a covariate for explaining this variability; (2) document              
              the extent of seasonality in macroinvertebrate life histories and              
              evaluate sesonality as an adaptation to flow regime; (3) evaluate              
              the relative  importance of storms in explaining seasonal                      
              variability in macroinvertebrate community structure (4) assess                
              the role of spatial scale (i.e. patch size) in studies of benthic              
              community succession; and (5) evaluate the role of disturbance in              
              maintaining the diversity of stream communities.
