Title       : The Effects of Complexity on Information Processing in CivilTrials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9007741

Award Number: 9007741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irwin A. Horowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Bordens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The ability of jurors to deal with the complex issues involved in              
              contemporary civil litigation has been of increasing concern.                  
              There is currently no formally accepted definition of complex                  
              litigation nor has there been an empirical demonstration of the                
              dimensions of complexity.  Further, little is known about how                  
              complexity may interfere with jurors' ability to reach a verdict.              
                                                                                             
              This study examines effects of evidentiary and legal complexity on             
              the jury decision process.  Integrating and adapting recently                  
              developed theoretical approaches to jury decisionmaking, the                   
              research aims to test an explanation-based model of decisionmaking             
              that suggests that jurors process evidence as a narrative                      
              organization of the trial data in which causal and intentional                 
              relations are of fundamental importance.  Decisionmakers are                   
              presumed to construct an intermediate memory model of the trial                
              data, and this representation, not the "raw" evidence, guides                  
              interpretation of the evidence.  An experiment will be conducted               
              to test this story model using 864 jury eligible individuals.  The             
              design includes the investigation of the influence of three                    
              dimensions of evidence complexity: informational load (high,                   
              moderate, or low rate of processing); technical complexity (high               
              and moderate); and implicational clarity (pro plaintiff, pro                   
              defendant, and neutral or ambivalent).                                         
                                                                                             
              This research promises to make a major advance in jury research.               
              Introducing trial complexity into this line of research will have              
              significant theoretical and practical implications for                         
              understanding juror decisionmaking.  The analysis will also make               
              an important contribution to cognitive psychology by contributing              
              to our understanding of cognitive strategies for coping with                   
              complex judgment tasks.
