Title       : Precision Measurement of the Infrared Reflectance of High-TcSuperconducting
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9007765

Award Number: 9007765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Markus I. Flik   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest G. Cravalho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There is great current interest in the infrared radiative                      
              properties of high-Tc superconducting films and crystals.                      
              This interest stems from both fundamental considerations and                   
              promising applications.  One promising application of high-Tc                  
              superconducting films is as infrared radiation detectors.  It                  
              has also been proposed to cool superconducting electronics for                 
              space applications passively by thermal radiation.  If the                     
              high-Tc superconductors are perfect reflectors at wavelengths                  
              greater than that corresponding to the energy gap, then a                      
              high-Tc superconductor radiation shield would show excellent                   
              performance if kept at a temperature of 20 K.  Precise                         
              knowledge of optical properties, and particularly the complex                  
              refractive indices of high-Tc superconducting films, are                       
              required to evaluate these applications.                                       
                                                                                             
              In this study the monochromatic normal reflectance of high-                    
              quality films of YBaCuO and BiSrCaCuO is being measured with                   
              sets of four identical samples for temperatures between 6 K                    
              and room temperature, at wavelengths from 0.5 um to 30 um.                     
              The measurements are performed with a high-precision grating                   
              spectrometer which was especially designed for the measurement                 
              of the low-temperature radiative properties of noble-metal                     
              films.  This apparatus does not employ a reference mirror.                     
              For the background measurement, the infrared beam travels                      
              through the sample compartment without optical interaction.                    
              The reflectance data are obtained by passing the beam through                  
              eight reflections from four identical samples.  This technique                 
              avoids both shortcomings associated with the reference-mirror                  
              single-reflection method.  Due to the absence of a mirror,                     
              absolute reflectance data are obtained, not values relative to                 
              a mirror reflectance less than unity.  The measurements are                    
              carried out with films of the highest quality available,                       
              fabricated by Siemens, Erlangen, West Germany, and the IBM                     
              T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights.  These films                    
              are of pseudocrystalline nature, with strong c axis upward                     
              orientation, such that the radiative properties of the ab                      
              plane of the crystal unit cell are measured.  These                            
              measurements are expected to set a new standard for the high-                  
              Tc materials.  This standard will help to clarify the                          
              applicability of BCS-based theories to the optical properties                  
              of superconducting high-Tc films.  The new precision                           
              measurements are also expected to shed light on the problem of                 
              the energy gap as observed by infrared spectra.
