Title       : YIA-PGR: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics of Crop and Weed Responses to Crowding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0227103

Award Number: 0227103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1734804            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia Weinig   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julin Maloof  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Domestication of wild species is characterized by changes in diverse traits,
              including plant architecture, fruit and seed morphology, fruit dispersal, and
              the timing of developmental events.  These changes result from human selection
              to increase yield.  Changes in environmental responses are also important in
              this regard.  For instance, higher planting densities could increase yield in
              many crop species, but densities are limited by developmental responses to
              crowding, in which time to flowering decreases and relative allocation to
              structural organs increases at the cost of agronomically desirable traits such
              as leaf, root, and fruit production.  Regardless of the trait selected in a
              crop species, agricultural weeds exhibit dramatic compensatory evolution that
              increases weed fitness at the cost of crop productivity.  

Comparative
              genetic approaches and genomic tools provide a means to investigate the genetic
              basis of phenotypic responses to crowding.  The research program focuses on
              crowding responses in Brassica rapa.  In addition to domesticated varieties,
              naturalized populations occur in both agricultural fields and disturbed, weedy
              sites.  Thus, this system is appropriate for investigating both the loci
              targeted during domestication and those underlying adaptation of weed species
              to agricultural settings.  The research takes advantage of available genomic
              tools to investigate the genetic basis of competitive responses in agricultural
              and natural settings.  Specific goals include 1) identifying the genetic
              determinants (known as quantitative trait loci or QTL) for fitness and traits
              affecting competitive ability in field settings, 2) using controlled light
              environments to identify QTL important for response to specific environmental
              cues, 3) quantifying evolutionary responses (measured as allele frequency
              changes) at QTL determining fitness and phenotypic responses to competition in
              agricultural and disturbed sites, and 4) cloning QTL for traits important to
              competitive ability with the aim of determining both genetic targets for crop
              improvement and loci underlying evolutionary change in agricultural
              weeds.

The experimental research will not only apply current genomic tools
              to evolutionary studies but also develop and distribute additional genetic
              resources for dissemination to other researchers.  The results will contribute
              significantly to both crop improvement and an understanding of weed evolution
              that may aid in management.  Finally, the collaborative nature of this work
              will provide unique, cross-disciplinary training for undergraduates, graduate
              students, and postdoctoral researchers in the application of genomic tools to
              evolutionary genetics and the study of both crop species and agricultural
              weeds.


