Title       : YIA-PGR: The Alternaria-Brassicaceae Pathosystem as a Model for Necrotrophic
               Fungal-Plant Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0227436

Award Number: 0227436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1363771            (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher B. Lawrence clawrenc@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas K. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant diseases caused by necrotrophic fungi are of world wide economic
              importance and result in millions of dollars in crop losses annually. In
              contrast to organisms exhibiting a biotrophic lifestyle, necrotrophic fungi
              actively kill host tissue prior to colonization usually through the secretion
              of toxic substances.  Necrotrophic diseases are not well controlled by
              resistant plant cultivars. Modern fungicides can help to control necrotrophic
              pathogens, but many consider these chemicals to be both environmentally and
              economically undesirable. The ultimate goal of this project is to identify and
              develop improved disease resistance strategies for these types of fungal
              pathogens. This project is focused on the development of an ideal model
              pathosystem for exploring interactions between plants and necrotrophic fungi.
              This pathosystem consists of select species found within the plant family
              Brassicaceae and the necrotrophic, toxin producing fungus, Alternaria
              brassicicola. This project will further our understanding of host-necrotrophic
              pathogen relationships in Brassicaceae by first identifying a set of ESTs
              related to a compatible interaction. A comparative genomics study of
              pathogen-induced defense responses in resistant and susceptible hosts will be
              performed using Arabidopsis full-genome microarrays and will give critical
              insight into the role of specific genes and signaling pathways involved in
              these responses. A functional genomics approach using knockout mutatgenesis
              will be performed to elucidate pathogenicity mechanisms in the fungus.  A
              publicly accessible database for this information will be created.  This
              project also includes a major educational component involving an outreach
              program that will use knowledge and materials obtained from this research as an
              aid in educating K-12 students about genomics.  This project will provide
              education and scientific training to undergraduates, graduate students, and
              postdoctoral scientists and will focus on the inclusion of underrepresented
              groups.
