Title       : International Focused Workshop: Materials in Extreme Environments; Denali
               National Park, Alaska; August 23-24, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0227512

Award Number: 0227512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Liang ffhl@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the workshop to discuss various materials aspects related to
              their utilization in extreme environments encountered in Alaska. The funding
              will enable around 30 participants from various countries to attend the
              workshop. This is the second in series with the first workshop conducted in
              Alaska in February 2001 where potential research areas were identified that
              would benefit Alaska with emphasis on manufacturing and materials aspects. In
              this second workshop, specific materials and manufacturing aspects will be
              discussed in detail. A major objective of the workshop is to bring together
              leading experts in materials research and manufacturing. Items that are to be
              discussed include materials issues in extreme environments, such as sub-zero
              temperatures and remote locations with particular attention to stimulate ideas
              to direct new or existing materials into commercial products such as those
              needed for transport surfaces, pipelines, entertainment, and communication. The
              goal of the workshop is to draft a short and long-term plan for Alaskan
              materials development and manufacturing.

There are many challenging issues
              related to materials and manufacturing aspects pertaining to the extreme
              environmental conditions and remote access in Alaska. Roads, harbors, and
              buildings in arctic environments are generally built on permafrost and
              seismically unstable locations, and thus must function at sub-zero
              temperatures. There is a need for technological development of materials with
              regard to the special needs of the extreme arctic environment such as the
              effect on the landscape, energy consumption, and potential accidents. The
              preservation of the Alaskan environment is paramount in any commercial
              development. The workshop enables participation of experts from academia,
              government and industrial institutions in Alaska, surrounding countries and
              other parts of the United States. Efforts will be made to invite and recruit
              minorities. The organizers of the workshop will review the abstracts and
              potential candidates with possible collaborations will be given priority. This
              grant supports the travel and registration of around 30 selected
              participants.

