Title       : Great Lakes Wood Manufacturing Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0227830

Award Number: 0227830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Brashaw   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Lalich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227830
Brashaw			

This award is to the University of Minnesota at Duluth to
              support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              02060). The partners include the University of Minnesota at Duluth (Lead
              Institution), Michigan Technological University, Minnesota Department of
              Natural Resources, Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Wisconsin
              Department of Natural Resources, USDA Forest Products Laboratory, Northern
              Economic Initiatives Corporation, Beaver Manufacturing, Shell Lake (WI), Besse
              Forest Products, Ladysmith (WI), Colonial Craft (Roseville, MN), Conner Sports
              Flooring (Amasa, MI), Crystal Cabinet Works (Princeton, MN), Fentech, Inc
              (Superior, WI), Ferche Millwork (Rice, MN), Glen Oak Lumber & Milling
              (Montello, WI), GFP Strandwood Corp Houghton, MI), Maple Flooring Manufacturing
              Association (Northbrook, IL), Northern Contours (Fergus Falls, MN), Northern
              Hardwoods (South Range, MI), Smurfit Stone (Ontonagon, MI), TrueRide, Inc
              (Duluth, MN), Wisconsin Business Innovation Corp (Spooner, WI). Kaizen
              techniques are being used to improve the manufacturing process by implementing
              lean manufacturing, resulting in reduced costs and improves profitability. 
              These techniques are being used in development projects to address technical,
              material, and market issues for new products and to reduce the development time
              cycle. The partnership cooperatively provides assistance to private companies
              in adoption of best manufacturing practices, introduction of new technology,
              and development of new products.  These activities promote and sustain
              innovation by training wood products specialists in lean manufacturing and
              group facilitation, strengthening their capabilities for contributing to
              economic growth and stability of the wood products industry. A model for
              promoting future ties between universities, state agencies, federal
              laboratories, economic development organizations and private wood products
              businesses in other regions of the United States will be developed. The program
              will also provide a well-trained workforce for the wood products
              industry.

During the first phase of the project, 15 companies will
              participate in company-specific manufacturing process improvement and/or
              product and market development projects.  In the second phase, an additional
              12+ company partners will be identified for projects.  Further outreach to the
              wood products companies in the Great Lakes Region will be completed through
              short courses and case studies.  Improved manufacturing technologies will make
              these companies more profitable and new jobs will result. The creation of new
              jobs will have a significant impact on the region, which currently has a high
              unemployment.  In addition, more efficient use of the natural wood supply will
              have ecological implications for the future.

