Title       : United States Participation in the Activities of the International Arctic
               Science Committee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a0227968

Award Number: 0227968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Louis B. Brown                          
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81663              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Webber webber@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1679      INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION ACT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              United States participation in and leadership of international Arctic science
              will be strengthened by a senior U.S. Arctic research scientist representing
              the interests of the U.S. Arctic science community in the International Arctic
              Science Committee (IASC) and by serving as President of the IASC Council.  The
              Arctic is very important scientifically and plays a strong role in global,
              including climate, change.  However the conduct of research in the Arctic poses
              many pragmatic problems, e.g., it is a harsh and remote environment; no
              permanent facilities can be located in much of the region; and eight different
              countries control various parts of the Arctic Ocean and adjacent land areas. 
              Thus, international cooperation in the Arctic is not only useful, but often
              essential.  IASC, established in 1990 to encourage and promote such
              cooperation, provides a forum for exchange of information among scientists and
              between scientists and governments on a wide variety of Arctic science topics. 
              IASC also supports international coordination of national Arctic research
              efforts by supporting small focused scientific planning meetings/workshops. 
              U.S. participation and leadership in IASC and its Council will assist IASC to
              address on a priority basis:  an assessment of the impact of the climate and
              climatic changes on the Arctic and its peoples; development of an international
              bathymetric chart of the Arctic Ocean; a study of the role of humans in
              caribou/reindeer grazing systems; a study of biocomplexity and biodiversity in
              Arctic tundra ecosystems; and providing scientific advice to the Arctic
              Council, an intergovernmental organization that focuses on interaction between
              the Arctic environment and its indigenous peoples.
