Title       : Cooperative Research: Petrogenesis of HP and UHT Granulites from the Brasilia
               Fold Belt in Minas Gerais and Goias, Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2002  
File        : a0227553

Award Number: 0227553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Brown mbrown@geol.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Piccoli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5913,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Brown
EAR-0227553

This project, with counterparts in Brazil, investigates
              the relationship between high-pressure (HP; P > 1.0 GPa, T > 700EC) and
              ultrahigh-temperature (UHT; T > 900EC) granulites and 'common' granulites in
              the core of the Brasilia Fold Belt. The orogenic core of the Brasilia Fold Belt
              is composed of a metamorphic complex characterized by granulite facies rocks,
              and the recent discovery of HP and UHT granulites within the southern (Minas
              Gerais; kyanite-K-feldspar bearing granulites) and central (Goias;
              sapphirine-quartz and spinel-quartz bearing granulites) sectors of the belt
              provides the principal motivation for this research. We will map the
              distribution of HP (Minas Gerais) and UHT (Goias) granulite types within the
              metamorphic complex of the core of the Brasilia Fold Belt, and establish their
              spatial, temporal, structural and metamorphic relationship with 'common'
              granulites. We will investigate the role of melt loss and melt retention in the
              preservation and/or retrogression of mineral assemblages formed under
              conditions of extreme crustal metamorphism. Melt loss will be evaluated using
              distribution of leucosome, bulk rock chemistry, and pseudosections in
              multi-element model systems that allow the investigation of subsolidus and
              suprasolidus phase equilibria. We will characterize the microstructural
              relationships and mineral assemblages within HP and UHT granulites for a range
              of bulk compositions, particularly in samples that preserve disequilibrium
              reaction microstructures such as symplectites and reaction coronae. Peak and
              post-peak segments of P-T paths will be established using these data and
              detailed mineral chemistry in rocks with suitably low variance. Of general
              interest is the relationship between the development, preservation and mode of
              exhumation of HP and UHT granulites to the tectonics of convergent (subduction
              - collision) orogens. The Brasilia Fold Belt displays tectonic elements that
              developed due to ocean basin evolution and subduction that culminated with
              continent-continent collision in Neoproterozoic time. We will evaluate the
              results of our research within the framework of current plate tectonics theory,
              and propose a model that is consistent with the data and which accounts for the
              evolution of the Brasilia Fold Belt.

