Title       : Support for a Workshop: Priorities in Solid Earth Science, October 26, 2002,
               Denver, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0227566

Award Number: 0227566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Brown mbrown@geol.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is submitted by Brown on behalf of an ad-hoc Workshop Planning
              Committee, as follows: Michael Brown (Laboratory for Crustal Petrology,
              Department of Geology, University of Maryland); Jessica Faust Larsen
              (Geophysical Institute, Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of
              Alaska Fairbanks); Cathryn Manduca (DLESE Community Issues and Groups, Geology
              Department, Carleton College); Tracy Rushmer (Department of Geology, University
              of Vermont); Basil Tikoff (Department of Geology & Geophysics, University of
              Wisconsin-Madison); and, Ben van der Pluijm (Department of Geological Sciences,
              University of Michigan, Ann Arbor). The PI's request support for a one-day
              workshop to be held on Saturday October 26, 2002, in Denver, CO, which is the
              day before the Annual Meeting of the Geological Society of America. The
              Workshop is proposed as the first in a series to support a specific agenda -
              the integration of the Solid Earth Sciences as the central core of Geology
              through the development and promotion of research priorities, educational
              initiatives and outreach. The Solid Earth Sciences concern the
              characterization, origin, and evolution of planetary lithospheres. Various
              processes have modified the lithosphere throughout geologic time. Investigating
              them requires studies of not only active environments but also the geologic
              record of ancient events. Research in the Solid Earth Sciences is inherently
              multidisciplinary and increasingly interdisciplinary. This approach
              characterizes not only larger projects supporting multiple scientists (e.g.,
              Continental Dynamics and Instrumentation & Facilities Programs at NSF) but also
              most of the smaller projects within the Solid Earth Sciences (e.g., Petrology &
              Geochemistry and Tectonics Programs at NSF). The Solid Earth Sciences represent
              an essential element at the core of Earth Sciences; educational programs should
              reflect the inherently multidisciplinary and increasing interdisciplinary
              nature of the Solid Earth Sciences, and the foundation the Solid Earth Sciences
              provide for the other elements of Earth Science. The PI's contend that any new
              long-range plans for Earth Sciences at NSF must advocate continued and readily
              identifiable support for research, education and outreach in the Solid Earth
              Sciences. The
record shows that advances in Solid Earth Sciences are achieved
              when research support is provided through small grants to individual PIs (e.g.,
              Geophysics, Petrology & Geochemistry and Tectonics Programs), through support
              of infrastructure (e.g., Instrumentation and Facilities Program), through large
              grants to several PIs (e.g., Continental Dynamics Program) and through
              integration among the sub- disciplines (e.g., the Plate Tectonics revolution).
              The PI's agenda for the Solid Earth Sciences will complement the EarthScope
              initiative, but it is not dependent upon EarthScope being funded. This request
              is for support to enable attendance by 50-100 participants (minimum 50, maximum
              100) representative of the spectrum of Solid Earth Sciences and sympathetic to
              the symbiotic relationship between research, education and outreach. The
              participants will be selected from a pool composed of invited and
              self-motivated applicants to ensure balance, both across the Solid Earth
              Sciences and among research, education and outreach. The primary goal of the
              Workshop is to promote an integrated and coherent approach to planning for the
              future of the Solid Earth Sciences. The integration will be both across the
              sub-disciplines in the Solid Earth Sciences and among the synergistic
              activities of research, education and outreach. The outcomes of the Workshop
              will be: a report to be submitted to the Division of Earth Sciences by December
              1, 2002, and customized versions to be submitted to Eos, Geotimes and GSA Today
              during the month of December, 2002; and, formation of an Integrated Tectonics
              Forum to continue the process. 
