Title       : System-Wide Change for All Learners and Educators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0227016

Award Number: 0227016
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence S. Millar millar@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy Lesley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lauren B. Resnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian D. Schunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1791      MSP-Comprehensive Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SCALE (System-Wide Change for All Learners and Educators) is a partnership
              involving two major educational research and development groups:  the
              University of Wisconsin's Wisconsin Center for Education Research (WCER) and
              the University of Pittsburgh's Learning Research and Development Center (LRDC).
               Building on past collaborations, the partnership includes the Denver Public
              Schools, Los Angeles Unified School District, Madison Metropolitan School
              District and the Providence Public Schools, as well as institutions of higher
              education whose preservice programs provide many new teachers to these
              districts.  

SCALE encompasses the following five areas of work:
1.
              Implementing the best current mathematics and science programs system-wide;
2.
              Creating state-of-the-art science, technology, engineering and mathematics
              immersion projects and implementing them system-wide;
3. Reforming preservice
              and in-service STEM teacher education for teachers in the partner
              districts;
4. Creating mentoring and guidance experiences for middle and high
              school students, especially women and minorities; and
5. Implementing a
              comprehensive program of research and evaluation

The partnership brings
              together mathematicians, scientists, social scientists, and education
              practitioners to build a whole new approach to reforming preK-12 mathematics
              and science education.  The partnership seeks to improve the mathematics and
              science achievement of all students at all grade levels in the four partner
              school districts by engaging them in deep and authentic science and mathematics
              instructional experiences.  The partnership is providing documentation of what
              works and information about how to construct such a partnership to a wide
              audience of policymakers and university and school leaders.

