Title       : Learning to Teach, Teaching to Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0227221

Award Number: 0227221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kathleen Bergin                         
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7415580            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Chaconas chaconas@ousd.k12.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland Unified Sch Dist
	      1025 Second Avenue
	      Oakland, CA  946062212    415/836-8203

NSF Program : 1792      MSP-Targeted Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The core partners of the Learning to Teach, Teaching to Learn (LT2L) MSP project
              are the Oakland Unified School District and California State University,
              Hayward School of Education and Allied Studies and School of Science.  The
              Lawrence Hall of Science, University of California, Berkeley and the Education
              Trust are service providers who are integral to the planning and implementation
              of this effort.  The Partnership establishes a sustained collaboration to align
              a seamless teacher recruitment, preparation and development continuum in
              Mathematics and Science across Grades K-12.  The program design focuses on the
              following goals: a) recruitment of undergraduate mathematics and science majors
              and tutors with close ties to Oakland; b) restructuring of preservice programs
              to better prepare new teachers entering a diverse and low income urban school
              district and to comply with state induction legislation; c) increasing teacher
              retention by establishing a culture of collegial support and life-long
              "learning to teach," and d) increased student achievement.

Colleagues across
              experience levels, that is university faculty, inservice teachers, and
              preservice teaching candidates, will have more frequent and substantive
              exchanges with one another, on-site, at the university and in the science and
              mathematics community.  Ongoing analysis and evaluation of the partnership will
              include the impact on academic achievement in mathematics and science of
              students in classrooms involved in the program.

Recruitment focuses on
              mathematics and science majors as well as current Oakland tutors.  The latter
              possess B.A.s and work in Project SOAR (GEAR-UP) and Americorps.  Undergraduate
              STEM majors will be engaged in "Communicating Math" and "Communicating Science"
              at UC-Berkeley to engage undergraduates in co-teaching of mathematics lessons
              with veteran teachers.  Preservice and New Teacher Preparation will engage
              college faculty in research on effective teacher preparation and professional
              development and look to the development of more flexible alternative
              credentialing programs.  Retention will be supported through differentiated
              professional development experiences driven by teacher experiences and site
              needs.  This will include Education Trust's Standards-in-Practice concentrating
              on the examination of student work to focus the teaching/learning process,
              lesson study and peer coaching, principals instructional seminars, subject
              matter partners with expertise in mathematics and science, science and
              mathematics leadership institutes, middle school science and mathematics
              initiatives, and Teaching Fellows.  

These efforts to construct a seamless
              teacher professional continuum are built upon past work among the partners, but
              which now will be brought into coherence.  The curricular and professional
              development offerings from the Lawrence Hall of Science will be infused along
              the continuum.  The various teacher development efforts, preservice and
              inservice will be refocused on the learning expectations of the K-12 students
              as well as the State of California credentialing guidelines.  Ultimately, the
              Partnership intends to improve student achievement as a result of more highly
              qualified professionals in classrooms.

