Title       : Dynamics of Growing Networks and Evolving Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0227670

Award Number: 0227670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney Redner redner@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0227670
Redner
This award supports theoretical investigations into the
              structure of growing networks.  The networks to be studied grow incrementally
              through popularity-based rules in which nodes that already have a relatively
              large number of attached links have a higher propensity for gaining new links. 
              This mechanism appears to underlie a variety of networked systems, such as the
              world-wide web, the Internet, and various biological networks.  The primary
              goal of this research is to develop a comprehensive quantitative understanding
              of network structure through the formulation and analysis of the governing rate
              equations for the evolution of prototypical network models.

There are
              several directions in which research on network structure will be pursued.  The
              role of decay processes, such as the removal of nodes or of links at a finite
              rate, on the integrity of networks will be studied.  Another project will focus
              on the percolation properties of networks that grow by independent node and
              link creation events.  The rate equation approach will also be extended to
              treat protein interaction networks in which the growth mechanisms model
              fundamental processes of small biological organisms, such as yeasts and
              bacteria.  In addition to studying local network properties, such as the degree
              distribution, effort will be devoted to revealing community structures -
              tightly linked subnetworks with weaker linkages between communities - within
              networks.  

A parallel effort will be devoted to studying porous networks
              that evolve due to the interaction of a reactive fluid that flows through the
              medium.  In the case of filtration, the pore space is gradually constricted,
              because of trapping of suspended particles.  In dissolution, the pore space is
              enlarged by a fluid that gradually consumes the solid matrix.  The principal
              goal of this research is to understand the role of the coupling between the
              pore space geometry and flow properties on long-time dynamical
              properties.

This will be accomplished by constructing simplified models that
              capture the essence of these processes and upon which analytical calculations
              can be performed.  The basic intellectual goal is to elucidate the role of
              feedback between the time evolution of the flow and the physical properties of
              the porous medium.  In the problem of filtration, the focus will be to develop
              a criterion to determine the useful lifetime of a filter and to understand the
              kinetics of filtration due to the trapping of fine particles.  In dissolution,
              one basic goal is to understand the role of longitudinal gradients on the basic
              dynamics of single tube growth.  Another major goal will be to quantify the
              transition between homogeneous dissolution and wormhole growth as a function o
              the relative flow and reaction rates.
%%%
This award supports theoretical
              investigations into the structure of growing networks.  The networks to be
              studied grow incrementally through popularity-based rules in which nodes that
              already have a relatively large number of attached links have a higher
              propensity for gaining new links.  This mechanism appears to underlie a variety
              of networked systems, such as the world-wide web, the Internet, and various
              biological networks.  The primary goal of this research is to develop a
              comprehensive quantitative understanding of network structure through the
              formulation and analysis of the governing rate equations for the evolution of
              prototypical network models.

A parallel effort will be devoted to studying
              porous networks that evolve due to the interaction of a reactive fluid that
              flows through the medium.  In the case of filtration, the pore space is
              gradually constricted, because of trapping of suspended particles.  In
              dissolution, the pore space is enlarged by a fluid that gradually consumes the
              solid matrix.  The principal goal of this research is to understand the role of
              the coupling between the pore space geometry and flow properties on long-time
              dynamical properties.
*** 

