Title       : POWRE: Structure and Function of an Apoptosis Domain in the 75 kDa Neurotropin
               Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0227160

Award Number: 0227160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 28,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18959              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Chapman bchapman@classroomtools.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sonoma State University
	      1801 East Cotati Avenue
	      Rohnert Park, CA  949283609    707/664-2156

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9805771  CHAPMAN   During development, different tissues and  organs require
              different numbers of cells.  Programmed cell death  (or "apoptosis"), along
              with cell division, is a primary way that  cell number is controlled. 
              Apoptosis occurs as a series of  cellular and biochemical events in which the
              cell, instead of  dividing, involutes, falls apart, and is engulfed.  Every
              normal  cell appears to have the "program" for cell death, which can be 
              activated in a number of ways.  The neurotrophin receptor gp75NTR  or NTR,
              expressed by neurons and some immune cells, is a member of  a family of
              cytokine and growth factor receptors known to regulate  many cellular decisions
              to undergo programmed cell death.  The NTR  contains an intracellular domain
              that is similar to the "death  domain" of other receptors that can initiate
              apoptosis, but it has  not yet been shown that the NTR's putative death domain
              functions  in apoptotic signaling.  The objective of Dr. Chapman's study are 
              to establish whether the NTR's death domain interacts with  elements of the
              apoptotic mechanism (caspases), and to demonstrate  whether this receptor can
              induce programmed cell death when  expressed ectopically in cultured mammalian
              cells.       This project is particular suitable for a POWRE award.  Dr. 
              Chapman recently made the unusual transition from the  biotechnology industry
              to take a faculty job at the new San Marcos  campus of the California State
              University system.  CSUSM  emphasized hands-on laboratory experience with
              modern technology  to prepare their students in the biological sciences for
              careers  as researchers, science teachers and in the biotechnology  industry. 
              Dr. Chapman brings real world experience to her  students, and will be able to
              actively engage them in research  with this POWRE award, which will provide the
              funding for her to  initiate this research project.
