Title       : SGER: Feasibility Study of Novel Instrumentation With nN Force Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0227842

Award Number: 0227842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Polycarpou polycarp@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Feasibility Study of Novel Instrumentation with nN Force Resolution
NSF SGER
              Proposal submitted to Dr. Jorn Larsen-Basse
By Andreas A. Polycarpou,
              Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, UIUC

 The performance
              and durability of many devices that experience contact, especially
              micro/
nanodevices is heavily influenced by the surface properties and
              interfacial phenomena like adhesion,friction and wear. Research in the areas of
              friction, adhesion and nanomechanical properties of advanced engineering
              systems and miniature systems, such as the Head Disk Interface (HDI) in
              magnetic storage and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), have advanced
              considerably. As the size scale of miniature systems shrinks further, finer
              tolerances are required, surfaces become smoother, thin-films become thinner
              and phenomena like strong intermolecular adhesion forces, high stiction and
              catastrophic failures at the interfaces may occur. Even though many of these
              problems have been alleviated or resolved, a major issue that remains and will
              be tackled in this research is the direct force measurement
with extremely low
              resolution.

 The proposed one year exploratory research deals with the
              co-development and purchase of novel instrumentation capable for direct force
              measurements with very high resolution of 1 nN. Current state of the art direct
              force instruments are capable of 0.5 nN - 1 nN force resolution. The 3 orders
              of magnitude improvement in the force resolution will be accomplish by:
(a)
              Significantly reducing the mass of the current systems from over 200 mg to 20
              mg (using a
      combination of integrated circuit-IC and MEMS
              technologies).
(b) Incorporating active vibration cancellation inside the
              force transducer.
(c) Improving the drive electronics of the force transducer
              and actuator to minimize  thermal             
      drift.

 The proposed
              instrumentation will then be integrated with an existing multi-mode Atomic
              Force Microscope (AFM) and will be used to perform preliminary interfacial
              nanoscale experiments to demonstrate the nN force resolution capabilities.
              Specifically, two types of experiments will be performed: (a) iasub
              nanoindentationl-A experiments for extracting material properties of sub 10 nm
              ultra thin layers and (b) adhesion and pull-off force experiments using
              isidealln surfaces and actual surfaces from microsystems, e.g., low flying
              head-disk interfaces from magnetic storage.

 The significance of this
              research is that it will enable the feasibility of novel direct force
              measurement instrumentation capable of nN and possibly sub nN resolution and
              the capability of performing qualitative nanoindentation and adhesion
              experiments at small scales that were not possible before. The proposed
              research is exploratory and high risk due to the novel prototype low mass
              direct force transducers. The success of this research will have a great impact
              on the future of nanoscale testing and nanotribology.

 The PI's background
              in macrotribology and his approach of applying micro/nano techniques to explain
              phenomena at multiple length scales, his strong instrumentation background and
              his strong relation with novel sensor manufacturers, and industrial companies
              place him in a unique position to develop novel instrumentation capable of nN
              force resolution and investigate interfacial phenomena and mechanical
              properties of sub-nm thick layers.

