Title       : Adaptive Design of Experiments for Optimal Uniformity in Semiconductor
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0227232

Award Number: 0227232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Nikolaou nikolaou@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Demetre J. Economou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Research:

Engineers in the microelectronics industry are frequently faced
              with the problem of selecting tool design and/or operating conditions (recipes)
              that produce high uniformity in the etching of thin films.  Experiments that
              determine optimal uniformity conditions are expensive and constraint on input
              variables have to be satisfied at the optimum.  Standard
              response-surface-methodology (RSM) can handle simple but not complicated
              constraints.   This work is aimed at developing a new algorithmic approach to
              inequality constrained RSM with application to plasma etching.  This will
              include the development of a high-fidelity fundamental plasma reactor
              model.

The work will consist of:
	-Formulation of the problem as an
              adaptive sequential design of E-optimal experiments based on                   
                  linear, or if necessary, nonlinear models;
	-Development of numerical
              solution techniques for the above optimization;
	-Development of a
              high-fidelity model for a dual-coil inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching   
                                  tool;
	-Investigation of connections between sequential
              RSM and adaptive control; and
	-Studying the properties of the algorithms
              developed through computer simulations and laboratory                   and
              industrial experiments.

Impact:

Interaction with an industrial
              collaborator will ensure focus on realistic problems encountered in the
              semiconductor industry.  The project has potential infrastructure benefits in
              that students trained in developing this methodology would be of great use to
              industry.  Given that over 50% of undergraduates at the University of Houston
              are minorities and that the project will have heavy undergraduate
              participation, the involvement of students from underrepresented groups can be
              expected.

