Title       : Innovations in Business Intelligence: Drexel University's Partnership Between
               Academia, Industry and the City of Philadelphia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0227802

Award Number: 0227802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599128             (Estimated)
Investigator: O. Bay Arinze arinzeob@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan K. Lippert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George P. Tsetsekos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murugan Anandarajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chittibabu Govindarajulu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227802
Arinze	

This award is to the Drexel University to support the
              activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The
              partners include the Drexel University (Lead Institution), University of
              Pennsylvania, SAP America, PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Philadelphia area high
              schools, and The City of Philadelphia.  The proposed goals are: (1) creating
              theoretical and methodological knowledge and innovation in the area of business
              intelligence, (2) spurring product innovation within the participating private
              sectors information technology forms, and (3) educational innovations by
              creating business intelligence related training and educational programs for
              students at the high school and college levels. The program focuses on basic
              research, methodology, knowledge creation and documentation. Business
              intelligence curriculum of 3-5 courses with input from the private sector
              partners is being developed. Methodologies and toolsets for business
              intelligence are being prepared and documented. The methodologies developed are
              being applied to specific projects in management in the City of Philadelphia
              government.  The high school curriculum will be evaluated and assessed after
              the first year and will then be disseminated to other high schools. 

The
              development and application of business intelligence methodology to management
              of local government and private sector partners will make them more efficient. 
              The methodology and software will be available for other government and private
              sectors once it has been shown to be efficacious. In addition, workforce
              training using the business intelligence methodology will prepare graduates for
              higher paying jobs in the information economy. 

