Title       : Algebraic Structures in Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0227974

Award Number: 0227974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 28,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31261              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Voronov voronov@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0104004
Alexander A. Voronov

The goal of the project is to discover and
              study new algebraic
structures in topology suggested or motivated by
              mathematical 
physics, in particular, quantum field theory and string theory.
              
More specifically, the project aims at discovering a new algebraic
structure
              on the homology of an n-sphere space, by which we mean 
the space of
              continuous maps from the n-dimensional sphere to a 
given manifold. This part
              of the project, joint with Dennis 
Sullivan, generalizes the work pioneered by
              Chas and Sullivan 
in the case n=1, i.e., that of a usual free loop space.
              Another 
goal is to establish connection between Chas-Sullivan's work and
              Gromov-Witten invariants, which we believe to be a holomorphic 
version of
              Chas-Sullivan's algebraic structure. Gromov-Witten invariants come from sigma
              model of quantum field theory, and Chas-Sullivan's work "String Topology" may
              be regarded as a 
topological version of the physical construction. This part
              of 
the project is suggested to be completed by developing a fusion
              intersection theory of semi-infinite cycles in infinite 
dimensional
              manifolds. Finally, part of the project is
dedicated to relating the above to
              Kontsevich's Conjecture, 
which generalizes Deligne's Conjecture and unravels
              a deep 
relation between deformation theory of abstract n-algebras 
and the
              topology of configuration spaces of points in an (n+1)-dimensional Euclidean
              space.

The main idea of Algebraic Topology is to be able to
              recognize
topological properties of a geometric object by associating
              
algebraic data or structure to the geometric object. Sometimes 
the geometry
              is too complicated to allow immediate understanding 
and work with the object,
              while the algebraic information is 
usually simpler by its nature. This
              project suggests some new 
algebraic structure for a sphere space, the space
              of maps from 
an n-dimensional sphere to a manifold. Such spaces are quite
              complicated and the classical work of Chen, Segal, Jones, 
Getzler, Burghelea,
              Fedorowicz, Goodwillie, and others, produced 
not only the computation of the
              homology of loop spaces, which 
are the particular case of sphere spaces for
              n=1, but 
also revealed amazing connections with algebra
              (Hochschild
complex). Also, recent progress in string theory emphasized 
the
              importance of invariants associated to holomorphic maps 
from the 2-sphere to
              a manifold (Gromov-Witten invariants). 
In this project we undertake an
              analogous study of continuous 
maps from the n-sphere to a manifold, which for
              n=1 has already 
enabled significant progress in topology.

