Title       : YIA-PGR: Functional Genomics of Plant Metabolism in Model Rhizome Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0227618

Award Number: 0227618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1114787            (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Gang gang@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The curcuminoids and gingerols are medicinally important metabolites found in
              the rhizome tissue (underground stem) of turmeric and ginger plants. In
              addition to their role as colorants and flavorants in these plants, these
              compounds have been show to possess anti-inflammatory and other important
              pharmacological properties. Because of these properties, turmeric and ginger
              rhizome powder and extracts have been used for millennia as spices, as
              important elements in traditional Chinese and Indian medicine, and as important
              parts of modern herbal remedies that are designed to reduce inflammation. In
              addition, these compounds may form the basis for future anti-inflammatory
              drugs. Despite their importance to human health, nothing is known about the
              biochemical pathways (the enzymes or the respective encoding genes) that
              produce these and structurally similar compounds. Furthermore, almost nothing
              is known about gene expression and metabolic regulation in plant rhizomes.
The
              advent of large scale automated gene sequencing (genomics), related methods for
              analysis of gene function (functional genomics), and improvements in
              instrumentation for protein purification (biochemistry) and metabolite analysis
              (metabolic profiling), now allow for application of a biochemical functional
              genomics approach to this problem. These technologies will be used to
              investigate how turmeric and ginger produce the medicinally important natural
              products that accumulate in their rhizome tissues. A detailed characterization
              of all metabolites made in rhizomes of ginger and turmeric plants will be made
              (metabolic profiling). Genes that are actively expressed in the rhizomes will
              be isolated and sequenced. The sequence information will be used to identify
              the enzymes responsible for the formation of the metabolites in these rhizomes.
              This information will also be used to identify rhizome-specific genes.
              Interesting target genes and their corresponding proteins will be characterized
              for their specific roles in the production of specific metabolites in the
              rhizome or in the development and biology of the rhizome in general.

