Title       : Collaborative Project: Core Integration - Leading NSDL Toward Long-Term Success
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0227648

Award Number: 0227648
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8745453            (Estimated)
Investigator: William Y. Arms wya@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl J. Lagoze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dean Krafft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Saylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Hillmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A team of institutions is developing, organizing, and managing the next stage
              growth of the core integration (CI) capabilities of the National STEM Education
              Digital Library (NSDL). Collaborators include: UCAR, Cornell University,
              Columbia University, the University of California at Santa Barbara, the Center
              for Intelligent Information Retrieval at the University of Massachusetts, the
              San Diego Supercomputing Center, the Merit Network, and Eastern Michigan
              University. The project is bringing together many efforts already underway, and
              engaging new efforts as well, in support of a comprehensive large-scale digital
              library expected to enhance every aspect of education in science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology. The organizational and technical underpinnings of
              the proposed work fall into three categories of effort, each within the overall
              context of educational excellence: 1) engaging the community, 2) providing
              technology, and 3) operating core services. To promote the vision of a strong
              NSDL community that sees itself as owning the program and having major
              influence on the character of the library, the project team is working with all
              NSDL-funded projects, helping to integrate their work into the library.
              Additional partnering with efforts such as those funded by the NSF's Digital
              Library Initiative and by the Institute of Museum and Library Services, and
              independently developed collections and services, is also taking place.
              Development and support of models for intellectual property and digital rights
              management are being undertaken, as well as promotion of a library evaluation
              framework, administration of an NSDL program advisory group, and development of
              an overall governance mechanism for the NSDL. A robust, flexible information
              technology infrastructure is being implemented based on two themes: a "spectrum
              of interoperability" and "one library, many portals". The other two awards in
              this collaborative project are 0227656 and 0227888.
