Title       : GLOBEC-01: The Physical Oceanography of Georges Bank and Its Impact on Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0227679

Award Number: 0227679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1520118            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Beardsley rbeardsley@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Irish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Ledwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Brink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Limeburner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. GLOBEC NW Atlantic/Georges Bank program was designed to investigate the
              underlying physical and biological processes that control the population
              dynamics of marine animals, with the specific target species being the pelagic
              early life stages of cod (Gadus  morhua) and haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus)
              and the copepod zooplankton Calanus  finmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp.
              (GLOBEC, 1992). The resulting combination of broad-scale, long-term and
              process-oriented field studies conducted between 1994-1999, together with
              numerical model studies, has produced unique data sets and new ideas with which
              to investigate specific processes and the integration of these processes into a
              new level of understanding of the physics and biology of the Bank.  Developing
              this new paradigm for physical/biological processes that control the population
              dynamics of the target species is a central goal of the Phase IV synthesis
              effort.  This project has three primary objectives that serve the broader Phase
              IV effort.  First, this project is seeking to more fully understand the
              physical dynamics and interactions of several specific processes (e.g., those
              associated with the seasonal evolution of stratification on the Bank, the
              crucial flow field over the Northeast Peak, and cross-frontal exchange within
              the tidal mixing and northern flank fronts) that are thought to play critical
              roles in zooplankton and fish recruitment.  Second, this project is combining
              observationally-based process synthesis studies into model-based studies to
              provide our best descriptions of the Banks physical environment and its
              variability on time scales from minutes to monthly to seasonal for the GLOBEC
              field years.  These model studies are using the finite-volume coastal
              circulation model (FVCOM) developed by C. Chen for coupled physical/biological
              studies. The model solutions, generated by hindcast and data assimilation
              approaches, are being used to define and quantify key physical mechanisms and
              physical/biological interactions on the Bank. Third, this project is providing
              other Phase IV investigators with as complete a description and understanding
              of the basic physical processes affecting their observations as possible.  The
              work has two long-term goals: (a) to refine and quantify the new physical
              paradigm and the physical/biological interactions that impact the target
              species, and (b) to develop with Franks and Chen et al. the FVCOM coupled
              physical/biological model system to understand the coupled physical/biological
              system on the Bank, including why one year might differ from another
              biologically. These goals are clearly related, since the data synthesis work
              will guide model evaluation and refinement, and the model simulations (both
              process and seasonal prognostic) will provide process understanding and
              realistic property and flow fields that are essential for quantitative
              biological modeling.      
