Title       : Vermont Mathematics Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0227057

Award Number: 0227057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3151501            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth I. Gross   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc E. Hull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Regina Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VT Inst for Science & Math
	      Technology
	      Montpelier, VT  05602    802/828-0060

NSF Program : 1792      MSP-Targeted Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is proposed by a partnership, which includes three institutes of
              higher education, the Vermont State Department of Education, the Vermont
              Mathematics Initiative (VMI), the Vermont Institute for Science, Mathematics,
              and Technology  (VISMT) and 4 school districts. 
The project is building upon
              the VMI Exemplary Teacher Model, a leadership model in K-6 mathematics by
              expanding the effort to include middle and high school mathematics, whole
              school systems and preservice education.  To enhance student achievement the
              partnership five major goals are.

1.	To prepare teachers and preservice
              students who deeply understand mathematics and can translate their knowledge
              into student learning.
2.	To develop school support systems that are rich
              learning opportunities for both students and teachers.
3.	To utilize valid
              reliable ongoing assessments and feedback systems to continuously improve
              mathematic results for all students.
4.	To develop a preservice and inservice
              curriculum that deepens teacher's knowledge and understanding of mathematics,
              equity strategies to assure no child is left behind and leadership strategies
              that enable scale up of the Partnership's initiatives throughout Vermont and
              beyond.
5.	To foster collaborative research involving mathematicians,
              mathematics education faculty and preK-12 educators contributing to the state
              and national research base in the teaching and learning of mathematics.
The
              partnership is seeking success in all schools, for all teachers and all
              students. 


