Title       : Building the "Last Mile" of the Research Enterprise Infrastructure: An
               Innovative Model to Connect Advanced Agriculture/Bioscience Research to the
               Resources of the Local Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0227837

Award Number: 0227837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Kapfer mkapfer@eiccd.cc.ia.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern IA CC District
	      306 West River Drive
	      Davenport, IA  528011221    563/336-3300

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227837
Kapfer	

This award is to Eastern Iowa Community College to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              02060).

Partners
The partners include Eastern Iowa Community College (Lead
              Institution), Iowa State University, University of Iowa, City of Davenport,
              Kaizen Corporation, USDA-Peoria Research Lab, and DavenportOne.

The program
              produces web-based publication of summaries of emerging research written in
              language for the business/investment audience, training curriculum to educate
              entrepreneurs in AG-based Biotech business, and a model for economic
              development of rural communities in the AG-based biotech sector. Continuing
              education/training for business developers will be conducted. In addition, they
              will create a system to capture and screen emerging Agriculture
              Technology-Bioscience ideas, technologies, and patents that have marketplace
              potential; communicate research information to potential entrepreneurs and the
              economic development community of eastern Iowa; educate potential
              entrepreneurs, business development consultants/trainers and economic
              development professionals on the process of creating a business based on
              emerging research; disseminate the results and practices to other regions;
              promote the development and effective use of Native American governments for
              economic development and management of their lands;  and establish internship
              programs in industry and government for the workforce. 

The AG-based Biotech
              sector produced $1B in 1995, and is expected to reach $10B by 2005.  The
              community college expertise in training coupled with the research universities
              is a powerful team to produce both the sources of technologies and the trained
              workforce to create new companies in this rapidly growing economic sector.  The
              community colleges can also provide continued business tech support to small
              emerging companies to improve their probability of success in the early stages
              of development.  Eastern Iowa is suited to be a large player in this emerging
              technology sector, resulting in economic well being and creation of new jobs.
              The model will also be helpful to other rural, agriculture-based regions.

