Title       : Scanning Bodegas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0227693

Award Number: 0227693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Blair Williams blairrw@att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Bugliarello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Greenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227693
Williams	

This award is to the Polytechnic University of New York to
              support the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              02060). The partners include the Polytechnic University of New York (Lead
              Institution), Bodega Association of United States Inc. New York, Datasym, All
              Long Island Cash Register, Symbol Technologies Inc., South Bronx Overall
              Economic Development Corporation, Accion-New York, New York National Bank and
              Wagner Graduate School of Public Service-NYU. The goals for this program are:
              (1) create the necessary organizational conditions to foster the transformation
              of knowledge into the systems and services that will educate underrepresented
              minority retail owners on the value of implementing point of service scanning
              technology, (2) introduce a point of service scanning technology linked to cash
              registers in small grocery stores owned by underrepresented communities in New
              York City, and (3) conduct research to understand the resistance of immigrant
              and minority communities to using technology.  The partnership of companies
              that make, install and service the scanners, city organizations responsible for
              economic development, and financial institutions to process loans to the store
              owners has been formed.  The program develops training to overcome the
              knowledge, skill, and psychological barriers associated with getting
              underrepresented minorities to adopt technology and extends the use of scanned
              data to identify, record and order inventory. Bilingual minority students are
              involved in the research and implementation stages. 

There is a genuine
              resistance by this minority-dominated retail market sector to use of
              technology.  The university has the confidence of the retailers association to
              manage the installation of the equipment and training of personnel in its use. 
              The partnership includes financial institutions to make loans to the retailers
              to purchase the equipment.  The minority-dominated retail sector will gain from
              use of this technology.  The study of the factors that cause the resistance to
              technology and how they were overcome will serve as a model for technology
              insertion in other demographic sectors where there is resistance to it.
              Extensive involvement of bilingual underrepresented students in the effort has
              obvious societal benefits. In addition, the scanning equipment will lead to
              increased profit for an estimated 8000 small grocery stores in New York City by
              providing inventory control and reduced inventory costs.  Retail scanners have
              been shown to reduce cashier errors and increase profitability nationally.

