Title       : Conference: SRC-NSF Mixed-Signal Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0227967

Award Number: 0227967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph K. Cavin cavin@src.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Semiconductor Res Corp
	      P.O. Box 12053
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  277092053    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227967
Cavin

Historically, mixed-signal technologies have had a back seat
              to high-performance digital technologies. The ITRS has in the past focused on
              high-speed digital, which drove technology scaling with little thought to the
              research needs for mixed-signal. Mixed-signal SoCs are being developed now at a
              rapid pace but with most being developed on technologies optimized for only
              high performance digital. As an example, a wireless
LAN or cell phone depends
              on an efficient radio receiver optimized for performance and cost to
              manufacture. With a mainstream bulk CMOS process, these radio receivers cannot
              be optimized as direct conversion receivers due to the noise and linearity
              issues with bulk CMOS. As a result, the radio section must be made much more
              complex by adding external filtering and many more components in the form of an
              IF section. A few companies have learned to make direct conversion receivers in
              SiGe process, however cost is higher. So one key question is, how can we
              influence research driven by the ITRS that will not only provide technologies
              that are optimum for high performance digital, but also for mixed signal? This
              workshop will bring together a great many experts from both industry and
              academia to discuss and formulate research needs for mixed-signal especially as
              relates to technologies (wafer fab processes, packaging, test, CAD, etc.).
              These needs will serve to guide the research funding efforts for both
              industry
(SRC) and NSF.

