Title       : YIA-PGR: Assessment of the use of Oligonucleotide Microarrays for Single
               Nucleotide Polymorphism Mutation Detection in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0227310

Award Number: 0227310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan Springer nspringer@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Large-scale genome sequencing projects in plants have yielded a wealth of
              sequence information that can be used to form hypotheses regarding gene
              function.  However, in many plant species it is difficult to test these
              hypotheses due to a lack of reverse-genetics resources.  This project will
              develop an Ethane methylsulfonate (EMS)-mutagenized population of maize plants
              and screen it using two approaches to SNP mutation detection: Targeted Induced
              Local Lesions IN Genomes (TILLING), which utilizes mismatch-specific
              endonuclease digestion to detect SNPs, and a prototype oligonucleotide
              microarray system, which uses a hybridization-based approach. 
	
EMS is a
              chemical mutagen that causes primarily C->T to A->G transition mutations. 
              Bioinformatic analysis can be used to predict whether these transitions result
              in nonsense, missense, or silent mutations.  An oligonucleotide microarray can
              be designed to screen for the informative mutations by incorporating
              oligonucleotides identical to the wild-type parental sequence and
              oligonucleotides identical to the transition mutation.  DNA from mutagenized
              individuals will be labeled and hybridized to the oligonucleotide microarrays
              to identify individuals containing a specific mutation.  The advantages of this
              screening method are increased efficiency (more genes at lower cost), precise
              identification of the mutation when it is detected, and the characterized
              genetic background being used.  

The approach employed in this project is
              made possible by the use of a maskless array synthesizer (MAS) device, which
              allows rapid construction of inexpensive oligonucleotide microarrays that can
              easily be customized.  A single microarray can be used to screen for over
              100,000 potential mutations if eight oligonucleotides are used to screen for
              each SNP.  

The outcomes of this project will form the foundation of a
              publicly available reverse-genetic resource for maize that will include
              mutants, screening protocols, and bioinformatic tools.  These resources will be
              valuable to researchers interested in developing reverse-genetics resources for
              other plant species as well as researchers interested in other SNP detection
              applications for plant and animal genomic DNA.  

