Title       : Virtual Markets in the Wireless Communication & Computation Grid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0227879

Award Number: 0227879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee McKnight lee.mcknight@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amar Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Gaynor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter O'Reilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ioannis N. Miaoulis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227879
McKnight	

This award is to the Tufts University to support the
              activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The
              partners include the Tufts University (Lead Institution), Boston University,
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Northeastern University, ETH Zurich,
              Mystic Valley Development Commission, Btexact Technologies, Cisco Systems,
              Dialout.net, Fractal Antenna, NimbleMicro, The Telmarc Group LLC.
The proposed
              goals are to create a collaborative pool of Massachusetts research universities
              in the wireless communication sector, to improve education and integrating
              wireless communication technology into the school system, to investigate the
              tremendous value that wireless grid networks offer to increase access to
              wireless communication, and to develop new economic sectors utilizing these
              ubiquitous networks to access grid networks.  Wireless communication and
              computation multi-provider and multi service grid services for usability and
              network, power, spectrum, and economic efficiency are being designed. The
              critical characteristics and features of the service layers that may be
              required for both virtual and real organizations to do business across a
              wireless communications and computation grid will be identified. The virtual
              organizations model will be extended to include the concept of a virtual market
              across a wireless communications and computation grid.

A wireless
              communication and computation grid services platform, designed for usability as
              well as network, power, spectrum, and economic efficiency, will increase access
              and engender productivity gains that crosses multiple market sectors.  This
              model will transform the way that the national research enterprise innovates
              and help to create collaborative networks that strengthen local and regional
              economies.  Communication and computation networks are a necessary part of the
              infrastructure for economic well-being and growth.
 

