Title       : Creating New Economic Opportunities in Downeast Coastal Maine by Enhancing
               Marine Education and Research Capacity: Developing the Infrastructure for
               Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0227729

Award Number: 0227729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian F. Beal   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Joseph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart Swain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UMM
	      9 O'Brien Avenue
	      Machias, ME  046541397    207/255-1210

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227729
Beal	

This award is to the University of Maine at Machias to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060).
              The partners include the University of Maine at Machias (Lead Institution),
              Downeast Institute for Applied Marine Research  & Education, Sunrise County
              Economic Council, Eastern Maine Development Corporation, Town of Bealls, Carver
              Shellfish Inc, Washington County Commissioners, Maine Aquaculture Innovation
              Center, Cobscook Bay Resource Center, The Nature Conservatory, Maine Department
              of Marine Resources, Maine State Planning Office, and Maine Science &
              Technology Foundation.  The goals of the program are to produce a significant
              increase in applied marine research and technology transfer leading to
              commercialization of products and processes, and to increase the numbers of
              people from eastern Maine enrolled in associate and baccalaureate degree
              programs at the University of Maine at Machias preparing them for the new
              workforce in marine technologies.  To accomplish these goals new faculty
              positions will be created in the areas of marine ecology, marine biology, and
              natural resource economics. Research facilities for marine research will be
              installed.  Positions for managers to enable technology transfer and
              commercialization are being established at the university.

More than 40% of
              the households in the region have incomes less than $20,000 annually.  The
              economy of the region relies very heavily on renewable marine resources. 
              Marine aquaculture has a huge potential to revitalize the regional economy
              given increased research and education/training to provide the technological
              and business support as well as the trained workforce for start-up companies.
              The participation of underrepresented minority students in the program will be
              increased through several currently existing programs, such as Alliance for
              Minority Participation Program, McNair Scholars Program, Bridges to the
              Baccalaureate Program, and affiliate programs with the University of Puerto
              Rico.

