Title       : Workshop on Experimental Infostructure Networks; Irvine, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0227640

Award Number: 0227640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74954              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Parker whparker@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT

UC Irvine requests funding to convene a workshop, in Irvine, on
              May 20-21, 2002, to produce a report that explores and recommends
              industry-academic-government infrastructure-building models for Experimental
              Infostructure Networks to help define new programs. This Workshop is being
              organized as a follow-on to a December 2001 workshop "Grand Challenges in
              e-Science" to add industry and private-sector input.

Infostructure
              encompasses the emerging computational, visualization, data storage,
              instrumentation and networking technologies that support our nation's major
              science and engineering research facilities. These facilities enable e-Science,
              large-scale networked science, that studies very complex micro to macro-scale
              problems over time and space. Infostructure includes computers and networks,
              and the middleware that enables coordinated resource sharing and problem
              solving among distributed facilities.

Networks are the key enabling
              technology for transforming infostructure from geographically separated
              computational facilities and instruments into a National Information
              Infrastructure. Three classes of Research & Education R&E networks beyond the
              commodity Internet are:
Production Networks
Experimental Networks
Research
              Networks

The purpose of this Workshop will be to answer the questions: Does
              the computer and telecommunications industry agree on a need for Experimental
              Infostructure Networks for e-Science? If yes, for what reasons, and what should
              they look like in the near and longer term? What roles should industry,
              government and academia play?

This Workshop will result in the publication
              of a report that contains a list of recommendations with justification. All
              participants' names will appear as contributors to the report. Cal (IT) will
              manage the logistics as the host site and will assist the program committee in
              planning. The agenda and the final report will be produced by a team at UC San
              Diego, headed by Dr. Larry Smarr, under subcontract from UC Irvine. The budget
              includes costs for the workshop expenses, for the subcontract, and for staff
              and supplies at UC Irvine.


