Title       : YIA-PGR: Comparative Genomics of Rice: reconstructing rice chromosome 1 in
               related species.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0227414

Award Number: 0227414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1630537            (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Jackson sjackson@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. SanMiguel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Encoded in units called "genes" on linear structures known as "chromosomes"
              present in essentially every cell of every organism is the instruction set for
              that organism. The purpose of a genome project, such as the nearly complete
              Rice Genome Project, is to precisely locate and describe each gene. This is not
              the end of the story however. For the description generated may only hint at
              the function of a gene and gives little indication as to the interacting role
              any gene or group of genes plays in the overall functioning of the organism. At
              this point enters the discipline of genetic mapping-whereby traits may be
              localized to specific positions on a chromosome.   To this end, in genomes
              related to rice, we will construct physical maps of regions homologous to rice
              chromosome 1. Libraries of genomes, called BAC libraries, which consist of
              bacteria containing large pieces of DNA from the genome of interest, will have
              been constructed for many of the species in the same genus as rice (Oryza). 
              These BAC libraries are the substrate for genome sequencing and, in this case,
              building sequence-ready comparative maps to compare genomes.  Approximately
              three-quarters of the nearly 5,000 predicted genes on chromosome 1 will be used
              to isolate and build comparative maps across this group of species.  The end
              result will be the reconstruction of rice chromosome 1 in a group of related
              species.  This will help us to better understand chromosome evolution and more
              efficiently utilize the rice sequence data for comparative mapping in more
              distantly related species, such as maize, sorghum and oat. In addition, by
              using the natural variation that occurs in this group of species, we will be
              able to begin assigning biological functions to many of the genes predicted to
              exist in rice based on the sequence data.
