Title       : Innovations in Aquaculture Feeds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0227925

Award Number: 0227925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Koropchak   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charlette Kohler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher C. Kohler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227925
Korpchak			

This award is to the Southern Illinois University at
              Carbondale to support the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal
              was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
              Solicitation (NSF 02060).

Partners
The partners for the proposed scope of
              work are Southern Illinois University at Carbondale (Lead Institution), ADM
              Animal Health and Nutrition, Illinois Fish Farmers Cooperative, Illinois
              Department of Commerce and Community Affairs, City of Carbondale/Southern
              Illinois Research Park. ADM Animal Health and Nutrition is contributing its
              trademarked animal feed supplements to be used by the Southern Illinois
              University at Carbondale Fisheries and Illinois Aquaculture Center in dietary
              /feeding experiments.  The Illinois Fish Farmers Cooperative will contribute
              technical support in fish processing and storage, and coordinate participation
              of its members in field trials.

Aquaculture is the most rapidly growing
              sector of U.S. agriculture. Illinois is the largest inland state consumer of
              seafood and the second leading consumer of farm-raised fish in the country. 
              The state of Illinois has recently invested $12 million to build a
              state-of-the-art fish processing facility.  This effort will build on this
              initiative by addressing the issues of feed for farm-raised fish, which is the
              most costly factor in aquaculture. The following innovations are included: (1)
              farm-raised fish with substantially higher levels of long-chain, omega-3 fatty
              acids in their edible fillets, (2) healthier fish in terms of growth and
              survival in winter, (3) higher survival percentage for the hatchlings.
              Potential economic benefits include, less expensive food for farm-raised fish,
              higher production yields for fish farms, reduction of over fishing of thee
              oceans, and increased new jobs in fish-processing plants.

The creation of
              new jobs will have a significant impact on the region, which currently has a
              high unemployment. In addition, lowered food costs and environmental
              improvements from less over fishing of the oceans plus a fish supply from
              waters known to be free from industrial contaminants will have obvious benefits
              to society.

