Title       : SGER: Unpredictable Events of Catastrophic Proportions in Temparate Forest
               Ecosystems: Developing a Baseline to Assess Cascading Effects and Coupled
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0227608

Award Number: 0227608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20562              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio F. Moran moran@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Clay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Odland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heather L. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,5209,9169,9237,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Recently developed ecological theories had identified major disturbance events
              as crucial factors in large-scale environmental change and evolution. 
              Punctuated equilibrium and chaos theories posit shifts in systems between
              alternative stable states.  Inquiries into the complex dynamics of these
              relatively abrupt shifts generally have taken place after major disturbances
              have occurred, with relatively little data available to characterize conditions
              prior to the events because of their suddenness and unpredictability.  Periodic
              emergence of cicadas in massive numbers are predictable, but they occur
              infrequently enough to constitute an excellent model of unpredictable
              disturbance events of catastrophic proportions.  This Small Grant for
              Exploratory Research will establish a set of baseline measurements in central
              Indiana starting in the summer of 2002 in anticipation of a major cicada
              outbreak in mid-2004.  Cicada outbreaks occur every 17 years in central
              Indiana, where the size of the outbreak is among the largest found anywhere in
              the U.S.  The time period between outbreaks is so long that most elements of
              the forest system that the cicadas inhabit effectively have no working memory
              of the form and character of the outbreak.  Before the outbreak, cicadas
              underground are massive consumption of tree root systems, while after the
              outbreak, they can rapidly defoliate tree canopies.  They become prey to a
              number of species, frequently inducing "predator saturation" as wildlife gorge
              on the seemingly endless supply of insects, an eating pattern that can
              dramatically alter the survival and reproduction rates of those predators
              during the year of the outbreak and in following years.  The laying of eggs can
              lead to damage or death of affected trees, and loss of tree canopy can alter
              the microclimatology of the understory and affect transpiration rates, which in
              turn affects groundwater and surface stream hydrology.  In order to develop
              baseline information against which to evaluate the impacts of the 2004 cicada
              outbreak in central Indiana, this research team, which includes members drawn
              from geography, biology, geology, and public and environmental affairs
              departments, will begin taking a series of measurements in mid-2002.  Among
              variables to be measured are nutrient dynamics, hydrology, canopy cover, tree
              physiology, seedling establishment, and socioeconomic factors.

This award
              will help establish baseline measurements from which follow-up studies can be
              conducted in the coming years.  In addition to laying the groundwork for a
              broad range of inquiries into interactions between natural and human systems,
              the project will have positive broader impacts, including the involvement and
              training of undergraduate and graduate students and the establishment of
              databases that can be used for a broad range of inquiries.

