Title       : Integrated Accessible Microscopical Workstation for Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0227992

Award Number: 0227992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Borgens cpr@vet.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley Duerstock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1545,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The goal of this project is to construct an integrated accessible
              microscopical
workstation that will allow students with disabilities to
              independently perform common
biological laboratory techniques, thereby
              enabling individuals to actively participate in
scientific experimentation and
              the opportunity to pursue a career in the SMET fields.
This multi-purpose
              workstation is to be used primarily by persons with mobility
impairments. All
              aspects of the integrated workstation will be operated from a central
computer
              interface, which will be used to automatically control and monitor
              external
peripheral devices so that biological experiments can be performed.
              Using a computer
as the user interface and central control of the accessible
              laboratory workstation is
ideal, because the personal computer can accommodate
              various disabilities using
different pointing devices and accessibility
              software utilities. Total keystroke control of
the integrated workstation will
              be emphasized.
The intent of this proposal is to develop an accessible
              laboratory workstation that will
allow students and investigators with
              mobility impairments to perform the majority of
microscopical and histological
              laboratory procedures, most notably in the biological
sciences, with minimal
              assistance and setup. The integrated microscopy workstation
will use software
              to control all features of operation, including an automated
microscope,
              motorized stage, bulk slide autoloader, and digital video camera.
              The
workstation will allow a student with a disability to independently load
              up to fifty
individual slides, focus, change objectives, filter wheels,
              illuminator and condensor, and
position the microscopy specimen
              translationally in X and Y directions and rotationally
using theta control -
              all controlled through a computer that will also capture images of
the
              histological tissues to be managed and analyzed for anatomical studies. Thus,
              the
only assistance the student with a disability requires is for someone to
              load the slides.
All other phases of microscopy and image analysis can be
              performed without further
assistance.
The accessible microscopy workstation
              will be evaluated both in a classroom setting
that performs typical
              undergraduate and post-graduate biological experimentation and
in research
              laboratory setting that performs sophisticated laboratory procedures. Ten
high
              school and college students with a range of mobility impairments will be
              assessed
in the first year by their ability to use a computer and their
              specific ergonomics relating
to the construction of the accessible
              workstation. In the second year the students will
be tested on their ability
              to use the workstation to accomplish a variety of laboratory
procedures.
              Educators will also be queried as to their capability of incorporating
              the
workstation into the classroom environment.
University and local high
              school educators and Special Education specialists and
statewide
              organizations, like the Council of Volunteers/Organizations for Hoosiers
              with
Disabilities (COVOH) and Assisting Technology through Awareness in
              Indiana
(ATTAIN), which advocate the use of assistive technologies for persons
              with disabilities,
will be utilized to disseminate findings and promote the
              use of the integrated microscopy
workstation.
