Title       : Revealing the Invisible Universe: from Nanoscope to Telescope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0227755

Award Number: 0227755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra Colodner colodner@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy N. Odegaard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Pompea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Supapan Seraphin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth S. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,1696,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the MPS Internships in Public Science
              Education (MPS-IPSE) solicitation, NSF 02-064. The project aims to create
              informal science programs that appeal to public interest by highlighting
              scientific areas in which people are interested, and broaden the audience for
              science by sending programs into the community.  It will concurrently provide
              valuable experience to undergraduate and graduate students in communicating
              about science with public audiences. This is a collaborative effort among the
              Flandrau Science Center, the Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
              the Arizona State Museum and the Science and Math Education Center, and the
              National Optical Astronomy Observatory at the University of Arizona. The
              project will create three modular programs for the general public and
              middle-school groups. The programs will highlight the use of optical and
              electron-beam technologies to extend human vision out to the edge of the
              universe, and into the atomic structure of materials. The first program,
              Electronic Detectives of the Future and Past, will examine the use of electron
              microscopy to develop new materials for the future, as well as to understand
              how Native Americans used materials in ancient times.  The second, called
              Revealing the Invisible, will look at the use of infrared detectors on
              satellites to look both into space and back at archeological sites on Earth. 
              The third program, Bucky and the Nanotubes, will tell the story of the
              accidental discovery of buckyballs during the course of basic Astronomy
              research, and their potentially revolutionary applications to the development
              of new materials.  Program designs will emphasize scientific process and
              people, and illustrate how and why recent advances have been made.  These
              stories of discovery will be accompanied by science demonstrations as well as
              slide and video imagery. Hands-on activities will accompany each program.    
              
%%% 
The project will develop descriptive programs about science that appeal
              to public interest. The programs will highlight scientific areas which appeal
              to the public, and are expected to broaden the audience for science.  The
              project will concurrently provide valuable experience to undergraduate and
              graduate students in communicating about science with public audiences. Broad
              impacts of the project include participating interns and the audiences they
              reach.  The project will train a diverse group of interns (18 undergraduates, 6
              graduate students and 6 teachers over three years) in science and informal
              science education.  The programs they develop will continue to be offered to
              school groups and the general public at the Science Center after the life of
              the grant.  Some modules will also be offered at the Arizona State Museum
              extending the reach of science programming to a broader audience. Annual
              attendance at the Science Center is approximately 60,000, of which 25,000 are
              children in groups.  Equivalent numbers at the State Museum are 50,000 and
              5000. Discovery boxes will be created for teachers and museum docents to use in
              the classroom to complement these programs. In addition, program scripts,
              images and videos will be made available via the Internet for other science
              centers to adapt and use. The project is supported by the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA). 
***  

