Title       : Partnering for Innovative Commercialization of Technology: The University of
               Kentucky Natural Products Alliance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0227838

Award Number: 0227838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Scott Smith mssmith@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy M. Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Fink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn B. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Chappell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227838
Smith	

This award is to University of Kentucky to support the
              activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060).
The
              partners include University of Kentucky (Lead Institution), Alltech, Apolmmune,
              Equine Biodiagnostics Inc, Limestone Capital Partners LLC, Martek, Neogen,
              Stoll, Keenon and Parks LLC, Venture Laboratories Inc, Coldstream Research
              Campus, KY State Office for the New Economy, KY Science and Technology Council,
              KY State Office on Agriculture Policy, KY Tobacco Research and Development
              Council, Lexington United, and The Innovation Group. The activities include
              launching at least 4 start-up companies based on intellectual property derived
              from the University of Kentucky College of Agriculture research programs,
              involvement of 4-6 students (some recently graduated) in the start-up
              companies, and development of at least 2 new advanced training courses to
              provide new technical and business skills in the new natural products
              technology sector. The proposed goals include the following: (1) education of
              entrepreneurs in management of intellectual property, business planning,
              incorporation and other legal issues, financial management and accounting,
              human resources management, insurance, financial resource acquisition and
              planning, and technology assessment, (2) creation of a mentoring network to
              provide new businesses with access tot business and tech support,  (3) provide
              financial resources to develop novel technologies and proof-of-concept
              research, (4) internships for students just completing their degrees (BS to
              PhD) to initiate or join new start-up companies, and (5) workforce development
              in the agricultural biotechnology sector.

The effort will increase the
              number of new sources of higher-paying jobs, and mobilize the underrepresented
              populations in the region by providing training, technology and business
              support, and connecting entrepreneurs with sources of capital for their
              companies.  The Commonwealth of Kentucky has traditionally been a rural economy
              that is stressed by the demise in demand for some of its cash crops.  They have
              had recent success in attracting business and capitalizing on the intellectual
              property generated by the University of Kentucky.  The proposal is based on
              their traditional strengths in agriculture and life sciences to create
              agricultural-based biotech start-up firms to create new jobs and economic
              output.
 
 

