Title       : St. Louis Center for Inquiry in Science Teaching & Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0227619

Award Number: 0227619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10264219           (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Klein cklein@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Granger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Addelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis Balcerzak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The St. Louis Center for Inquiry in Science Teaching and Learning (CISTL)
              combines a focus on research into science teaching and learning with a focus on
              professional development and support needed to bring inquiry-based teaching and
              learning into K-12 science education in both formal and informal settings. 
              Joining together in this effort are three informal science institutions, two
              universities, five school districts, one community college system and the
              Association of Science-Technology Centers (ASTC).  CISTL will address the full
              continuum of science educators -- those entering the field, those in the field
              and those retooling from one area of expertise to another.  Their research
              agenda focuses on the effect of varying types of collaboration on professional
              development and the interfaces among the collaborators (education and
              scientific; formal and informal).  A diagnostic tool for assessing strengths
              and weaknesses in science and inquiry backgrounds will be developed for
              teachers and other science educators.  In addition, the project will create a
              synergy between research and practice through research based in practice,
              practice based on research and the translation of results into practical
              suggestions for educators.  



