Title       : Appalachian Mathematics and Science Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0227028

Award Number: 0227028
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Kathleen Bergin                         
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22013868           (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Eakin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl W. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald K. Atwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wimberly C. Royster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1791      MSP-Comprehensive Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Appalachian Mathematics and Science Partnership (AMSP) is a partnership
              among 38 central and eastern Kentucky school districts (Bath Co., Breathitt
              Co., Carter Co., Casey Co., Clark Co., Clay Co., Clinton Co., Corbin
              Independent, Estill Co., Floyd Co., Frankfort Independent, Garrard Co., Harlan
              Co., Jackson Independent, Jessamine Co., Johnson Co., Knott Co., Lee Co.,
              Letcher Co., Lewis Co., Lincoln Co., Madison Co., Martin Co., McCreary Co.,
              Montgomery Co., Morgan Co., Owsley Co, Paris Independent, Pike Co., Pikeville
              Independent, Powell Co., Pulaski Co., Rockcastle Co., Rowan Co., Washington
              Co., Wayne Co., Whitley Co., Woodford Co.), 9 Tennessee school districts (Alvin
              C. York Agricultural Institute, Anderson Co., Campbell Co., Cumberland Co.,
              Grainger Co., Harriman City, Johnson Co., Oneida Special School, Scott Co.), 5
              western Virginia school districts ,(Dickenson Co., Russell Co., Scott Co.,
              Tazewell Co., Wise Co.), the Kentucky Science and Technology Corporation
              (Appalachian Rural Systemic Initiative), and 10 institutions of higher
              education, including Eastern Kentucky University, Kentucky State University,
              Morehead State University, Pikeville College, Union College, University of
              Virginia College at Wise, University of Tennessee, Prestonsburg Community
              College, Somerset Community College, and the University of Kentucky, with the
              latter serving as the lead organization. 

Student achievement for the almost
              170,000 students in the partner districts is significantly lower than state
              averages.  The Appalachian regions of the three states are characterized by low
              socio-economic status (income rates are 62-81% of national averages) with over
              one-third of children living in poverty.  In addition, attracting and
              maintaining a staff of highly qualified mathematics and science teachers in the
              Appalachian region is a major challenge.  Within the partner school districts,
              38% of the mathematics teachers and 37% of the science teachers at the middle
              and high school levels are teaching with a minor or less in mathematics. 
              Simultaneously, the number of individuals graduating with teacher certification
              in mathematics or science from the partner higher education students is
              extremely low.

This Partnership will reform science, mathematics and
              technology (MST) education in central Appalachia in order to eliminate the
              "achievement gap" in MST for regional preK-12 students and to build an
              integrated PreK-12 and higher education system to insure the selection,
              development and career-long support of a diverse and high quality mathematics
              and science teacher workforce.

AMSP involves four components to address the
              needs of the region: (1) Preservice teacher and administrator education; (2)
              Professional development of preK-12 personnel; (3) Student learning
              opportunities including parent/community engagement; and (4) Research to
              advance the understanding of rural education reform.


