Title       : YIA-PGR: Genetic, Molecular and Developmental Analysis of Variation in Tomato
               Fruit Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0227541

Award Number: 0227541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1109980            (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther Van der Knaap vanderknaap.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Breeding and mutation analysis in tomato have resulted in a diverse germplasm
              collection, providing a rich resource for studies on fruit morphology. Often,
              fruit morphological changes occur during growth and maturation of the ovary
              prior to pollination and/or during maturation of the fruit after pollination
              and successful fertilization. Therefore, tomato varieties displaying altered
              fruit shape may provide unique insights into developmental processes
              controlling ovary and fruit growth and maturation. Understanding the
              molecular-genetic basis of diversity in fruit form will allow insights into
              evolutionary processes in tomato as well as other fruit-bearing crops, and
              modification of developmental processes regulating ovary and fruit formation.
              

The first goal is to identify and fine-map novel genetic loci to obtain a
              global view of key loci and developmental pathways controlling variation in
              tomato fruit shape. Populations derived from crosses between cultivated tomato
              exhibiting extreme fruit shapes and a round-fruited wild relative will be
              phenotypically and genotypically analyzed to identify quantitative trait loci
              (QTL) controlling fruit shape. These loci will be introgressed into a
              homogenous background to permit future genomic analyses and map-based cloning
              of genes underlying fruit morphology QTL. 

The second goal is to identify
              changes in gene expression profiles during tomato ovary and fruit growth, and
              to correlate these to developmental changes in morphology. Results from the
              analyses will provide insights into molecular events regulating ovary and fruit
              development. In addition, genes will be identified whose transcript levels
              change as a consequence of allelic substitution at fruit shape loci resulting
              in changes in fruit morphology. This information will allow insights into
              networks of genes and biochemical processes potentially downstream from fruit
              shape loci, and how fruit morphology is regulated. 

The third goal is to
              integrate fruit shape characteristics with gene expression and genotype
              information becoming available during the course of the project, and to develop
              a searchable database containing this information. In addition, a software
              package will be developed to semi-automatically analyze variation in fruit
              shape in tomato varieties and in mapping populations. 

