Title       : International: U. S. Brazil Cooperative Research: Impact of the Lower Order
               Terms On Degenerate Elliptic Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0227100

Award Number: 0227100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas W. Hanges nhanges@alpha.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5913,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Americas Program collaborative research project will support investigations
              by Nicholas Hanges of CUNY H. H. Lehman College together with Paulo Cordaro of
              the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil to study the impact of the lower order
              terms on degenerate elliptic operators.  The main interest is in analytic
              regularity for partial differential equations with a focus on degenerate
              elliptic operators as well as on complex first order perturbations of such
              operators.  Analytic hypoellipticity will be studied in the usual sense, in the
              global sense and in the sense of germs. These properties are influenced by the
              lower order terms and by the existence (or absence) of bicharacteristics
              (Treves curves).  The PI has discovered an operator that has an infinite number
              of Treves curves over the origin, yet is analytic hypoelliptic at the origin in
              the sense of germs.  However, this operator is not analytic hypoelliptic in the
              usual sense.  This shows that Treves' conjecture, at least in the sense of
              germs, is false.  One of the goals is to understand the influence of the lower
              order terms in the tradition of the work of Gilioli and Treves.

Degenerate
              elliptic partial differential equations arise in many different areas of
              mathematics, and thus the resolution of problems tackled in this project will
              have significance in several areas of pure and applied mathematics in which one
              is interested in establishing that solutions are analytic.  There may even be
              applications in such distant fields as economics and thermodynamics.  The
              Brazilian PI and his institution are very strong in the area of this
              investigation.  As a result, U.S. students will have the opportunity not only
              to become involved with cutting-edge problems, but through these exchanges they
              will also be exposed to and begin to participate in international
              collaborations.

