Title       : Digital Pueblo Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0227806

Award Number: 0227806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward S. Angel angel@cs.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John K. McIver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zoe Falliers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest D. Herrera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227806
Angel	

This award is to the University of New Mexico to support the
              activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060).
The
              partners include the University of New Mexico (Lead Institution), Sandia
              National Laboratory, City of Albuquerque, Connect New Mexico, National Hispanic
              Culture Center, New Mexico Trains, Aquila Group, Bandelier EFX, Big Byte,
              ContiFilms, Drumfire, IBM, Intel, National Indian Telecommunications Institute,
              Pixar, Poeh Center, Pueblo of Zuni, Vizeon, and The Studio.  The proposed goal
              is to create a Digital Arts and Technology Pueblo that will create an
              infrastructure in New Mexico for economic development and innovation in the
              digital arts and science industry. Three state-of-the-art centers with
              equipment and facilities for digital arts, which are similar to incubators to
              create and nurture innovations in the digital arts are being developed.
              Curricula in digital arts for training and education are being developed and
              implemented. Infrastructure to enable the innovation, technology
              commercialization and entrepreneural process is being established. 

New
              Mexico is rich in culture and art as well as science and technology. Much of
              the well-trained talent has been forced to leave the state owing to lack of job
              opportunities.  The state's isolation is an obstacle to entrance into the
              information technology sector. This partnership establishes the infrastructure
              for innovation leading to economic well being in the digital arts and sciences
              industry. The effort brings expertise in digital science and technology with
              the expertise in graphic arts to create an infrastructure for digital graphics
              industry in New Mexico.  The new companies and new jobs will bring economic
              well being to the region.  A strong emphasis is placed on recruitment and
              involvement of Native Americans and Hispanics in the new industry in New
              Mexico.

