Title       : Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0227592

Award Number: 0227592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Mathieu mathieu@astro.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol L. Colbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrence S. Millar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Fairweather  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7181      CENTERS FOR LEARNING & TEACHIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning (CIRTL) at
              the University of Wisconsin-Madison, in collaboration with Michigan State
              University and Pennsylvania State University, is creating an interdisciplinary
              program to prepare graduate students, post-doctoral researchers and current
              faculty to meet the challenges of STEM higher education.  This Higher Education
              Center for Learning and Teaching is based on a teaching-as-research concept
              that enables future and current STEM faculty to engage in teaching in the same
              way they engage in their research.  The project integrates teaching-as-research
              and interdisciplinary learning communities in a professional development
              program that addresses the educational responsibilities of current and future
              faculty.  The professional development program includes a curriculum that
              provides a foundation for teaching-as-research and improved classroom practice,
              experiential learning in informal education and instructional materials
              development, internships in a variety of learning environments, and preparation
              for teaching and learning with diverse student populations. The focus of the
              research component is on promoting best practices in post-secondary STEM
              teaching and learning, fostering change in STEM graduate-through-faculty
              cultures, and transferring successful strategies between departments and across
              universities.  Through national implementation of the professional development
              program, CIRTL is expected to serve approximately 2,000 STEM graduate students
              and post-doctoral researchers annually while establishing learning communities
              for graduates-through-faculty at 10 research universities representing 10% of
              the major U.S. graduate institutions.  This project is jointly funded by the
              Division of Undergraduate Education in the Directorate for Education and Human
              Resources and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences. 
