Title       : Texas Middle and Secondary Mathematics Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0227128

Award Number: 0227128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Hamos                          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2909637            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jasper E. Adams adams@math.sfasu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Pace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly M. Childs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stephen F Austin St Univ
	      Box 6078
	      Nacogdoches, TX  759626078    936/468-2201

NSF Program : 1792      MSP-Targeted Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Stephen F. Austin State University and twelve independent school districts
              establish the Texas Middle and Secondary Mathematics Project as an effort to
              positively impact student achievement in mathematics through better preparation
              of teachers to teach mathematics.  The partner school districts serve over
              40,000 students, with variable percentages of minority students (non-white
              students range from 9% to 64% of student population in the different districts)
              and high percentages of economically disadvantaged students (28% to 67% of
              student population).  As is true in Texas as a whole, the teacher workforce in
              partner districts does not match the diversity within the student population,
              and many new teachers of mathematics are not certified in the discipline and
              have not majored in mathematics.

The Texas Middle and Secondary Mathematics
              Project expects to improve the capacity of mathematics teachers in grades 4-12
              to impact student performance within the partner districts by:
*	increasing
              the number of qualified and certified mathematics teachers directly as sixty
              middle school and thirty high school mathematics teacher will be produced;
              
*	preparing teachers to become Texas Master Mathematics teachers who will, in
              turn, provide leadership and mentoring for other teachers; and 
*	increasing
              student performance at higher levels in mathematics through classroom
              experience and summer institutes for students.  
In addition, an underlying
              premise of the partnership is that higher education mathematics faculty are not
              generally accustomed to thinking about the pedagogical needs of the middle or
              high school teacher.  Therefore, the Project will improve the awareness and
              involvement of mathematics higher education faculty regarding preparation and
              professional development of teachers by involving mathematics faculty from a
              variety of higher education institutions across Texas in the effort, and noting
              evidence within college/university mathematics departments of curricular and
              programmatic changes designed to better meet the needs of grades 4-12
              mathematics teachers.

