Title       : Northwest Ohio Partnership on Alternative Energy Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0227899

Award Number: 0227899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Calzonetti fcalzon@utnet.utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xunming Deng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alvin D. Compaan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria R. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Stuart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227899
Calzonetti			

This award is to the University of Toledo to support
              the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              02060).
The partners include the University of Toledo (Lead Institution),
              Bowling Green University, Owens Community College, IQ Systems, First Solar,
              Cooltech, Dana Corporation, General Motors Corporation, Owens-Corning,
              Pilkington, Center for Technology Commercialization, EISC, Inc, Regional
              Technology Alliance, NASA Glenn, Regional Growth Partnership, City of Toledo,
              COSI-Toledo, and Toledo Zoo.
The activities of the program include the
              following: (1) improvements in the technical skills of the workforce by design
              of the technical programs at Owens Community College in the area of alternative
              energies, (2) participation of African American and Hispanic students from the
              Toledo EXCEL Program, (3) promotion of related industrial and business
              development through support provided by the Regional Growth Partnership and the
              Regional Technology Alliance, (4) increased public awareness of alternative
              energy systems, (5) development of statewide support through the Ohio
              Alternative Energy Development Council, (6) transfer of alternative energy
              research and technology from the University of Toledo and Bowling Green
              University to the partner companies.

The program will increase academic
              research on alternative energy systems, develop the energy systems
              technologies, make innovations in manufacturing of these systems, develop the
              workforce for these companies, increase the participation of underrepresented
              populations in alternative energy systems technology, improve the environment
              from responsible manufacturing and less-polluting energy systems, and promote
              regional cluster development and increased investment in alternative energy
              technology.


The region of northwest Ohio is in a state of economic
              depression.  The proposed effort will provide new technologies, new companies,
              and new jobs. The creation of new jobs will have a significant impact on the
              region, which currently has a high unemployment.  Involvement of
              underrepresented groups in alternative energy technology has obvious societal
              implications.  In addition, lowered energy costs and environmental improvements
              from less-polluting energy will have societal benefits.

