Title       : Collaborative Research: Holocene Geology and Anthropology: Paleoclimate,
               Landscape Evolution, and Human Occupation of the Western Lake Titicaca Basin,
               Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0227550

Award Number: 0227550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140593             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Baker pbaker@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The ultimate goal of this collaborative study is to determine how
              Holocene climate variability affected landscape evolution in tributary valleys
              of the western Lake Titicaca basin and how Holocene landscape evolution in
              those tributaries influenced human activities. To meet this goal we will work
              at the intersection of three disciplines: paleoclimatology, fluvial
              sedimentology, and archaeology. We will create a proxy-based, high-resolution
              (decadal), properly interpreted paleoclimate time series for the western Lake
              Titicaca basin by collecting and analyzing sediment cores from small,
              high-sedimentation-rate lakes. We will generate new sedimentologic and
              geomorphic data, from three river valleys in the same region, and use those
              data to create a basinwide model of fluvial evolution in the context of
              regional climate change and base level. And, we will generate new
              archaeological data that will begin to fill the gaps in our knowledge of the
              early prehistory (especially the record of the Archaic Period, ca. 10,000 to
              3500 cal BP) of the basin. These data will address important questions about
              the character of the initial occupation of the basin, the dynamics of the
              sedentarization process, and the expansion of agropastoral settlements
              following sedentarization.

In this study we aim to produce the best-dated
              and best-understood reconstruction of Holocene precipitation in tropical South
              America. This record is needed to answer important paleoclimate questions (such
              as the nature of the sea-surface temperature forcing of the tropical
              atmosphere), but it also essential to our ultimate research goal. Once climate
              variability is securely known, we can address questions concerning the
              evolution of fluvial landscapes within the proper climatological context.
              Holocene fluvial
sedimentology in the western Titicaca basin is largely
              controlled by precipitation variability, which affects both riverine discharge
              and base level (the level of Lake Titicaca). Few studies of fluvial evolution
              have been done with the complete knowledge of the relevant records of both
              climate and base level, so this is an unusual opportunity to increase our
              understanding of both the rates and processes of sediment aggradation and
              downcutting, as well as possible non-linearities in the fluvial response to
              climate and base-level variability. Because fluvial variability is a key factor
              in both landscape evolution and the lives of both modern and ancient occupants
              of the basin, a secure knowledge of climate and landscape variability will
              allow us to address serious issues relating climate change and human
              activities. The new archaeological data we will collect will complement ongoing
              work elsewhere in the basin and the data, gathered within a highly resolved
              paleoclimatic context accompanied by a well-constrained reconstruction of
              natural landscape evolution, unrivaled in many other research settings, will
              allow us to document the relative timing of environmental and cultural
              change.


