Title       : YIA-PGR: Genomics of Rice Susceptibility to Bacterial Diseases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0227357

Award Number: 0227357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1095589            (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam J. Bogdanove ajbog@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Bacterial diseases cause significant losses in many crops, and control
              measures often are limited or unavailable. The majority arise from invasion of
              the vascular system or colonization of the tissue between the veins (the
              parenchyma). The major classes of molecular tools that enable bacteria to
              thrive inside plants are beginning to be understood, but little is known about
              the functions within the plant of most of these tools.  Less still is known
              about the plant signals and targets that render plants susceptible.  Virtually
              nothing is known of the basis for tissue specificity. An understanding of the
              pathogen and host traits that create opportunities for microbes to exploit
              different plant tissues is an important goal.  It will advance our fundamental
              understanding of plant biology and support innovative efforts to develop
              strategies to alter plant susceptibility or block pathogen virulence
This
              five-year functional genomics project will 1) identify plant genes
              differentially expressed in response to two closely related pathogens of the
              same host that cause different, representative types of disease; 2)
              characterize genetic differences between these pathogens which likely play a
              role; and 3) identify plant genes that affect susceptibility or tissue
              specificity to the pathogens.   The project is expected to yield key plant
              molecular targets and signals required for susceptibility and tissue
              specificity, and key proteins used by bacteria to infect plants in different
              ways.  Rice (Oryza sativa), an important crop and a model species, will be used
              for these studies.  Bacterial leaf blight (vascular) and bacterial leaf streak
              (parenchymal) will be examined.  These diseases are caused by the two
              subspecies of  Xanthomonas oryzae, pathovar oryzae and pathovar oryzicola,
              respectively.  Both diseases are threats to US agriculture.  They are also
              excellent models for the two most common ways bacteria cause disease in plants.
              
The project will have the following broader impacts. It will integrate
              research and education by providing training and teaching experience for
              graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and a two-week genomics module
              for high school biology students.  The project will foster increased
              participation in science for underrepresented groups through summer internships
              for undergraduate women and minorities. The project will produce versatile
              molecular resources that will be useful in many different aspects of rice (and
              other cereal) biology and in plant bacteriology.  In addition to publication
              for the scientific community, results will be disseminated to the public
              through the educational activities of the project, a project website, and other
              outreach efforts.

Deliverables

Data will be available online at <a
              href=www.public.iastate.edu/~ajbog>  www.public.iastate.edu/~ajbog </a>. 
              Clones, and seed from identified susceptibility mutants will be provided by
              Bogdanove on request on a cost-return basis. An important 
goal of the project
              is to construct Gateway (Invitrogen) cDNA libraries of rice undergoing
              infection by each pathogen, Gateway libraries of pathogen type III effector
              genes, and new compatible vectors for expression in pathogenic gram-negative
              bacteria.  The Gateway system allows easy transfer of clones, in-frame and en
              masse without loss of representation, to a wide range of expression vectors.
              The Gateway rice cDNA library will be provided by Bogdanove <a
              href=mailto:ajbog@iastate.edu> ajbog@iastate.edu </a>  or a third party
              distributor such as the ATCC on a cost-return basis. The Gateway Xanthomonas
              effector gene libraries and new destination vectors will be provided by
              Bogdanove on a cost-return basis.



