Title       : Biotechnology Resource Group: A Framework for Innovative Partnerships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0227754

Award Number: 0227754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $581059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Cheatham cheatham@mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Seipelt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227754
Cheatham	

This award is to the Middle Tennessee State University to
              support the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              02060). The partners include the Middle Tennessee State University (Lead
              Institution), Austin Peay State University, Tennessee State University,
              Tennessee Technological University, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
              Oakland High School, Riverdale High School, Tennessee Bureau of Investigation,
              Tennessee Department of Health, Communicable and Environmental; Disease
              Services, Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency, BioVentures Inc, Esoterx Center
              of Innovative Research, Orchid Cellmark, Tennessee Biotechnology Association.
              The program includes: establishment of training programs; provision of 
              equipment and materials; development of laboratories for teachers to encourage
              the use of hands-on biotechnology exercises in science curricula; establishment
              of internships for teachers to work in the partner companies; establishment of
              a seminar course for students and company employees in biotechnology; and
              enhancement of biotechnological growth by developing and applying novel sensors
              in microarray technology.

Currently there are more than 50 biotech companies
              in the region that have started with research done at the regional
              universities.  This proposed effort will provide the workforce to make and keep
              these companies competitive in the biotech industry.  It will also provide the
              workforce for additional jobs created by the regional university research
              enterprise.  These jobs will have considerably higher salaries than the
              traditional jobs in the region. The academic institutions involved serve
              traditionally underrepresented groups.  In addition minority students will be
              involved in this effort.         

