Title       : COST-IST (EU)/NSF (USA) Workshop on Networking; September/October 2002, Crete,
               Greece
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0227595

Award Number: 0227595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim Matta matta@cs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              We  propose  to  organize  a  joint COST-IST (EU) / NSF (USA)  workshop  on 
              Networking in September/October 2002,  in  Crete, Greece.  There are two main 
              objectives  for  the  proposed  workshop.  The  first  is  to  discuss  and 
              try  to  shed  some more  light  into key, new and upcoming networking
              technologies by focusing on the driving fundamental aspects and principles. A
              better understanding could help better steer  the upcoming advancements with
              the expected benefits in reduced complexity, improved performance and enhanced
              services.  
 
The second main objective is to give the opportunity to the
              networking communities in  Europe  and USA  to get  together and  have a
              first-hand exposure to the advancements and strengths in the other side of the
              Atlantic.  The targeted balance in the participation of  researchers from  the
              two sides  of the Atlantic will help achieve this cross-fertilization
              objective, bring the benefits  to  both communities  and  help advance the
              technology. 
 
As funding is a major driving force, another objective of this
              workshop is to provide a forum that  could help the workshop-sponsoring 
              funding  agencies from the EU  and USA identify the key and required networking
              technologies and direct their funding accordingly.  
 
Key networking areas
              represented by the best researchers from EU and USA will be targeted. The focus
              of the proposed workshop may be divided into three broad themes: 
 
 Internet
              Modeling and Control 
 Overlay Networks, Content Distribution Networks,
              Peer-to-Peer 
 Broadband Wireless, Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks, Hybrid Networks
              
The  precise focus will be determined by  the  makeup of  the  participants. 
              Program  officers  from COST-IST  and ANIR-NSF are  expected to attend the
              workshop.  The General Workshop Chair is Ioannis Stavrakakis, University of
              Athens. The Program Co-chairs  are  Ioannis  Stavrakakis,  Ibrahim Matta  (the 
              PI) and Michael Smirnov (Fraunhofer  FOKUS,  Germany). Ibrahim Matta will
              handle the NSF funding and Michael Smirnov  will  handle the COST  funding for
              the workshop. After  the conclusion of the  workshop,  the  organizing 
              committee  will furnish a report to  the 
COST-IST (EU) and ANIR-NSF (USA), 
              and  will  make  it  publicly  available  to participants an  others via the
              workshop site.
