Title       : Late Pleistocene Forager Adaptations at the Gateway to the New World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0227962

Award Number: 0227962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Andrefsky and@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. William Andrefsky, Mr. Jeff Rasic will conduct
              research for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze excavated lithic
              collections from	ten sites in northwestern Alaska that date to between 10,000
              and 11,000 years ago. With support from the National Science Foundation Mr.
              Rasic will develop two additional data sets. He will conduct excavations at the
              Caribou Crossing site and will geochemically characterize chert artifacts from
              several sites. Preliminary research at the Caribou Crossing site demonstrates
              that it has good spatial integrity, a rich artifact assemblage, and good
              potential for recovery of radiocarbon samples. Stone tools and the debris
              resulting from their modification are all that remain of these early
              hunter-gatherer's camps and are thus an important basis for understanding how
              they lived. Technological, functional and raw material source analyses of these
              artifacts aim to understand how raw materials were procured, how tools were
              manufactured and used, and how they were transported across the landscape. A
              primary goal of the study is to increase understanding of the behavioral and
              ecological factors that conditioned variation among stone tool assemblages, and
              in turn, to learn about the behavioral strategies used by some of the earliest
              inhabitants of northwestern Alaska.

Arctic Alaska is a key region in many
              scenarios describing the initial settlement of the New World, but the Alaskan
              archaeological record remains difficult to incorporate into these arguments
              since few sites are reliably dated beyond 10,000 years ago, and the lifeways of
              these people are poorly known. This research is important for several reasons.
              It will generate and disseminate information in the form of stone tool
              assemblage descriptions, radiocarbon dates, and chert provenance data from a
              series of early Alaskan sites. Models of human adaptive strategies derived from
              this study will facilitate comparisons among early hunter-gatherers in the New
              World and Siberia and illuminate the processes by which the Americas were
              settled. It will also shed light on the diversity of adaptations known for
              hunter-gatherer societies both past and present and assist in the training of a
              promising young scientist.

	 

	



