Title       : The Florida Innovation Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0227833

Award Number: 0227833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion J. Soileau mj@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Keon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas O'Neal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin P. Wanielista  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227833
Soileau	

This award is to the University of Central Florida to
              support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              02060).

Partners
The partners include the University of Central Florida
              (Lead Institution), University of South Florida, Florida Institute of
              Technology, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, City of Orlando,
              City of Tampa, Florida High Technology Corridor Council, Mid Florida Economic
              Development Commission, Museum of Science and Industry, Orange County
              Government, Orlando Science Center, Tampa Bay Technology Partnership, Applied
              Photonics, Central Florida Innovation Corporation, Central Florida Technology
              Partnership, Florida/NASA Incubator, Florida Business Incubator Association,
              Florida Photonics Cluster, Laser Institute of America, Team of Professional
              Internet Entrepreneurs.
The proposed goal is to develop the infrastructure in
              education, technology transfer, commercialization, and entrepreneurship in the
              technology sectors of photonics, space science, and simulation and software.
              
The following activities are proposed: (1) develop education and training
              programs to increase the number and sophistication of technology entrepreneurs
              and high tech entrepreneural start-ups in Florida,  (2) identify commercial
              applications of developed and developing technology and facilitate and foster
              technology transfer, (3) provide special program curriculum and mentors to
              underrepresented groups, and (4) provide infrastructure to enable the
              innovation, technology commercialization and entrepreneural process. 

The
              Central Florida economy is largely dependent on tourism, which provides
              low-paying service sector jobs with limited opportunity for advancement. 
              Minorities constitute a large percentage of the workforce in this industry, but
              they are underrepresented in the technology and entrepreneurship sectors.  The
              program has a strong effort to recruit, educate and train entrepreneurs from
              the regional minority academic institutions.  The current program will create
              new start-up companies and train personnel to work in these companies.  The new
              high-tech jobs will be considerably higher in pay scales for the employees.

              


