Title       : The Biomedical Engineering Partnership Program at FIU: Fostering Technology
               Entrepreneurship, Commercialization, and Clinical Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0227869

Award Number: 0227869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vishwanath Prasad prasadv@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sushil K. Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon R. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Daniels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard T. Schoephoerster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227869
Prasad			

This award is to the Florida International University to
              support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              02060).

Partners
The partners include Florida International University
              (Lead Institution), Baptist Health Systems of South Florida, Beckman Coulter,
              Inc, Bioheart, Inc, Boston Scientific Corporation, Cardis (Johnson & Johnson),
              IDEXX Laboratories, Inc, Medtronic Peripheral Vascular, Miami Cardiac and
              Vascular Institute, Miami Children's Hospital, Mt. Sinai Medical Center, Scion
              Cardio Vascular, Scion International, Inc, Syntheon, LLC, and The beacon
              Council.

The program establishes a permanent infrastructure for
              entrepreneurial and technology transfer activity at Florida International
              University with a focus on the biomedical industry.  The infrastructure
              provides a venue for faculty and students to engage industry to transfer their
              developmental projects to commercialization. The region has a balanced mixture
              of large and small entrepreneurial corporations in the medical device and
              pharmaceutical industries that rank in the top 13 in the nation.  In addition
              to commercialization of the research and development output of the university,
              an activity that will create economic wealth and new jobs, the activities
              supported by this award will educate students in biomedical engineering for the
              workforce for the regional industry.  

The biomedical industry is growing
              very rapidly with large investments of venture capital.  South Florida has
              established this industry as a top priority for economic growth.  The goal of
              this proposal is to provide the workforce to enable the industry to grow in the
              region. The creation of new jobs will have a significant impact on the region.
              Florida International University currently ranks in the top 20 in graduation of
              Hispanic and African American engineers in the nation.  In addition, the
              population of the region is high in underrepresented groups.  Hence, the award
              broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in the technological and
              economic enterprise of the region.

