Title       : International Workshop on Concept Assessments for Nanoelectronics September
               9-14, 2002 in Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0227998

Award Number: 0227998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph K. Cavin cavin@src.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Semiconductor Res Corp
	      P.O. Box 12053
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  277092053    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed workshop will be held as a part of the International Trends in
              Nanotechnology conference. The workshop scope encompasses an assessment of the
              probable impact of nanotechnology research on the deployment of new competitive
              classes of nanoelectronic circuits based on novel materials, processes and
              devices.

It does appear that by 2016 we will be nearing the end of MOS
              evolution and that continued progress in functionality-cost ratios will require
              the invention of replacement technologies. A range of new concepts for devices,
              fabrication techniques, and system architectures are emerging today under the
              general heading of 'nanoelectronics' that may eventually provide the basis for
              continuing the Moore's Law advances in information technologies that we have
              experienced for the last three decades. A wide range of new ideas have been
              proposed for post-CMOS technologies, such as molecular electronics, quantum
              computation etc. Characteristic of any new area, it is difficult to discern
              which of these concepts has the potential to provide a technological basis for
              information technologies of the future. This workshop will seek to identify
              nanoelectronic technologies that have the potential to sustain our tradition of
              exponential improvements in cost-performance.

The meeting will assess the
              status of nanotechnologies from the long-term (10 years from now) perspective
              of semiconductor industry applications. It will bring together industry and
              university researchers to consider the potential of different concepts in
              nanotechnology and their potential impact on semiconductor industry'. The
              workshop objective is to explore and develop both short- and long-range
              strategies for research in nanoelectronic technologies, addressing the
              long-term needs of the microelectronics industry.

The workshop will be
              structured to encourage an active interchange of ideas among participants. Six
              major nanoelectronics themes have been identified, each of which is to be
              addressed by a speaker from industry and a speaker from a university. The
              discussion points and speaker presentations will be compiled and published
              after the workshop. The desired outcome of the workshop will be to visualize
              the direction needed to approach the long-term goals of developing
              nanoelectronic technologies: Where we are and what shall be done today for
              future nanoelectronics research. Can we think of a "nanoelectronics strategic
              plan" with milestones?

