Title       : ToolingNET: A Partnership for Enhancing the Tooling Industry in Indiana through
               the use of Information Technology in the Advanced Manufacturing Sector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0227828

Award Number: 0227828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karthik Ramani ramani@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda B. Katehi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sunil K. Prabhakar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christoph Hoffmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227828
Ramani	

This award is to Purdue University to support the activity
              described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted in response to the
              Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners
              include Purdue University (Lead Institution), Alcoa, Caterpillar, Metal
              Technologies, GT Automation, Kirby Risk, Lear, Office of Technology
              Commercialization, Innovation Realization Lab, and WeToollT, 21st Century
              Research and Technology Fund, Cunningham Pattern & Engineering, American
              Foundry Association, National Tooling and Manufacturers Association, Indiana
              Manufacturers Association, Mid-America Plastics Partners, and Central Indiana
              Corporate Partnership. The goals of the program include the following: (1)
              comprehensively integrate industrial tooling marketplace interactions into a
              streamlined structure and help manage the network using information technology,
              (2) use an advanced three-dimensional communication tool that will use and link
              geometry communication to partner manufacturing firms, and (3) promotion and
              use of advanced tools for rapid manufacturing by partnering with state-wide use
              in the tool and die education programs to enhance the readiness of the
              workforce. 
The program provides an integrated and structured development of
              the tooling/manufacturing capability for the manufacturing firms in Indiana. 
              The infrastructure provides a common platform for all types of information
              exchanges including 3D Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing that will
              streamline and improve efficiency in the design to manufacturing cycle. Faculty
              of community colleges will be trained in advanced manufacturing technology so
              they can train the new workforce. A product informatics system is being
              developed at Purdue and will be made available to the manufacturing firms in
              Indiana. Technical support in rapid tooling, manufacture, and design will be
              provided to small manufacturing firms in the state.  The program combines
              information technology with manufacturing technology and education programs
              that simultaneously develop the manufacturing workforce. 

The aim is to
              increase the efficiency and productivity of the manufacturing sector in
              Indiana.  This will make the manufacturing sector in Indiana more competitive
              and contribute to the economic well-being of the region.  Workforce development
              will provide workers for the growing industry. Underrepresented groups in
              technology-businesses will have a greater access to training and jobs in the
              manufacturing sector.  

