Title       : SGER: Fractal Surface Enhanced Chemical & Biological Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0227473

Award Number: 0227473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir M. Shalaev shalaev@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 7209,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award.  It is in response
              to the "Next Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems"
              Dear Colleague letter, NSF-02-112.  In this project, novel nanostructured
              fractal and fractal-microcavity sensors will be fabricated.  These sensors are
              expected to provide unsurpassed sensitivity in optical detection of molecules
              in minute quantities, including small amounts of biological and chemical
              agents.  The sensors are based on fractal metal-dielectric composites, which
              can support various plasmon modes resulting in giant enhancement of optical
              responses.  Plasmon modes in fractal materials experience localization so that
              the electromagnetic energy is accumulated and concentrated in nanometer-scale
              areas, "hot spots," leading to the strongly enhanced local fields.  The
              resonating areas, hot spots, can act as nano-antennas with different resonance
              frequencies.  Combining the energy-concentrating effects from localized optical
              excitations in plasmonic nano-resonators with micro-resonators based on
              dielectric cavities, can result in record-high enhancement of optical
              phenomena.  This research could lead to new optical sensors with unsurpassed
              sensitivity.  The proposed research, supported by synergistic activities with
              Center for Sensing Science and Technology at Purdue will integrate cutting-edge
              research in sensor science and technology with top-flight education and
              training.  

This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award. 
              It is in response to the "Next Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and
              Sensing Systems" Dear Colleague letter, NSF-02-112.  In this project, novel
              nanostructured fractal and fractal-microcavity sensors will be fabricated.
              These sensors are expected to provide unsurpassed sensitivity in optical
              detection of molecules in minute quantities, including small amounts of
              biological and chemical agents.  The sensors are based on fractal
              metal-dielectric composites, which can support various plasmon modes resulting
              in giant enhancement of optical responses.  Plasmons represent collective
              oscillations of electrons in metals and metal-dielectric composites and they
              are known to be a major reason for surface-enhanced spectroscopy, in which
              plasmonic nanostructures lead to many orders of magnitude increases in the
              sensitivities of optical spectroscopies.  Plasmon modes in fractal materials
              experience localization so that the electromagnetic energy is accumulated and
              concentrated in nanometer-scale areas, "hot spots," leading to the strongly
              enhanced local fields.  Combining the energy-concentrating effects from
              localized optical excitations in plasmonic fractal modes with micro-resonators
              based on dielectric cavities can result in record-high enhancement of optical
              phenomena. This research can eventually lead to developing new optical sensors
              with unsurpassed sensitivity.  The research, supported by synergistic
              activities with the Center for Sensing Science and Technology at Purdue will
              integrate cutting-edge research in sensor science and technology with
              top-flight education and training. 


