Title       : Enhancing the Emerging Biotechnology Cluster in Southeastern Ohio
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0227907

Award Number: 0227907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Wight wight@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Bantle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Blazyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Goetz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Kopchick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227907
Wight	

This award is to Ohio University to support the activity
              described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response to the
              Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060).  The partners
              include Ohio University (Lead Institution), Intherthyr Corporation, DiAthegen
              LLC, GeneBact Biotechnologies, Battelle Memorial Institute, Diagnostic Hybrids
              Inc, Sen Med Medical Ventures, Athenian Venture Partners, Adena Ventures,
              Appalachian Regional Commission, Edison BioTechnology Center, Governor's Office
              for Appalachia, Governor's Regional Economic Development Office. The goals of
              the program include accelerating and enhancing the growth of the biotechnology
              sector in southeast Ohio region, accelerating the growth of existing companies
              and increasing their probability of success, creating the technology pipeline
              and creating new companies, sustaining the regional cluster, and keeping the
              companies in the region. New start-up companies based on intellectual property
              derived from the Ohio University research programs will be launched and
              nurtured.  Training of the workforce for the biotech industry is a top
              priority.  Partnering with existing corporate and other private and public
              partners will form a strong nucleus to form and retain start-up companies in
              biotech in the region.

The aim of the program is to increase the number of
              new sources of higher-paying jobs, and to mobilize the underrepresented
              populations in the region by providing education, research and technology and
              business support for new start-up biotech companies.  The economy in
              southeastern Ohio is among the worst in Appalachia.  
 

