Title       : The Women's Entrepreneurial Life Science Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0227936

Award Number: 0227936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel A. Musa s-musa@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lydia Villa-Komaroff  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sarah L. Sykora  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0227936
Villa-Komaroff		

This award is to Northwestern University to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              02060).
The partners include Northwestern University (Lead Institution),
              Illinois Technology Enterprise Corporation and the Women's Business Development
              Center, Evanston Township High School, Truman Community College, Young Women's
              Leadership Charter School of Chicago, Abbott Laboratories, Accelerated Business
              Solutions, Biotron Group, Counseltech, cue BIOtech, Piper Rudnick LLC,
              Springboard Enterprises, Wellspring Communications, Women Advancing Bioscience,
              Association for Women in Science. The program will increase the participation
              of young women of all backgrounds in science and innovation and document the
              partnership's activities so that similar partnerships interested in
              women-focused life science economic development can benefit from the
              experiences and lessons learned.

The program has the following goals: (1)
              increase the number of women-owned and managed life science start-ups in the
              Chicago region, (2) increase the number of women receiving SBIR and STTR
              awards, (3) increase the percentage of venture capital raised by women-owned
              businesses, (4) create wealth through additional high paying life sciences
              technology jobs, (5) broaden under-served young women's life science knowledge
              and participation, and (6) create a documentation study emphasizing the people,
              tools, and activities needed by similar partnerships interested in related
              activities.

There will be an increase in the number of new sources of
              higher-paying jobs, especially among underrepresented populations in the
              region, by creating woman-owned and managed life science companies.
 


