Title       : Northwest Alliance for Access to Science, Technology, Engineering, and
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0227995

Award Number: 0227995
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: James Powlik                            
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3986606            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheryl Burgstahler sherylb@cac.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anjan Bose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denice D. Denton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The University of Washington (UW) requests funding for the Northwest
              Alliance for Access
to Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
              to increase the quantity and
quality of people with disabilities in STEM
              careers.
Intellectual Merit and Qualifications of Partners
The lead agency is
              the UW's award-winning DO-IT (Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking
and
              Technology) program, which has conducted successful NSF PPD projects since
              1992.
Regional site teams at the two largest STEM research institutions in the
              State of Washington, the
UW and Washington State University (WSU), will
              collaborate with K-12 and postsecondary
schools, employers, and leading STEM
              research institutions in neighboring states - the
University of Idaho, the
              University of Oregon, Oregon State University, and the University of
Alaska in
              Anchorage and Fairbanks. The project will partner with ENTRY POINT! to place
              STEM
postsecondary students with disabilities in paid internships. It will
              collaborate with MESA
(Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement) adapting
              for students with disabilities the
hands-on science activities and teacher
              training strategies it uses with racial/ethnic minority and
female students.
              The Alliance builds on established collaborations and brings together
              practices
that have proven successful individually, to create a unique,
              comprehensive set of interventions.
Objectives and examples of interventions
              include:
1. The Northwest Alliance will increase the number of students with
              disabilities pursuing
STEM academic programs and careers. Interventions:
              Motivational college/career transition
and STEM fairs for precollege students
              and STEM academic/career activities for college
students that identify
              participants for the AccessSTEM Team in objective 2 interventions.
2. The
              Alliance will provide on-going support and encourage high school and
              college
students with disabilities who show interest and aptitude in STEM with
              peer and
mentor interaction, work experiences, and other activities as they
              transition to college,
graduate school, and employment. Interventions:
              Students join the AccessSTEM Team to
engage in an on-line community,
              mentoring, fields trips, research, paid internships, and other
activities to
              assure their success in STEM careers and promote the success of others.
3. The
              Alliance will provide precollege educators and staff with strategies, tools
              and
support to create more inclusive programs for students with disabilities,
              where they are
encouraged to pursue STEM studies and careers. Interventions:
              Training and curriculum
materials through established networks of MESA,
              Educational Services Districts, teacher
training programs, and professional
              organizations; provide educators with opportunities to
work with students who
              have disabilities.
4. The Alliance will help STEM postsecondary faculty,
              support staff, counselors, and
employers fully include students with
              disabilities in their courses and programs and create
accessible facilities
              and electronic resources. Interventions: Opportunities for faculty to
receive
              training and work with students with disabilities in research; assistance in
              making
facilities, equipment, distance learning, and Web pages
              accessible.
Each intervention is associated with measurables that provide
              evidence of effectiveness. The
National Center on Postsecondary Educational
              Supports (NCSPES) will evaluate project
outcomes and impacts, conduct research
              on factors that promote success for students with
disabilities, describe
              replication models, and help disseminate results.
Broader Impacts Resulting
              from the Northwest Alliance
Collaborations with MESA and other programs will
              broaden the participation of racial/ethnic
minorities and females with
              disabilities in STEM. Wide distribution of a replication model,
              curriculum
materials, and other project products and creation of a searchable
              Knowledge Base on the project
Web site will enhance scientific and
              technological understanding and maximize project impact.
Project outcomes will
              benefit society by making STEM opportunities available to all citizens
              and
increasing the number of STEM professionals and leaders who have
              disabilities.
