Title       : Teachers Assisting Students to Excel in Learning Mathematics (TASEL-M)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0227303

Award Number: 0227303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Hamos                          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6483054            (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Pagni   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dianne L. DeMille  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Howell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1792      MSP-Targeted Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Teachers Assisting Students to Excel in Learning Mathematics (TASEL-M) has been
              developed by a partnership that includes California State University-Fullerton,
              the Orange County Department of Education, Orange Unified School District,
              Fullerton Joint Union High School District, and Garden Grove Unified School
              District.  TASEL-M is a standards-based, data-driven program designed to
              improve students' academic performance in mathematics by giving their teachers
              the knowledge and tools to accurately diagnose students' deficiencies, assess
              their progress, adjust the curriculum and pedagogy, and transform the
              departmental culture to maximize student learning in mathematics.  

The
              partnership seeks to improve the mathematics performance of 14,000 students
              (approximately 70% of these students are from underrepresented minority groups)
              at four low-performing high schools and seven feeder middle schools.  TASEL-M
              focuses on these students' ninety mathematics teachers, roughly one-third of
              whom have emergency or supplemental credentials and neither majored or minored
              in mathematics.  Strategies employed to raise student achievement include:
              using data to get results; improving classroom assessment; teacher coaching and
              mentoring; and increasing pedagogical content knowledge.  The nature and form
              of the comprehensive professional development activities are expected to change
              administrative practice in the school and in the classroom, effecting a
              cultural change that creates a sustainable climate of improvement and
              achievement.



