Title       : Synthesis of Carbon Nanotubes into Large Scale Functional Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9871947

Award Number: 9871947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $507308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongjie Dai hdai@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Calvin Quate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Kenny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1084,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871947
Dai
Carbon nanotube research has been an extremely active field over
              the past years.
Nanotube materials have unique structural, electrical and
              mechanical properties, which makes them promising for a range of projected
              scientific and technological applications.  However, significant future efforts
              are required in order to realize these promises.  This research proposes
              obtaining large-scale arrayed nanotube probe tips and sensors with advanced
              functions for scanning probe microscopy applications.  We also propose
              obtaining electrical circuits based on arrayed nanotubes networks.  The overall
              motivation is to enable a series of novel nanotube devices useful for
              scientific and technological applications.

The immediate research goals and
              activities of this proposed research will include
(1) developing controlled
              chemical vapor deposition methods to synthesize high quality and yield carbon
              nanotubes materials. (2) Synthesizing nanotubes directly into probe tips and
              cantilevers for scanning probe microscopy applications.  Our approaches will
              involve combining chemical synthesis (CVD) with top-down nanofabrication
              methods (such as ebeam lithography).  The integration of carbon nanotube tips
              into arrayed AFM cantilevers could enable a powerful parallel AFM imaging and
              nanofabrication system. (3) Fabrication and characterization of A-FM
              cantilevers using individual carbon nanotubes.  A defect free carbon nanotube
              is a perfect one-dimensional crystal that has the highest Young's Modulus among
              all materials.  There is no intrinsic structural mechanism expected in
              nanotubes for mechanical energy dissipation.  Therefore, a nanotube can be
              utilized as a cantilever to measure extremely small forces.  Methods for
              fabrication and mechanical characterizations of nanotube based cantilevers are
              proposed. (4) The physics of carbon nanotube electronic devices will be
              studied.  We will start the construction of nanotube electrical circuits at the
              nanotube synthesis stage.  Improving electrical contacts to individual
              nanotubes by chemical means will be a major focus in this proposed
              research.

The proposed research will be highly interdisciplinary involving
              synergetic groups at Stanford University (in Chemistry, Physics and Applied
              Physics, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering).  We will also be interacting
              closely with our collaborators at NASA Ames Research Center, KLA-Tencor, Park
              Scientific and other industrial companies.  This collaboration has already been
              initiated recently and some promising results are being generated.  The results
              include (1) the demonstration that carbon nanotube tips provide a solution to
              the long-standing tip-wear problem in A-FM based nanolithography. (2) Synthesis
              of bulk single-walled nanotube materials using new chemical vapor deposition
              (CVD) approaches.  And (3) CVD synthesis of nanotubes on flat surfaces
              containing catalytic particles patterned by nanofabrication techniques.  Our
              collaboration will represent an ideal opportunity to bring together scientists
              and engineers in different disciplines and institutions; to merge bottom-up
              chemical synthesis with topdown nanofabrication; and to allow students in
              different departments to work together and receive broader academic and
              research training.  Thus, the proposed research will be of fundamental and
              practical significance and will accelerate the impact of nanostructures on
              real-world problems.
  ***

