Title       : Acquisition of Core Logging Equipment for the Antarctic Marine Geology Research
               Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9871166

Award Number: 9871166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Janecek janecek@gly.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherwood W. Wise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9871166  This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs and the
              Office of Science and Technology Infrastructure at NSF, supports acquisition of
              equipment for the Antarctic Marine Geology Research Facility (AMGRF) at Florida
              State University (FSU).  AMGRF is supported by NSF as the marine sediment core
              repository for the US Antarctic Program (USAP) and is the largest repository of
              Southern Ocean piston cores in the world.  AMGRF has been conducting marine
              geological research and receiving, describing, and archiving cores for over 30
              years.  AMGRF holdings include more than 20,000 m of cored sediment (over 6500
              cores).  The Facility also archives more than 2000 m of rotary-cored material
              from programs such as the Dry Valley Drilling Project, Cenozoic Investigations
              of the Ross Sea, and the current Cape Roberts Project.  This unique collection
              of sediments is especially valuable today because of the Cenozoic
              paleoenvironmental record it preserves for the largely inaccessible Antarctic
              continent.  During the past decade scientific attention has focused
              increasingly on the role of Antarctica in the evolution of global Cenozoic
              climate, and especially as it pertains to research about global warming.  AMGRF
              provides three primary functions for the Antarctic and Earth Science community:
              (1) Service - Core descriptions, sampling, and technical support to Principal
              Investigators. (2) Research - Equipment and space for in-house and visiting
              investigators. (3) Education - Workshops and short courses for investigators,
              training for graduate and undergraduate students, and lectures and tours for
              students of all ages as well as the general public.  A primary product of AMGRF
              activities are detailed core descriptions of deep-sea cores recovered by the
              USAP.  These descriptions, published as AMGRF reports, are used by
              investigators around the world to evaluate the utility of specific cores for
              their research programs.  In addition, AMGRF provides necessary research
              equipment and technical support for  in-house and external USAP Principal
              Investigators and their research teams who come to the Facility to study and
              sample in detail the cores they have acquired on USAP vessels.      Acquisition
              of a multi-sensor core logging system and a modern research-grade light
              microscope with imaging capabilities will allow AMGRF to significantly improve
              basic work on core descriptions and to keep pace with modern methods in core
              analysis and curation.  This equipment will give Antarctic and Earth Science
              researchers who use the Facility the necessary tools to rapidly and objectively
              analyze the new piston and shallow drill cores that are sent to the AMGRF each
              year.  It will provide several non-destructive modes of analysis that will
              eliminate excessive sampling for purposes of core characterization.  In
              addition, researchers will be able to re-analyze many of the thousands of cores
              already stored at the Facility at a resolution not previously possible.  This
              equipment will serve the needs of both FSU investigators and those of the wider
              community in the US and other countries for many years to come.  The equipment
              will also benefit students from FSU and from other institutions who need
              exposure to, and training in state-of-the art equipment for conducting modern
              research in marine geology.  It will provide a technical infrastructure that is
              complementary to and worthy of the unique collection of cores archived at the
              Facility.  The equipment will greatly enhance the value of the collections and
              provide a higher scientific return on the 30-year investment that has gone into
              the acquisition and maintenance of the sediment cores.  ***
