Title       : West Virginia EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2001    
File        : a9871948

Award Number: 9871948
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Hill phill@wvgot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Calzonetti  (Principal Investigator former)
              Frances L. Van Scoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871948  Calzonetti  West Virginia EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement  The West
              Virginia EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement with the National  Science Foundation's
              EPSCoR Program will provide funding and  support for West Virginia to build
              academic strength in two areas  of importance to the state and nation: (1) high
              performance  computing, communications, and software; and (2) identification 
              technologies.  These areas were recommended by the West Virginia  EPSCoR
              Committee and represent areas of special consideration by  the West Virginia
              Science and Technology Advisory Council.  The  high performance computing,
              communications, and software initiative  involves a statewide computer science
              initiative to strengthen  computer science instruction throughout West
              Virginia, a computing  technology initiative to provide the latest computing
              technology  for research applications, a scientific computing initiative to 
              develop more high performance computing applications in science and 
              engineering in West Virginia, and a business and industry  initiative to
              improve the use of high performance computing and  communications technology by
              West Virginia businesses.  The  identification technologies thrust builds upon
              recent EPSCoR and  state investments at Marshall University by providing new
              core  facilities in the College of Science to encourage collaborative  research
              and research training with faculty members in the School  of Medicine.  At West
              Virginia University, investments in  identification technologies research
              infrastructure will provide  necessary expertise in mathematics, computer
              science, and  electrical engineering for the university to build a program in 
              these disciplines.  West Virginia EPSCoR, housed within the  Governor's Office
              of Technology, builds academic capability which  is related to the state plan
              for science and technology and relates  to other statewide development
              initiatives.  Through this award,  West Virginia will develop academic strength
              in these two R&D areas  which will provide  a foundation for future
