Title       : Partnership in Nanotechnology: Robotic Assembly of Functional Nanstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9871775

Award Number: 9871775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $708726             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aristides A. G. Requicha requicha@lipari.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce E. Koel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Will  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anupam Madhukar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9216,9218,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9871775  Requicha, Aristides A.  Koel, Bruce E.  University of Southern
              California    Partnerships in Nanotechnology:  Robotic Assembly of Functional
              Nanostructures      Control over the structure of matter at the nanometer scale
              may revolutionize science and technology,  depending on the extent to which
              nanostructures can be assembled for specific functions.  The thrust of this
              project is the development of  a process for producing functional
              nanostructures.  The process is based on manipulation of colloidal
              nanoparticles with an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) under program control. 
              This process can be used by itself or to complement others,  for example to
              modify a regular array of particles laid down by self-assembly or to construct
              a template for self-assembly.    The primary application motivating this
              project  is fabrication of an information storage device,  the nanoCD,  in
              which digital information is encoded in patterns of nanoparticles.  However, 
              the resulting processes will be generic and will have a wide  range of
              potential applications.  The research will proceed along two directions.  The
              first is the development of manipulation strategies and associated software, 
              using either known robotics techniques or inventing new ones.  Nanoassembly
              must be automated because the number of elementary operations required in most
              assemblies will be enormous.    The second research direction  focuses on
              materials and phenomena at the nanometer scale.  Issues  to be addressed
              include the substrates,  tips,  and nanoparticles to be used,  and the physics
              and chemistry of particles manipulation.  Initial efforts are aimed at
              understanding the mechanics of moving nanoparticles with an AFM tip and the
              influence of process parameters.  Initially,  silicon substrates and colloidal
              nano particles will be investigated,  to build upon current knowledge.    This
              project results from a proposal submitted in response to NSF98-20,  
              Partnership in Nanotechnology:  Synthesis,  Processing,  and Utilization  of
              Functional Nanostructures (FNS).
