Title       : WWW Ethics Center for Engineering and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9871169

Award Number: 9871169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline A. Whitbeck caw9@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 2840,9178,9218,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This support will maintain and continue to develop the World Wide Web Ethics
              Center for Engineering & Science and plan for the expansion of its use and
              usefulness.  A diverse student team under the direction of the present
              principal investigator, who is advised by a-distinguished advisory board, will
              continue to carry on the work of the Center in the renewal-period.  Conference
              activities will be supported through Case Western-Reserve's Baker-Nord Center
              for the Humanities. In the twenty-eight months of its-existence the Center has
              grown rapidly into a substantial and well-organized-site of over 1,500 pages. 
              The following sections are available from the main page:  Research Ethics,
              Ethical Codes and Guidelines, Moral Leaders, Solving Problems, Ethics in a
              Corporate Setting, Diversity, Essays, and Instructional Resources.  Also on
              that page are links to a keyword index, a bibliography, a glossary of terms,
              and an organization/acronym list, as well as information about the site and
              other sites on science and engineering ethics, and a search engine.  Use has
              doubled three times since May 1995, and the time interval required for-doubling
              continues to decrease.  The Center now averages over 1,500 requests for pages
              per day and 6,000 to 7,500 distinct hosts access the Center each month.--Some
              of the objectives for the renewal period are similar to previous
              accomplishments, such-as:--operational improvements to further facilitate
              response and-reliability of the site;-updating of the bibliography, the
              indexes, and the keywords, and further linking of the-glossary to new and
              existing pages, and the addition of other hypermedia enhancements; ongoing
              response to user requests and comments;-creation of new cases, essays and
              commentaries.--The special objectives for this renewal period are to develop a
              plan for the overall focus of the Center, for evaluation, and for the
              development of on-going support.  Novel objectives for the renewal period are
              those designed to introduce scholars and other-potential contributors to a more
              active role in creating educational resources and exchanging ideas-through this
              unique Ethics Center.  These initiatives will meld modalities familiar to
              academics with-exploitation of the special capabilities of the WWW.  Prominent
              among these initiatives will be-jointly sponsored conferences on topics in
              science and engineering ethics, the proceedings of-which will be made available
              in the WWW Ethics Center.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
