Title       : Acquisition of a Magnetic-Sector, High-Resolution Inductively-Coupled Plasma
               Mass Spectrometer for the University of Texas at Austin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9871301

Award Number: 9871301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay L. Banner banner@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd B. Housh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Connelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip C. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871301  Banner    This  Major Research Instrumentation Program grant  provides 
              funds  for  one-half  of  the  cost  of  a  high-resolution,  magnetic sector
              inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometer  (ICP-MS)  for the Department of
              Geological Sciences  at  The  University of Texas at Austin.  This instrument
              will be used  in  conjunction with existing analytical clean room and mass 
              spectrometer  facilities for high-sensitivity elemental  and  isotopic 
              analysis of rock, mineral, water,  and  biological  samples.   The  high
              temperature (up to  10,000  K)  of  the  inductive heating and the rapid and
              complete introduction of  the  sample  to the ionizing environment result  in 
              a  high  efficiency of dissociation and ionization for most  species.  The 
              coupling of the high ionization efficiency of  the  ICP  source  with  the 
              recent  improvements  in  background  and  resolution  afforded by a
              double-focusing,  magnetic  sector  analyzer,  will  provide  previously
              unavailable  analytical  capabilities  at  UT  Austin.   These  capabilities 
              include  detection  limits in the part-per-quadrillion  to  part-per-  trillion
               range for many elements, which will open many  new  avenues  to  be pursued in
              our ongoing research programs  in  reconstructing records of climate change,
              the development of  sedimentary  basins  and aquifers, mineral  weathering, 
              and  magmatic    evolution.     These   new    avenues    include 
              investigations of low-level trace metal concentrations  such  as  the  rare 
              earth elements in natural waters and  labeled  particles;   high-spatial 
              resolution  chemical   and   U-Th  radiometric  age data on groundwater mineral
               deposits;  the  biological control on mineral weathering; and trace  element 
              substitution in igneous mineral phases.    It is anticipated that this
              analytical facility will be used  for  research  and  research training by 
              faculty,  graduate  students,   and  post-doctoral  research  fellows   in  
              the  geological, biological, and chemical sciences  at  UT  Austin  and  other
              universities and research institutions in  Texas.  Currently  funded  and 
              future research  efforts  will  take  advantage of the new analytical
              capabilities offered by  the  ICP-MS technology.  ***
