Title       : Computational Studies of Dynamical Phenomena in Nanoscale Ferromagnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2001   
File        : a9871455

Award Number: 9871455
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Arne Rikvold rikvold@csit.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Novotny  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1339,9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871455  Novotny  This is a theoretical and computational research grant which 
              aims to explore the properties of magnets on the nanometer  scale using high
              performance computers and state-of-the-art  algorithms.  Advances in the past
              decade have opened up the  possibility of understanding and designing materials
              at the  nanometer scale.  At the same time there have been  tremendous advances
              in computational algorithms and computer  architectures which make it possible
              to realistically study  these materials.    The specific study of magnetic
              nanoparticles and ultrathin  films is of importance for reliable
              ultrahigh-density  magnetic storage.  In this case a single bit of information 
              will be stored in a single-domain nanoscale magnetic  particle.  Consequently,
              it is vitally important to  understand the stability of these domains, their
              dynamical  properties, and their behavior at finite temperatures.  This 
              requires intensive large-scale numerical simulations of  realistic models of
              technologically important magnetic  materials.    This grant will develop novel
              algorithms for hysteresis and  thermally driven magnetizatin reversal models of
              nanoscale  ferromagnets.  The materials objective of this research will  be to
              improve our understanding of dynamical phenomena in  real ferromagnetic
              materials in restricted geometries at  nonzero temperatures.  The materials to
              be modeled include  ultrathin films, whiskers and nanometer-sized single-domain
               particles.  The models to be used include the clock-and  continuum-spin models
              with finite spin anisotropy, effects  of magnetostatic interactions, systems
              with defects and  quenched disorder, models of ferrimagnets, and quantum spin 
              models.    To study these models, novel algorithms will be further  developed. 
              These include the Projective Dynamics and the  Monte Carlo with Absorbing
              Markov Chain algorithms.  It is  also proposed to initiate large-scale studies
              of continuum-  spin models using, and further developing, Langevin 
              micromagnetic methods f or finite-temperature simulations.    Successful
              completion of this research will lead to a better  understanding of the
              dynamics of magnetization switching in  real nanoscale magnetic materials.  The
              algorithms developed  should have broad application.  %%%  This is a
              theoretical and computational research grant which  aims to explore the
              properties of magnets on the nanometer  scale using high performance computers
              and state-of-the-art  algorithms.  Advances in the past decade have opened up
              the  possibility of understanding and designing materials at the  nanometer
              scale.  At the same time there have been  tremendous advances in computational
              algorithms and computer  architectures which make it possible to realistically
              study  these materials.    The specific study of magnetic nanoparticles and
              ultrathin  films is of importance for reliable ultrahigh-density  magnetic
              storage.  In this case a single bit of information  will be stored in a
              single-domain nanoscale magnetic  particle.  Consequently, it is vitally
              important to  understand the stability of these domains, their dynamical 
              properties, and their behavior at finite temperatures.  This  requires
              intensive large-scale numerical simulations of  realistic models of
              technologically important magnetic  materials.  ***
