Title       : MRI: Integrated Crystal Growth and Wafer Manufacture Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a9871152

Award Number: 9871152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498940             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Larson david.larson@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Imin Kao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon P. Longtin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Dudley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vishwanath Prasad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This major research instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funding for
              setting up a state-of-the-art, integrated crystal growth and wafer manufacture
              research facility at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, which
              will comprise crystal growth, substrate manufacturing, material
              characterization, thermo-optical measurements and process modeling
              laboratories. The major instrumentation to be acquired through this grant
              includes: the next generation high pressure Czochralski crystal growth system
              with provisions for in-situ synthesis of compound materials as well as an
              applied magnetic field; a multizone modified Bridgman furnace with advanced
              instrumentation; an inner diameter wafering saw; a chemo-mechanical polishing
              apparatus; and a 2-axis/3-axis x-ray characterization instrument. They will add
              to the university's existing facilities for experiments, process modeling and
              virtual prototyping. These facilities will help to broaden the talent base
              available to address specific problems in the field of crystal growth and wafer
              manufacturing, and provide access to highly specialized and costly facilities
              that would be otherwise unavailable. The MRI grant will help in further
              expanding the university's research efforts in both basic and applied sciences,
              provide a focus to attract more industrial participation, and help in
              developing a better academic and research environment in this field.       
              With the support of MRI funds, Stony Brook will be able to establish an
              integrated experimental and theoretical, industry/university/federal laboratory
              research program for semiconductor processing at the pre-device level that is
              non-existent in the country. It will allow validation of numerical models that
              cannot be accomplished without conducting carefully-designed experiments for a
              wide range of parameters, feasibility study of new concepts, design
              verification, and test of model-based feed-forward control algorithms. It will
              also serve as a clinic to which industry can visit for intellectual support,
              theoretical modeling and experimental testing. Research on both elemental and
              compound materials will be pursued with results directly applicable to
              electronics, opto-electronics, laser-based devices, photovoltaics, sensors and
              micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS).                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
