Title       : Non-Contact Diagnostics in Manufacturing: A New Precision Measurement Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9871946

Award Number: 9871946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499541             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sameer I. Madanshetty   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hui Meng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gale G. Simons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Hang Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Terry Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871946  Madanshetty  Non-Contact Diagnostics in Manufacturing:  A New Precision
               Measurement Laboratory  The project will establish a new precision measurement
              research  laboratory for the development of a variety of non-contact sensing 
              technologies for application in manufacturing environments. Since  1995, an
              interdisciplinary group of faculty members and graduate  students from several
              departments was formed at Kansas State  University (KSU). The common interest
              of this cohesive group is to  share research results, research equipment, and
              laboratory  experiences in the areas of non-contact sensors, instrumentation, 
              data acquisition, precision positioning, and digital signal  processing.  This
              activity enjoys a great support from the  university, state agencies and
              private industry. In addition to  university and private sector support, the
              Manufacturing Learning  Center (MLC) within the university s Advance
              Manufacturing  Institute(AMI) provides a unique opportunity for conveying
              research  results to the private sector. Based on past experience, one  expects
              that the anticipated new research results will greatly  benefit the small to
              medium-sized progressive manufacturers in  Kansas as well as the nation.  Four
              critical areas of research in  Non-Contact Precision Measurement (NCPM) have
              been identified:   laser sensors, acoustic emission, computer vision, and
              radiation  sensors. These research areas encompass the majority of non-contact 
              diagnostic technologies frequently applied in manufacturing  environments.
              Examples of real-life applications include gear  profile inspection; high
              precision surface structure diagnosis;  non-contact evaluation of nodularity in
              casting irons; and non-  contact printed circuit board plating thickness
              inspection.
