Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Free and Forced Vibrational Analysis of
               Cylindrical and Non-Cylindrical Helical Coil Springs Made of Composite
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a9871129

Award Number: 9871129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erol Sancaktar erol@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871129
Sancaktar

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Erol Sancaktar, Professor of Polymer Engineering at the
              University of Akron, Akron, Ohio and Dr. Vebil Yildirim, Associate Professor,
              and Head of the Mechanics Division at Cukurova University in Adana, Turkey. 
              The two plan to formulate the free and forced vibration problem of cylindrical
              and non-cylindrical helical coil springs made of composite (anisotropic)
              materials, and to perform experiments for verification of the analytical
              results.  The work is expected to ultimately lead to the development of a
              methodology for relating the spring's natural frequency to the design
              parameters of the spring, which include geometrical as well as material
              parameters.  The scientific benefits include the development and testing of
              mathematical and numerical methodology, while the technological benefits
              include the provision of tools for proper design and use of composite springs
              in a variety of products.  The applications may include designing of springs
              for vibration isolation, for energy storage, and for power transmission under
              conditions where weight and chemical resistance are primary concerns.
              

Scope:  This award will allow collaboration between a US scientist and a
              Turkish counterpart who have complementary capabilities.  The US scientist
              brings to the project experience and expertise in mechanical engineering
              design, polymeric and composite materials, manufacturing and testing.  He also
              has access to significant composite manufacturing facilities and testing
              equipment.  The Turkish scientist has experience and expertise in analytical
              and numerical methodology, as evidenced by her impressive publication record. 
              She will be able to utilize the extensive computation facilities at the US
              scientist's laboratory at the University of Akron.  This proposal meets the INT
              objective of increasing US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.

