Title       : Acquisition of Core Equipment for Princeton Cognitive and Behavioral
               Neuroscience Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9871186

Award Number: 9871186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1248931            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia K. Johnson marcia.johnson@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles G. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan D. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1391,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9871186  With instrumentation provided by the National Science Foundation Drs.
              Marcia Johnson,  Jonathan Cohen and Charles Gross will establish a Center for
              Cognitive and Behavioral  Neuroscience (CCBN) at Princeton University. The
              Center will focus on understanding the  brain mechanisms underlying the
              cognitive and motivational processes that control behavior,  as well as the
              development of new methods for cognitive neuroscientific research. Research  at
              all levels, from the molecular to the behavioral, will explore the brain
              mechanisms and  subsystems underlying higher cognitive functions (such as
              attention, memory and decision  making), and the closely-related affective
              processes that govern reward and motivation. Of  central interest are the ways
              in which normal behavior is controlled by higher level goals  and regulated by
              states of arousal, motivation and reward, as well as the ways in which  these
              systems can fail. The Center will couple methods developed during one hundred
              years  of research in physiological and cognitive psychology with important new
              technologies for  investigating the brain. This combination promises to open
              the way to understand functions  of the mind once considered intractable, such
              as how consciousness and thought emerge from  the underlying structures of the
              brain, what biological systems control emotion and  behavior, and what
              chemical, structural and functional anomalies underlie cognitive  deficits and
              psychopathologies. Several complementary approaches will be employed: fMRI and 
              Event-related Potential (ERP) will be used to examine the structure and
              function of the  brain in conscious human subjects performing cognitive tasks
              designed to analyze higher  mental processes. The separate activity of each of
              multiple brain cells can be measured.  Likewise the expression of particular
              molecules in individual brain cells as a result of  engaging in a specific
              behavior will also be determined.    Two closely related laboratories will be
              included in the CCBN.  An Im aging and Modeling  Facility (IMF) will house
              staff and equipment for the analysis of data sets obtained from  fMRI and human
              electrophysiological studies, and for support of neural network simulation 
              modeling. It will also provide facilities for on site ERP, eye movement and
              pupilometric  recording. During the initial phase of Center development, fMRI
              data will be gathered at a  site less than a mile from the Princeton campus and
              through collaborations with  investigators at other institutions. A closely
              related Neurotechnology (NTF) Facility will  support research at the cellular,
              molecular and biochemical level. The facility will house  modern equipment
              necessary to conduct analyses of neural substrates of behavior at all of  these
              levels in a variety of mammals, from rodents to primates.     Central to
              proposed research at the IMF is a SGI Symmetric Multiprocessor and associated 
              workstations, microcomputers, networking and software. ERP and eye movement
              recording  equipment, including a Neuro Scan 128 channel SYN-AMPS will also be
              purchased. A Nikon PCM  2000 confocal microscope system and related computer
              software will be acquired for use by  the NTF. Both graduate and undergraduate
              students will have access to the laboratories and  the instrumentation
              therefore will serve important educational and training functions.
