Title       : MRI: Advanced Processing Equipment for Microelectronics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a9871290

Award Number: 9871290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shubhra Gangopadhyay shubhra.gangopadhyay@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jordan M. Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henryk Temkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871290  Gangopadhyay  The proposed equipment purchase will be a major part of a
              broad interdisciplinary research initiative at Texas Tech University (TTU),
              aimed at the fabrication and characterization of semiconductor materials. 
              Within this larger research theme, the equipment will support work in two major
              focus areas-silicon processing and compound semiconductors-as well as in
              process modeling.  The research effort in these areas at TTU is progressing
              with high levels of private sector partnership.  Both graduate and
              undergraduate students are actively involved in this work.  In addition to
              research, the equipment will be used for education and training of students in
              two graduate programs--the Master's Program with Internship (MSI) in the
              College of Arts and Sciences, and the Master's Program in Semiconductor Product
              Engineering (SPE) in the College of Engineering.  The MSI program is an
              NSF-supported curriculum.  The required nine to twelve months of internship are
              supported by major semiconductor manufacturers.  The SPE program is entirely
              supported by major semiconductor companies.    In this proposal the PIs request
              funding for one system.  This system is a modem R&D cluster tool that will
              allow them to significantly improve and expand the range of etching and
              deposition processes needed in their research effort.  The cluster tool
              consists of two electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) plasma chambers, one for
              large area (6-8 inch wafers) deposition and the other for etching.  This
              instrument is manufactured by PlasmaQuest.  This company has been selected for
              a number of reasons.  Their equipment suits our needs and their prices are very
              competitive.  More importantly, PlasmaQuest products are used by our industrial
              collaborators at Texas Instruments and Raytheon.  Compatibility of equipment is
              important in joint process development and the subsequent technology transfer. 
              It is also important in our student-training activities, including industrial
              co-ops and mentoring.  Finally, PlasmaQue st has an excellent reputation for
              developing various processes for microelectronics in collaboration with
              university and industry researchers, and is known for encouraging dissemination
              of the results.    The equipment requested will have a major impact on research
              activities in Si and compound semiconductors.  While the two research areas
              appear quite separate there are in fact a number of synergies.  For instance,
              deposition of AIN on Si appears to be of interest both to the compound
              semiconductors and Si communities.  Similarly, low damage etching of GaN would
              not he possible without the expertise developed in the etching of Si.  While
              equipment sharing rises the possibility of cross-contamination, they believe
              both research areas will benefit.  their modeling work is relevant to both
              semiconductor programs.  The goal of this effort is to develop reliable
              numerical simulations of etching and deposition, which are then to be used in
              process analysis, design, and control.  ***
