Title       : Acquisition of a Field-Emission Energy-Filtering Transmission Electron
               Microscope for Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9871119

Award Number: 9871119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Murray Gibson j-gibson@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray D. Twesten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ian M. Robertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871119-
Gibson
A state-of-the-art field-emission gun transmission electron
              micro-scope (FEG/TEM) which is capable of energy filtering the diffracted
              electrons and which will be used for an integrated research program at the
              University of Illinois will be acquired using funds from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program.  This instrument will be lo-cated in the Center for
              Microanalysis of Materials (CMM) located in the Frederick Seitz Materials
              Research Laboratory (FSMRL); an interdisciplinary research department focused
              on the fields of Materials Science and Engineering, Condensed Matter Physics,
              Materials Chemistry, and Biomaterials.  The FSMRL has a rich tradition of
              enabling cross-disciplinary research involving about 60 faculty research groups
              distributed among seven academic departments.  Access to an FEG/TEM is critical
              to the success of several very specific projects at the University of Illinois.
               Projects on the synthesis of catalytic materials, epitaxial nanostructures in
              semiconductors, the chemistry and structure of interfaces, the structure of
              ball-milled amorphous solids, and corrosion will take advantage of the unique
              capabilities of the proposed instrument for Z-contrast imaging, nanoscale
              chemical analysis, energy filtering, and electron holography.  The electron
              holographic capabilities of the proposed FEG/TEM and its ability to image the
              electrostatic fields associated with ferroelectric domains will enable studies
              of the microstructure, domain structure, and domain switching of ferroelectric
              thin films.  The energy filtering and STEM capabilities of the proposed
              instrument are critical to a project on imaging of biological structures such
              as chromatin fibers.   In addition to the research projects, the instrument
              will be used for many other graduate student research projects in the context
              of its operation by the CMM.  This mode of operation will have a major impact
              on the graduate research and educa-tional programs as indicated by the fact
              that more than 157 graduate students have been educated in the use of TEM
              methods in the past five years and more than 469 have used the CMM TEMs during
              that same period.  
%%%
The field-emission gun transmission electron
              micro-scope that will be acquired using funds from the National Science
              Foundation's Major Research Instrumentation program will be integrated into the
              CMM and will see extensive annual use by an estimated 80 users of the TEM
              facilities of the CMM.  This facility supports projects that involve many
              faculty and graduate students at the University of Illinois.  
***



