Title       : Multiresolution Data Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9871859

Award Number: 9871859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284796             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Daniel Bergeron rdb@cs.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. McHugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The sheer size of modern scientific data presents significant bottlenecks that
              limit the value of the data. Fortunately, a scientist often only needs access
              to small subsets of the data at its full resolution. The identification of
              these "interesting" subsets is part of the data exploration process. An
              effective data exploration environment for very large data sets requires a
              hierarchy of data representations at increasingly finer resolution, along with
              an accompanying "error" measure that helps to identify the authenticity of each
              representation level. One example of research that could benefit significantly
              from such a representation is the study of clear air turbulence in the
              atmosphere. Using techniques of computational fluid dynamics (cfd), direct
              numerical simulations resolve both the smooth wave motion over most of the
              domain, and the turbulence, which occurs in small patches. These turbulent
              patches are important for airplane travel, satellite communications, and
              environmental studies. Simulations such as require hours of supercomputer time
              and produce far more output data than can be "downloaded" and visualized
              without time-consuming trial-and-error. This project aims at developing tools
              to transform such data into a multiresolution hierarchy with error measures and
              to provide associated interactive access and rendering functionality. Such an
              environment will provide researchers with interactive access to an order of
              magnitude more data than is otherwise possible. Such access will allow
              researchers to interpret their data in far less time than is now possible, and
              as a result, they will be able to run their simulations at ever more accurate
              resolutions. 
http://www.cs.unh.edu/mdr/


