Title       : Acquisition of Research Equipment for the First GIS Center in Southeastern Idaho
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9871003

Award Number: 9871003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith T. Weber webekeit@isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin W. House  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      
	      Pocatello, ID  83209    208/236-3277

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1189,9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This award provides support to complete the  establishment of the first
              GIS (Geographic Information  Systems) Training and Research Center in
              Southeastern Idaho.  GIS provides users with the ability to acquire, organize, 
              manipulate and analyze spatial data through the use of  computer systems. Or,
              more simply, data are collected and  plotted onto digital "maps," where it can
              be analyzed, or  manipulated in modeling exercises. Very accurate spatial  data
              are obtainable, to within +/- lcm, through  triangulation with geostationary
              satellites. GIS technology  has a wide array of research applications,
              including such  fields as Archeology, Anthropology, Biological Sciences, 
              Geology, Ecology, and many more. In many fields, training in  GIS technology is
              becoming a competitive requirement for  graduates seeking jobs.       At the
              same time, southeastern Idaho is an ideal  laboratory for both researchers and
              students to learn the  applications of GIS. Idaho, as a state, is very
              concerned  with environmental issues, and protecting its natural  resources. It
              has remarkable geographic diversity, including  the Snake River Plain Hot Spot
              Track and one of the deepest  canyons on the North American Continent. It also
              has the  largest designated wilderness area in the lower 48 states.  As a
              result of these and many other factors, Idaho is  extremely rich in
              biodiversity, and much of it is relatively  untrammeled by humans. All of this
              diversity -physical,  biological, environmental--requires study if protective 
              measures are to work.         The equipment obtained through this award will 
              increase research opportunities for Idaho State University  Faculty, Graduate
              and Undergraduate students from a wide  range of fields. It will also be
              heavily utilized by  business, industry and government agencies and
              organizations  (from the local level to the federal). The center will be an 
              important tool for the study and maintenance of Idaho's  natural environment.
