Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for a Comprehensive Agricultural Genomics Laboratory at
               Purdue University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9871040

Award Number: 9871040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $876500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Bennetzen maize@bilbo.bio.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory B. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca W. Doerge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     Funds are requested for instrumentation needed to  establish a
              Comprehensive Agricultural Genomics Laboratory  at Purdue University. Over the
              past five years, Purdue has  strengthened its capabilities in plant and
              microbial  genetics. The Purdue Genetics Program was founded and funded  by
              University resources and an NSF Training Grant in Plant  Genetics. Purdue now
              plans to expand this program with the  establishment of a comprehensive program
              in agricultural  genomics. Current instrumentation for genomic research runs 
              with a substantial backlog and there is great need to  enhance available
              resources to accommodate the expected  increase in demand as the program in
              agricultural genomics  expands.         The instrumentation to be purchased by
              the award falls  into three categories: (1) DNA sequence and analysis and 
              genome mapping; (2) informatics; and (3) functional  genomics. Funds will
              provide four DNA sequencers and  associated equipment; two Sparc computers; two
              micro array  machines and additional microscopes and support equipment.  This
              equipment will support analysis of the structure of  several plant and fungal
              genomes. Comprehensive cDNA cloning  of genes expressed in both pathogens and
              their plant hosts  will identify major components of these interactions. 
              Similar approach will be taken to study the molecular  genetics of secondary
              product synthesis, cell wall  development, cytoskeletal interactions or
              protein-DNA  interactions. Studies will also be initiated on microbial 
              diversity in standard versus polluted soils.
