Title       : Acquisition of a Gas Source Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Stable Isotope
               Analyses at the University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9871423

Award Number: 9871423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256868             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Ripperdan ripperdan@rumac.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871423  Ripperdan    This grant, supported equally by Experimental Program to 
              Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Major Research  Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program, provide partial funding for the  acquisition of a gas source
              stable isotope ratio mass  spectrometer (SIRMS) for the Geology Department at
              the University  of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez.  Establishment of this SIRMS facility
               at Puerto Rico will make it the only one of its kind both on the  island and
              within the greater Caribbean region. As a result,  acquisition of a SIRMS by
              the University of Puerto Rico provides  an infrastructural improvement for the
              commonwealth and the  University that significantly increases the ability of
              the PI and  UPR colleagues to compete for federal and private sector research 
              and development funding.  While the main users of this facility  are relatively
              young, they have already begun a number of  research projects that require
              stable isotopic analyses of carbon  and oxygen in marine microfossil tests,
              coralline skeletons,  dissolved organic and inorganic carbon in groundwater and
               biological samples.  Specific studies that will make use of the  SIRMS
              include: combined chemostratigraphic and paleontological  studies of the late
              Ordovician marine mass extinction, research  on millennial-scale stable
              isotopic proxies of sea surface  temperatures as recorded in coral skeletons,
              isotopic studies of  adsorbed and structural water within natural and
              artificial  zeolites in order to appraise their effectiveness for use in 
              environmental remediation efforts and to improve their design,  isotopic
              studies of hair for use in forensic toxicology, and  ecological studies of the
              fate and pathways of organic matter in  tropical ecosystems.  Finally, given
              the number of currently  funded NSF researchers that continue to conduct stable
              isotopic  investigation on Caribbean samples, be they aqueous, coralline, 
              igneous or otherwise, this facility will undoubtedly find use by  a large
              number of visiting scientists and  their students from  U.S. mainland
              institutions.     ***
