Title       : Nanotechnology with Emphasis on Tribology: A Combined Experimental and
               Simulation Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9871919

Award Number: 9871919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $580000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Cummings   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary S. Grest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hank D. Cochran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shengting Cui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Granick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,9263,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    CTS-9871919  Cummings    This is a grant to undertake a fundamental
              study of lubrication at manometer scale, including experiments with surface
              rheometry and non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulation.  The project will
              be a multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional collaboration. The first goal of
              the research is to achieve overlap in shear rate between experiments and
              simulations with the same systems. This overlap, sought for over a decade, will
              be achieved through significant advances in the capabilities of both the
              experimental and numerical approaches.   A second goal is to extend both the
              experimental and computational efforts to more complicated systems and surface
              characteristics, including surfaces with chemical and topographical
              heterogeneity, that are of primary technological importance.  A third goal is
              to study not only the steady-state shear response of nano-tribology systems but
              also their transient behavior, including the technologically important issues
              related to adhesion.  A final, but overarching, goal of the work is to seek new
              methods to reduce the friction and wear of moving surfaces separated by only
              nanometers.  These goals will be attained through coordinated experiments and
              calculations that probe the fundamental phenomena involved at a molecular
              level.    The motivation for this work is that devices with moving parts
              separated by only nanometers are already of immense technological and economic
              importance, magnetic recording devices such as computer disk drives, for
              example.  Many other  novel micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), such as
              micro-motors, are under development.  The fluid between the moving surfaces in
              such devices is subjected to extremely high rates of shear strain, 108 s-1 or
              higher, more than an order of magnitude higher than previously attained in any
              controlled experiment.  Often, lubrication is essential to the practical use of
              such devices, and the US data storage industry has identified the development
              of new lubricants and surf ace finish as one of six major technical objectives
              to achieving increased recording density and read/write speed.    This project
              results from a proposal submitted in response to NSF 98-20 Partnership in
              Nanotechnology:  Synthesis, Processing and Utilization of Functional
              Nanostructures (FNS).
