Title       : Acquisition of Finnigan MAT 252 Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1998    
File        : a9871480

Award Number: 9871480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336208             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley H. Ambrose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1391,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the University of Illinois will
              purchase a Finnegan MAT 252 GIRMS mass spectrometer. When interfaced with
              automated multi-sample preparation devices, it will lead to substantial
              improvement in productivity over machines currently available on the Urbana
              campus and permit significant and fundamental advances in teaching and research
              in several disciplines. The MAT 252 permits unattended operation automated
              reaction, combustion and distillation of 50 or more sub-milligram samples and
              can sequentially analyze isotope ratios of elements in different gases purified
              from the same sample. Sample size requirements are reduced by a factor of 10 to
              100 over other available instruments and what currently requires a month's work
              can be accomplished overnight. Because of small sample size requirements a wide
              range of rarely-used applications become feasible. The machine will be shared
              among researchers in three laboratories in the Anthropology and Geology
              Departments as well as the Illinois State Geological Survey. it will be housed
              in the latter. The machine will be of immediate use in a number of research
              projects. Within anthropology, these include: diet reconstruction through
              stable isotope analysis of bone; analysis of life history patterns through
              examination of incremental structures such as the striae of Retzius in tooth
              enamel; reconstruction of the distribution and appearance of grasslands in the
              Middle Miocene and their role in hominid evolution; environmental
              reconstruction in a number of African regions which played an important role in
              hominid development; and diet reconstruction of past hominids. Within geology,
              studies will focus on: several ongoing projects in the isotope geochemistry of
              sedimentary carbonates; petrographic studies of sedimentary and hydrothermally
              altered rocks; use of isotope ratios as tracers of groundwater flow; the
              process of rock-water interaction during deformation and examination of
              groundwater hydrology to assess nuclear waste storage, landfill and other such
              sites.  The machine will be incorporated into a range of courses and greatly
              improve the quality of teaching and training resources.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
