Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Peptide Synthesis and Purification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9871427

Award Number: 9871427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59605              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean M. Decatur sdecatur@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The PI proposes the acquisition of instrumentation for the  synthesis and
              purification of short peptides. This  instrumentation will help advance the
              research program of  the PI involving spectroscopic characterization of model 
              alpha helices. The infrared (IR) spectra of amide modes of  peptides have long
              been used to estimate secondary structure  content and describe conformational
              dynamics. However, the  transition dipole coupling which makes these modes
              sensitive  to backbone structure also causes these modes to be global  markers
              about protein structure and limits their application  as specific, local
              probes. In this study, isotopic labels  introduced into the sequence of model
              helical peptides will  be used to disrupt transition dipole coupling and to
              provide  local reporters of peptide structure and environment. These  labels
              will be used to investigate the effect of helix  capping and helix dipoles on
              amide I frequency. In addition,  the labeled residues will be used to
              investigate  folding/unfolding processes of model helices focusing on the 
              conformation of a particular residue. The basic information  about the effect
              of local interactions on amide I  frequencies will be the basis for developing
              methodology to  use IR spectroscopy as a tool for probing of dissecting 
              specific structural or dynamic properties of proteins. The  peptide synthesis
              instrumentation will make the pursuit of  this research project more time and
              cost efficient by making  possible the preparation of isotopically labeled
              peptides on  site.    Mount Holyoke College, the nation's oldest continuing 
              liberal arts college for women, has a long history of  educating women for
              careers in scientific research. A key  component of this tradition is the
              collaboration between  undergraduate students and faculty on research projects.
              In  order to best prepare students for future research careers,  undergraduate
              research programs must give students as much  direct, hands-on experience with
              the techniques and  instrumentation  as possible. This instrumentation will 
              enhance the research experience of student collaborators  with the PI by
              exposing them to important, modern techniques  of biochemistry.
