Title       : Acquisition of Scanning Electron Microscope for Multi-User Electron Microscopy
               Core Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9871184

Award Number: 9871184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heide Schatten SchattenH@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The purpose of this proposal is to request funds for the  purchase of a JEOL
              JSM-6340F Field Emission Scanning Electron  Microscope with key optional
              capabilities including a field  emission (FE) electron gun for increased
              resolution of sample  analysis, and a backscattered electron detector for low 
              voltage imaging and analysis of gold-labeled (3, 5, and 10 nm)  surface
              antigens. This new JEOL JSM 6340F FESEM will serve 7  major and 13 minor users
              from seven different departments in  interdisciplinary research and education
              efforts at the  University of Missouri-Columbia (MU). The requested microscope 
              will be housed in the Electron Microscopy Core Facility (EMCF)  which is a
              recently reorganized centralized multi-user core  facility that has as its
              mission to support research and  education within the University community and
              in the region.  It was established in 1995 as a result of combining the 
              resources from the College of Agriculture, Food and Natural  Resources, College
              of Arts and Science, College of Veterinary  Medicine, and School of Medicine.
              The need for more modern  capabilities has made it essential to ask for funds
              to  purchase a new versatile, reliable, and user-friendly  instrument, as the
              20-year old JEOL-JSM35 scanning electron  microscope cannot satisfy the demands
              of the present users.  Additionally, because the EMCF serves a diversity of
              research  projects and has as it's mission the training and education of 
              future scientists, modern instrumentation is critically  important. The new
              capabilities requested for this multi-user  Core Facility will allow (1) high
              resolution analysis of  minimally coated samples of biological plant and animal
               materials, and of molecular isolates and spreads; (2) high  resolution
              detection of small gold labels down to 3 and 5nm  gold-labeling for
              immuno-electron microscopy; (3) image  acquisition and archiving for
              post-examination analyses; (4)  use of the PC-based, fully digital microscope
              for training  computer-age microscopists and resea rchers; (5) the ability to 
              add a cryo-system; and (6) the ability to add enhanced x-ray  microanalysis of
              minimally coated specimens from an EDS system  that is planned for future
              purchase. These features have  become essential for major parts of funded
              projects in  agronomy, entomology, plant pathology, cell and molecular 
              biology, veterinary parasitology, plant and animal  reproduction, microbiology,
              and other basic sciences. The  requested microscope will also serve to train
              users and  students in a graduate-level Cell and Molecular Electron  Microscopy
              course offered annually. The new microscope will be  supervised by the EMCF
              director, who is assisted by two  permanent staff EM technicians. The EMCF is
              one of six Core  Facilities administered by MU's Molecular Biology Program, a 
              state-funded program, that is committed to provide 50% of the  capital costs,
              long-term salaries for the director and staff  of the EMCF, and substantial
              subsidies for existing equipment  as well as laboratory renovations and service
              contracts for  all Core instruments.
