Title       : MRI: Instrumentation Development for Human-Centered Tele-Immersion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9871058

Award Number: 9871058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $760000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. DeFanti tom@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maxine D. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Sandin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret M. Rawlings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9871058    DeFanti, Thomas A.  Brown, Maxine D.  University of Illinois
              Chicago    MRI: Instrumentation Development for Human-Centered Tele-Immersion  
               The Electronic Visualization Laboratory (EVL) at the University of Illinois at
              Chicago has developed an aggressive program over the past decade to partner
              with dozens of computations scientists and engineers all over the Nation.  The
              focus of this effort has been to create visualization and virtual reality (VR)
              devices and applications for collaborative exploration of scientific and
              engineering data.  Since 1995, the EVL research and development activities have
              incorporated emerging high bandwidth networks like the vBNS, in an effort now
              called Tele-Immersion.  As a result of past experience in building first and
              second generation VR devices to support these applications, the EVL now wishes
              to conduct research in third-generation VR devices to construct variable
              resolution and desktop/office-sized displays.  Since no current technology is
              yet configurable with ideal resolution and size, there is a need to simulate
              these devices with available parts, and then build more advanced prototypes. 
              This proposal requests significant equipment funds to buy, evaluate, and
              integrate a variety of emerging display devices, such as large color plasma
              displays, LCD projectors, LED panels, Feffo-electric Liquid Crystal displays
              and Digital Macro Mirror Displays.  This proposal also requests funds to
              purchase new workstations for use by the EVL's 50+ students, and dozen faculty
              and staff.  The proposal aims at long-term, basic display configuration
              research and development.
