Title       : Development of Freezing Nucleation Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9871049

Award Number: 9871049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor Vali vali@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Perry J. Wechsler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1522,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871049  Vali        Fundamental understanding of the characteristics of
              freezing nuclei is an  important problem for the atmospheric and other
              sciences.  The atmospheric science  community recognizes that the origins of
              ice in clouds is one of the major  uncertainties in the understanding of cloud
              processes.  Those processes in turn are the  most critical source of
              uncertainties in global models of the general circulation and the  water cycle.
                In the biological arena, ice nucleation has been found to have  widespread
              importance.  Bacterial and fungal ice nuclei have been identified and it  has
              been shown that ice nucleation measurements can provide more effective ways 
              than microbiological tests for the identification of bacterial contaminants in
              food.  Ice  nuclei are being used in spray ice technology (including artificial
              snow making).   Prevention of frost damage to agricultural plants is possible
              via control of ice  nucleating bacteria on plants, and insect pest survival may
              be controlled similarly.          The new freezing nuclei apparatus that the 
              Principal Investigator will develop   has the potential to significantly
              enhance research activity in these areas, since the  unavailability of simple
              and reliable measurement methods has been frequently cited  by researchers as a
              serious problem.  This apparatus will provide a significant  improvement over
              the commonly used drop freezing method of determining the  activity of freezing
              nuclei in water. The principal advances provided by the new  instrument will be
              the preservation of sample integrity and a high degree of  reliability.  Sample
              integrity will be achieved by placing sub-samples in individual  sealed vials. 
              In this manner each sub-sample can be preserved through any desired  sequence
              of freezing or other tests without any serious limitation on duration.  This 
              same step also assures that there is no possibility of spurious spread of ice
              into the  sample which was a major limitation of earlier devices.        
              Successful develo pment of this instrument is expected to lead to new research 
              on freezing nucleation, in relation to atmospheric and biological ice formation
               including better measurements of the effects of solutes, inhibitors, and
              activators; the  stability of nuclei; compositional analyses; the analyses of
              cloud and precipitation  samples; and the connection between biogenic and
              atmospheric ice nuclei.  Most of  these topics have been addressed in previous
              experiments but only statistical results  could be obtained, and some results
              remained in doubt because of shortcomings of  earlier instruments.   ***
