Title       : Laboratory of Polymeric Bearing Modeling, Characterization, and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9871943

Award Number: 9871943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499561             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martine LaBerge martine.laberge@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Said Ahzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bongtae Han  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Joseph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Drews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871943  LaBerge  Laboratory of Polymeric Bearing Modeling, Characterization,
              and  Simulation  This research project will establish a Cooperative Science and
               Technology Research Laboratory within the State of South Carolina  focused on
              the tribological performance of polymeric bearings. The  Laboratory is being
              developed jointly at Clemson University and the  Medical University of South
              Carolina under the auspices of the  Bioengineering Alliance of South Carolina.
              It will study polymeric  wear observed in conventional and orthopedic bearings.
              Within the  24-month award period a more fundamental understanding of the 
              mechanical, chemical and biological physical processes, which  control the
              performance of polymeric bearing surfaces, will be  developed through team work
              between the investigators of the  Laboratory under the guidance of an advisory
              board. This  significant R&D problem will be addressed at the microscopic and 
              macroscopic scales for both for computational modeling and  experiments. By
              maintaining a close collaboration and communication  with the members of an
              industrial advisory board, the models and  experimental analysis and testing
              methodology developed will be  marketed to the industrial sector. Project
              results will be applied  to analysis of polymeric wear and to the prediction of
              its clinical  occurrence with existing artificial joints, as well as with 
              alternative bearing materials. The analysis and experimental  capabilities
              developed in this Laboratory will also be extended to  the study of other
              polymeric bearing applications and materials  such as those commonly utilized
              in the automotive and textile  industries, each of which represent significant
              segments of the  economy in the State of South Carolina. The long term goal of
              this  unique Laboratory is to provide advanced investigational tools  necessary
              to predict the clinical occurrence of polymeric wear.
