Title       : Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Facility to Study Terrestrial Processes and
               their Interaction with Climate and the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9871262

Award Number: 9871262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Welker   (Principal Investigator current)
              James I. Drever  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon R. Poulson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen T. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer facility is  proposed at the University
              of Wyoming to address several  multidisciplinary processes including carbon
              flux between  ecosystems and the atmosphere, ecosystem responses to  simulated
              climate change, patterns of precipitation isotopic  chemistry, reconstruction
              of climates using proxy records,  and the geochemistry of environmental
              contamination.  At  present, no such facility exists in the state of Wyoming. 
              This proposal funds the purchase of a dual inlet isotope  ration mass
              spectrometer for high precision analysis of the  stable isotopes of H, C, N, S,
              and O in air, water, soil,  and vegetation.  This instrument will support
              numerous  ongoing studies that utilize stable isotope analyses to  enhance a
              basic understanding of terrestrial processes.  These include: 1) delineating
              the CO2 source and sink  activity of native and agricultural ecosystems; 2) 
              quantifying the degree to which changes in snow depth alter  the patterns of
              water sources used by plants and modifies  the flux of carbon; 3) assessing the
              weekly patterns of the  isotopic composition of precipitation from an array of
              sites  across the U.S; 4) applying the isotopic composition of  plant tissues
              as paleoclimate proxies; 5) using stable  isotopes to identify sources and
              processes affecting  groundwater contaminants such as nitrate and hazardous 
              organic compounds; and 6) characterizing the seasonal  foraging patterns of
              free-ranging ungulates and applying  this to the reconstruction of
              anthropological diets and  predation strategies.  The major focus of the
              proposed facility will be to nurture  an expansion of interdisciplinary
              collaboration among  diverse research teams.  In addition, this instrumentation
               will provide regular exposure and research training  opportunities for upper
              division undergraduates, graduate  students, and postdoctoral scientists while
              encouraging  other researchers on campus to utilize stable isotopes as  part of
              their research.  Finally, the facility  will perform  analyses that will
              contribute to several new national and  international research initiatives,
              including a U.S.  contribution to the Global Network of Isotopes in 
              Precipitation (GNIP) and the Biosphere-Atmosphere Stable  Isotope Network
              (BASIN).
