Title       : Acquisition and Development of a New Computing Environment for the Department of
               Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9871313

Award Number: 9871313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hidehiko Ichimura   (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Kagel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Francois Richard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1391,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Hidehiko Ichimura, John Kagel and
              Jean-Francois Richard will acquire instrumentation to upgrade the antiquated
              computer facilities at the department of economics at the University of
              Pittsburgh. This award will permit both acquisition and development of the new,
              more efficient system. The department will acquire a state of the art multi-CPU
              server, will upgrade the graduate student PC laboratory and finally upgrade the
              department's experimental laboratory. To use the system more effectively, the
              group will develop a scheduling process. They will adopt and modify an off the
              shelf queuing system to schedule workloads in a way that batch jobs can be
              executed on idle machines even during times at which the laboratory is
              dedicated to data gathering. To accomplish this each computer must work in a
              uniform environment and the researchers will develop an integrated system to
              achieve this goal. They will make the result available in an effective drop-in
              package form which can be widely distributed.  The upgraded laboratory will be
              immediately useful to pursue a variety of research goals. Three projects relate
              to major numerical developments whose importance transcend economics:
              high-dimensional numerical integration, nonparametric methods and simulation
              techniques. Another deals with the statistical analysis of dynamic nonlinear
              macroeconomic models. Three applied projects address fundamental current
              socio-economic policy issues: job training programs, health-care reforms and
              mortgage lending patterns. The laboratories will be extensively used by
              students and thus serve an important educational as well as research function. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
