Title       : New Methods and Tools for Nanotechnololgy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9871874

Award Number: 9871874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney S. Ruoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Huettner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tomasz Kowalewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1084,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871874
Ruoff
This award provides partial support for an effort addressing the
              manipulation of matter on the nanoscale to form functional nanostructures.  New
              methods and tools will be developed and used to:  (i) study a new type of
              mechanochemistry were carbon nanotubes are mechanically strained to create very
              specific atom locations for chemical reaction (nanostressing stage); (ii)
              controllably shape surfaces, manipulate nanotubes and build structures with the
              AFM probe used in a new, unconventional way; (iii) dispense gas and liquid
              molecules (the latter in volumes down to 100 nm3) with sub-nm positional
              control (nanotube pipet); (iv) achieve spatiotemporal control over a new class
              of charged or magnetic particles using finely controlled electric fields or
              magnetic field gradients (designer particles).

Development of new tools and
              methods for nanoscale manipulation will be centered around carbon nanotubes
              (NT).  Unique features of NT's as potential building blocks for nanotechnology
              include:  unique size; the presence of a hollow core; unusual mechanical
              properties; possibilities for mechanically activated chemistry.  Tools and
              methods which will be developed in this study will be essential for achieving
              one of the long term objectives of the proposed effort - turning NT's into
              components in functional nanostructures and as tools for building functional
              nanostructures.

A piezoelectric nanostressing stage will be built and used
              to apply mechanical stress to NT's and mechanically activate chemical reactions
              by straining carbon-carbon bonds.  Site-specificity of such mechanically
              sensitized reactions, which are expected to occur in kinked regions of
              nanotubes, is very desirable for potential applications of NT's in
              nanotechnology.  The nanostressing stage will also be used to elucidate the
              mechanical behavior of various types of NT's and of very thin graphite sheets
              (potentially as thin as a single atomic layer).

Tapping mode AFM, which was
              originally developed to minimize the interactions between the probe and the
              surface, will be  used in a new and unconventional way to manipulate (objects
              on) surfaces and then image them with high resolution.  Operations such as
              micromachining, nanohammering, and pushing objects on surfaces will be achieved
              by controlled increase of tip-surface interactions.  High-resolution imaging
              after manipulation will be possible owing to our recent discovery that AFM
              probes can be resharpened by mechanical deposition of metal grains at the tip. 
              New AFM methods and tools developed at Washington University and also at Zyvex
              will be applied to manipulation of NT's on surfaces (both at ambient conditions
              and under liquids) and to study the new mechanochemistry of NT's.

A nanotube
              pipet, capable of delivering volumes of liquids as small as several tens to a
              hundred nm3 (note that 1 femtoliter of water is 1 cubic micron, and that 100
              nm3 contains 3000 molecules of H2O) will be built and used for fundamental
              studies of living cells and to construct nanostructures on surfaces.  It will
              be capable of delivering gases, such as organometallics, which could be
              pyrolyzed on a surface as a means of writing nanoscale metal features, and of
              delivering very small volumes of biomolecules to cells.
%%%
***

