Title       : Acquisition of a Genomic Computing Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9871174

Award Number: 9871174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Stillman stillman@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lincoln D. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew F. Neuwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will fund the acquisition of computer  resources to support
              research activities in genomics,  bioinformatics, and macromolecular structure
              determination.  These resources will benefit researchers by improving lab- 
              wide informational services and training programs and will  enhance
              collaborative efforts between the bioinformatics  group and other research
              groups at Cold Spring Harbor  Laboratory (CSHL).  Areas of research at CSHL
              include  neuroscience, structural biology, plant genetics and  genomics. 
              Neurobiologists seek the genetic roots of brain  function, striving to
              understand consciousness, learning,  and memory.  This program began in the
              early 1990s and has  already had a profound impact on understanding the basis
              of  memory formation.  CSHL plant geneticists study genes  involved in plant
              development and function.  CSHL is one of  the international centers involved
              in the sequencing of the  first plant genome, Arabidopsis thaliana. 
              Arabidopsis has  been adopted as the preferred model system for many plant 
              scientists, and new genetic technologies developed for this  system at CSHL are
              receiving great interest in the plant  field.
