Title       : Acquistion of Equipment for Genomic Analysis Using Microarray Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9871386

Award Number: 9871386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold C. Riethman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                        06/19/98    A major application of microarray
              technology is quantitative  monitoring of gene expression patterns.  Microarray
               experiments have been described recently in which dozens of  new
              differentially expressed genes have been discovered  using microdissected
              tissues and radioactive labeling and  detection methods.  Fluorescent detection
              methods afford the  bast quantitation, permit co-hybridization of two samples 
              labeled with different fluors to the same microarray grid,  and permits
              resolution of very closely spaced microarrayed  spots.  However, it does have
              the drawback of increased  expense and requires a much higher amount of
              starting  material than radioactive detection methods.    This proposal will
              support the purchase of instrumentation  for a state-of-the-art facility that
              will use microarray  technology for genomic analyses.  Two instruments will be 
              purchased: a confocal laser-scanning and imaging devise for  reading
              high-density microarrays hybridized with probes  labeled with fluorescent tags
              and a phosphoimager for high-  resolution scanning of microarrays hybridized
              with probes  labeled with radioisotopes.  The research to be supported by  this
              technology include combining microarray analysis with  engineered
              transcriptional repressors for identification of  target genes, fundamental
              studies of transcription  regulation in yeast, studies of cellular pathways
              involved  in transformation and apoptosis, novel approaches to  elucidate the
              biological function of subnuclear cytological  structures, studies of tissue
              regeneration and T-cell  development in mice, analysis of subtelomeric
              variation and  transcription patterns in humans, and the development of  novel
              peptide-nucleic acid detection strategies.    Graduate students and
              postdoctoral associates at the Wistar  Institute will have access to this
              emerging technology,  allowing them to incorporate this powerful new
              methodology  into their research projects as they develop.  More  importantly,
              they  will see the exciting new opportunities  microarray analysis offers for
              understanding basic  biological processes, and will begin to develop fresh 
              approaches to biological problems that may have been seen as  difficult or
              insoluble using non-global approaches.
