Title       : Aquisition of an X-ray Powder Diffractometer for Chemical, Materials, and
               Environmental Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9871259

Award Number: 9871259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen W. Apblett apblett@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Knobbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth M. Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas A. Kotov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Isabelle L. Lagadic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871259
Apblett
X-ray analysis equipment will be acquired with funding from
              the Major Research Instrumentation program.  The specific instrument is an
              X-ray powder diffractometer with the full-range of sample temperature control
              and thin-film capabilities.  The equipment will be computer controlled and will
              possess all available software for data reduction, including Rietveld analysis
              and a complete X-ray powder diffraction database with search/match
              capabilities.  This equipment will bring state-of-the-art X--ray analysis to
              Oklahoma State University (OSU) and will tremendously enhance our capabilities
              for characterization of inorganic and organic materials and environmental
              samples.  Materials and environmental sciences are among the largest growth
              areas in research and research funding at OSU and the equipment will favorably
              impact research on novel ceramic precursors, colloids, liquid crystals, optical
              materials, ultraviolet sensors, tribological and corrosion -resistant coatings,
              forms/fractionation of heavy metals in contaminated soils, soil forming
              processes, polymer chemistry, corrosion, and catalyst development.  As well as
              being important in academia, X-ray powder diffraction is widely used in
              industry for research, quality control and product development. Therefore, the
              training of students in the operation and capabilities of this instrument and
              the interpretation of its data is an important goal.  It will be achieved by
              providing both the opportunity for hands-on research by students and by the use
              of the instrumentation in Chemistry or Agronomy courses on Materials
              Characterization, Clay Mineralogy, Solid State Chemistry, and Instrumental
              Analysis.
%%%
The acquisition X-ray diffraction equipment, using funds from
              the National Science Foundation's  Major Research Instrumentation program, will
              foster greater interactions and collaboration between the Chemistry Department
              and the Departments of Chemical Engineering, Civil and Environmental
              Engineering, and Agronomy at Oklahoma State University, as well as helping to
              maintain an active collaboration between OSU and Xavier University of
              Louisiana.  Additionally, interest in the equipment has been expressed by ASEC,
              a local division of Allied Signal.  A Internet-based course and promotional
              literature will be used to expand the user base to other nearby universities
              and industries.  Overall, the equipment will contribute to the establishment of
              a well-equipped learning environment for science, agriculture, and engineering
              students at OSU and will promote partnerships between researchers from a
              variety of departments and industry.
***


