Title       : Nanotechnology: Preparation, Characterization, and Dynamical Properties of
               Nanostructured Metal-Oxide Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9871864

Award Number: 9871864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $516526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Tissue tissue@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Ducker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1084,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871864  Tissue    A systematic and extensive study of the physical, optical,
              and  dynamical properties of lanthanide-doped metal-oxide  nanostructures will
              be performed.  These novel materials have  potential applications as materials
              for lasers and optical  amplifiers, and as phosphors for flat-panel displays. 
              This work  will assist in developing a theoretical and practical framework  to
              optimize the optical properties of metal-oxide nanocrystals  and
              nanocomposites.  A reduction in particle size for micron-size  materials has
              often resulted in a reduction in optical emission  due to quenching by surface
              defects.  There are experimental  indications that finite size effects in
              nanocrystals can  significantly enhance the oscillator strength of impurity 
              transitions.  In addition, modifications to the phonon  density-of-states, and
              to the strength of the electron-phonon  interaction, will undoubtedly influence
              non-radiative relaxation  rates in nanoparticle systems.  Applications in the
              display  industry require smaller particle size for both high-resolution  and
              low voltage flat-panel displays.  At the same time, they also  require rugged
              and high-efficiency materials.  Therefore, the  optical and dynamical
              properties of the nanocrystals will be  characterized both alone and after
              passivation by surface  modification or by embedding in a matrix.  The approach
              will be  to prepare nanostructured materials, and characterize their  structure
              and morphology by X-ray diffraction,  transmission-electron microscopy,
              atomic-force microscopy, and  fluorescence spectroscopy at Virginia Tech. 
              Well-characterized  nanostructured materials will then be studied at the
              University  of Georgia using high-resolution spectroscopic techniques to 
              determine how fundamental properties such as oscillator strength,  optical
              dephasing, non-radiative relaxation, phonon dynamics, and  energy-transfer
              processes depend on particle size or surface  modification. The collaboration
              between Virginia Tech and the  University of  Georgia brings together expertise
              in  nanocrystalline synthesis, processing, and characterization, with 
              expertise in high resolution and nonlinear spectroscopic  techniques.  The
              close collaboration between synthesis and  spectroscopy groups will allow the
              PIs to systematically grow and  characterize new materials, with property
              measurements providing  rapid feedback to guide material preparation and
              processing.  The  synergism of this collaboration will allow much more progress
              in  preparing and understanding very complex nanostructures than if  the groups
              were working alone  %%%  Novel lanthanide-doped metal-oxide nanostructured
              materials have  potential applications as materials for lasers and optical 
              amplifiers, and as phosphors for flat-panel displays.  The  results of this
              research will provide feedback to engineer  nanostructures to improve the
              properties of these materials.  The  interdisciplinary nature of the
              collaboration between Virginia  Tech and the University of Georgia will provide
              an excellent  educational experience to train future scientists for the 
              multidisciplinary teamwork that is increasingly characteristic of  scientific
              research and technological development.  This project  is funded as part of
              Nanotechnology Initiative by the Ceramics  and the Solid State Chemistry
              programs in the Division of  Materials Research, the  Physical Foundations and
              Enabling  Technologies program in the Division of Electrical and  Communication
              Systems, and the Office of Multidisciplinary  Activities in the Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences Directorate.  In addition, the Division of International
              Programs has provided  funding for travel in order for the PIs to perform
              collaborative  research with their counterparts in Russia.
