Title       : Smart Pixels with Smart Illumination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a9871454

Award Number: 9871454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wm. Randall Babbitt babbitt@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871424
Babbitt
Smart Pixels with Smart Illumination Smart pixels with smart
              illumination (SPSI) is a new approach to image sensor and processing.  The SPSI
              concept, recently proposed by Prof.  Babbitt of Montana State University and
              Prof.  Darling of the University of Washington, involves the dynamic control of
              the spatial and temporal illumination of an object via feedback from the
              detected image.  The optical design of a SPSI sensor enables the light from an
              array of smart emitters that scatters off a remote object to be optically
              coupled back to an array of smart photodetectors, even if the emitters and
              detectors are spatially and electronically integrated.  Integrated enlitters
              and detectors enable dynamic and efficient illumination and sensing off remote
              objects on a pixel by pixel basis, leading to enhanced image processing
              capabilities and some radically new sensor designs.  Some of the potential SPSI
              applications in sensor array technology include edge detection-, dynamic
              spotlight tracking system; a tracking sensor that monitors focus, translation,
              and rotation of a scribe line; winner-take-all neural networks that highlights
              the "winning" pixel; precise tracking of fluorescent objects; intensity
              compression algorithms; tracking, differential sensing, and error correction in
              page oriented memory and processing systems; pixel by pixel background
              subtraction; and ranging.

Simultaneous Submissions of Proposals This
              proposal was written collaboratively by Prof.  Babbitt of Montana State
              University and Prof.  Darling of the University of Washington, who are
              simultaneously submitting proposals with the same technical sections, but with
              separate budgets and supporting data for their respective institution.  The two
              proposals are coupled and should be reviewed jointly, as the work of each
              institution relies on the expertise contribution of the other institution to
              achieve the proposed objectives.  For each task in the research plan, the
              institution that has primary responsibility for its completion is
              identified.

Program Objectives The overall objective of the proposed program
              is the development of the SPSI concept and its potential applications from
              their embryonic stage to well defined and practical sensor systems.  The
              research objectives of the proposed program are to 1) formalize the design of
              proposed SPSI applications, 2) model their performance, 3) design and fabricate
              the electronic and optical elements needed for SPSI, 4) demonstrate those
              implementations with the most promising attributes, and 5) map out a plan for
              future development of the SPSI concept.

Research Plan The proposed program
              benefits greatly from the acceptance of the SPSI concept for participation in
              the VCSEL Foundry Service, which supplies at no cost an integrated VCSEL/MSM
              array, a custom CMOS processing chip, a custom diffractive optical element, and
              a custom lenslet array.  The initial research effort will focus on the design
              and utilization of these elements, building on our initial results with
              integrated LEDs and MSM detectors, which demonstrated the core SPSI optical and
              electronic feedback mechanisms.  New electronic and optical devices will be
              designed, fabricated, and incorporated as needed.  Advances in other
              integration technologies, including the silicon on sapphire technology being
              developed by Prof.  Darling, will be examined and utilized to optimize SPSI
              sensor performance.  The research program will require extensive design,
              fabrication, and testing of both electronic and optical devices and is thus
              strengthened by the collaboration between Prof.  Babbitt, with his expertise in
              optical design and processing, and Prof.  Darling, with his expertise in
              electronic and optoelectronic design and fabrication.
***


