Title       : Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencing Instrumentation for Molecular
               Evolutionary and Systematics Core Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9871363

Award Number: 9871363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108268             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo Joseph joseph@say.acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Uzzell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. McCourt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christina M. Spolsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the acquisition of equipment to upgrade a 
              cross-disciplinary research program in Molecular Systematic  and Evolution (the
              MSE group) at the Academy of Natural  Sciences of Philadelphia. These
              acquisitions will enhance  existing research efforts in molecular systematics
              and  population studies at the Academy, facilitate development of  the research
              programs of the group's six molecular  systematists and under pin the MSE group
              's efforts in  systematics-related training, which is itself focused on a 
              student pool drawn from local universities. The MSE's newer  members increase
              the diversity of the taxonomic expertise at  the Academy; their laboratories
              will emphasize the  programmatic rather than taxonomic orientation of the MSE 
              group. The same basic research methods are used by all members  of the group,
              and the equipment will maximize research  productivity of the shared
              laboratories. Scientists and  students from the Academy and neighboring
              universities  participating in on-going joint programs with the Academy will 
              further contribute to this maximization of the use of the  facilities.    The
              centerpiece of the acquisitions in an automated DNA  sequencer with its
              auxiliary support tools: remote alarm  system for an ultra-cold freezer,
              automated thermocyclers and  imaging equipment. In order to provide a central
              site for  storage and manipulation of DNA sequence data, funding will  also
              establish a computer network for the MSE group; this  network will be
              integrated within the Academy' s existing  network of servers and provide
              seamless access among MSE  members and to Interact services.    The enhanced
              MSE facilities will significantly improve current  educational opportunities
              for students from area universities,  and in particular those from Drexel
              University, which trains  significant populations of minority and urban
              students. The  Academy is currently developing a formal program with Drexel 
              for biodiversity studies and will soon be implementing and NSF-  funded REU 
              Site award that will see further training of  students. The Academy offers
              Jessup and McHenry Fellowships  for graduate study that currently and in the
              near future will  see recipients using the MSE facilities. Also MSE members are
               already supervising graduate students in systematics. The MSE  group, then, is
              and will be actively involved in a diversity  of training programs using
              undergraduate and graduate students  recruited for research programs and area
              faculty, all of whom  will be provided with hands-on research in collections- 
              oriented molecular systematics. The MSE group will act as a  team to train
              students and other users of the facility in the  theory and practice of modern
              molecular systematics.
