Title       : Gulf Coast Protein Crystallography Beamline (Development by Consortium)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a9871464

Award Number: 9871464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1750600            (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Phillips   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert O. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Craft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9871464


Abstract

	This project involves the construction of a beam line
              for macromolecular crystallography at the Center for Advanced Microstructures
              and Devices (CAMD) in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  A consortium of
              crystallographers from Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana and physicists at CAMD/LSU
              will design, construct and maintain a state-of-the-art protein crystallography
              beam line for multiwavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) and other diffraction
              experiments at CAMD.  

	Protein crystallography has provided invaluable
              insight into the molecular basis of life.  These contributions range from a
              deep chemical understanding of enzyme mechanisms to the molecular basis of
              signal transduction and its role in cancer.  An understanding of the molecular
              basis of biology will require structural information from many proteins.  This
              is a daunting task because protein crystallography has traditionally been a
              challenging and labor-intensive methodology.  

	Synchrotron radiation has
              aided macromolecular crystallography in several ways.  The superior intensity
              over laboratory sources has allowed the determination of structures of large
              proteins and viruses that could not be previously contemplated.  The
              development of the synchrotron-based multi-wavelength anomalous dispersion
              (MAD) technique has streamlined the structure determination process.  The
              number of structures solved by this methodology has grown exponentially in the
              last few years, placing great and ever increasing demand on the very few
              synchrotron beamlines.  Regular and fast access to beam lines through lengthy
              application and waiting procedures now hinders the solution of new structures
              and other structural studies in a serious way.

	The synchrotron at CAMD is
              in operation at an energy of 1.3-1.5 GeV.  Together with an energy shifting
              wiggler which is being installed, the intensity of the beam for x-ray
              crystallography is estimated to be similar to that of a bending magnet at the
              National Synchrotron Light Source at Brookhaven National Laboratory.  This
              should yield frame exposure times of under a minute for routine problems and up
              to 2 minutes for problem crystals.  This is an order of magnitude faster than
              rotating anode times and has the extreme advantage of wavelength tunability for
              MAD experiments.

	The beamline will serve as a regional research and
              training facility.  Its close proximity to the consortium laboratories will
              expedite the solution of new structures and allow students new to
              crystallography to participate alongside senior students and postdocs in
              solution of protein or nucleic acid structures.  A general user program will be
              established to allow access to non-consortium crystallographers.



