Title       : Nanotechnology: Silicon Nanoparticle Engineering for Novel Memory and Logic
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9871850

Award Number: 9871850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry A. Atwater haa@daedalus.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry J. Vahala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Flagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1084,1682,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871850  Atwater  This objectives of this project are to develop the synthesis, 
              processing, manipulation and characterization tools to enable and  improve
              novel, emerging silicon nanoparticle memory and logic  devices. These devices
              exploit common approaches for particle  synthesis, manipulation, interface
              passivation and electrical and  optical characterization of ordered, passivated
              arrays of  size-classified silicon nanoparticles which are integrated into 
              larger device structures. Device structures to be addressed in  this project
              include: a nonvolatile memory based on discrete  charge storage on the
              nanoparticle floating gate of a  field-effect transistor, and a silicon
              nanoparticle-based  implementation for a cellular automata wire/logic gate, in
              which  information is propagated by cell-cell electrostatic interactions 
              rather than by current flow. The nanoparticle engineering and  assembly methods
              developed in this program may enable the first  realization of a cellular
              automata logic gate capable of room  temperature operation.  Key aspects of the
              synthesis and processing are engineering of  nanoparticle size, shape,
              dielectric passivation thickness and  stoichiometry, and control of
              nanoparticle position. Control of  position is achieved in model device
              structures using force  manipulation by a scanning probe microscope. Another
              effort is  aimed at utilizing fluid and colloidal forces to fabricate  ordered
              linear and planar arrays. Characterization of charge  state and morphology at
              the single particle level is performed  using conducting tip atomic force
              microscopy.  %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of  science and engineering having high technological relevance. The  research
              will contribute new knowledge at a fundamental level to  important aspects of
              electronic devices. The basic knowledge and  understanding gained from the
              research is expected to contribute  to improving the performance of advanced
              devices by providing a  fundamental understanding  and a basis for designing
              and producing  improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important 
              feature of the program is the integration of research and  education through
              the training of students in a fundamentally and  technologically significant
              area. This research grant is made  under the Nanotechnology Initiative (NSF
              98-20), and is co-funded  by the Directorate for Engineering, the Directorate
              for Computer  and Information Science and Engineering, and the Directorate for 
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The research team is a 
              university/industry/government lab collaboration between Applied  Physics and
              Chemical Engineering faculty at the California  Institute of Technology, and
              technical staff at Bell Labs/Lucent  Technologies and the Jet Propulsion
              Laboratory.
