Title       : Self-assembling Nanostructures from An Expanded Genetic Information System
               (AEGIS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9871880

Award Number: 9871880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Benner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Weihong Tan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 1084,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                DNA and RNA are virtually unique among polymers in organic chemistry to 
              display role-base self-assembly over a broad range of molecular structure. 
              This self-assembly is the basis of biotechnology and genetics, and is the 
              focus of this proposal.        Work in the Benner laboratories has shown that
              the Watson-Crick base  pair can support 12 nucleobases joined in six distinct
              base pairs, each  joined by different patterns of hydrogen bonding, to give An
              Expanded  Genetic Information System (AEGIS) following an expanded set of
              Watson-  Crick pairing rules. AEGIS can be copied via template-directed 
              polymerization catalyzed by DNA and RNA polymerases.        Work in the Tan
              laboratories has developed and exploited near-field  scanning optical
              microscopy (NSOM) tools to image single molecules with 10-  20 nm resolution on
              two-dimensional surfaces, in particular, nanostructure  functional probes
              having the dimensions of single molecules. Using these  technologies, Tan has
              imaged a variety of molecules and nanostructures  (buckminsterfulleranes, DNA
              chains, and cell membranes),  photonanofabricated a variety of biochemically
              functionalized  nanostructures, analyzed the kinetics of single enzyme
              molecules, and  probed the release of metabolites inside single cells.       
              The two research groups, housed in adjacent buildings, therefore have 
              technologies ideally matched to undertake a collaborative project focusing  on
              the practical aspects of synthesis/fabrication through bio-self  assembly of
              nanostructures.  Procedures for synthesizing the components of  the
              nanostructures using biocatalysts (in particular, thermostable DNA 
              polymerases) will be explored, with an eye towards in situ generation of  the
              components of nanostructures. The cells of the largest nano-nets will  be
              loaded with photoreactive groups that can be written/read by NSOM. We  hope
              that this will create a small readable/writable memory element with  obvious
              relevance to practical applications.
