Title       : Nanotechnology: Novel Electrodeposited Nanocrystalline Metals and Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9871980

Award Number: 9871980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $558206             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl C. Koch carl_koch@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Fedkiw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jagdish Narayan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1084,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871980  Koch    The focus of this research is to develop artifact-free 
              nanocrystalline materials by electrodeposition.  Electrochemical parameters
              that control the grain size and  chemistry of copper and zinc nanocrystalline
              films are a  central theme of the research.  The effects of chemical  addition
              agents to the bath and the waveform of a periodic,  pulsed-current deposition
              are studied.  For comparison  purposes selected nanocrystalline samples are
              also prepared  by mechanical attrition followed by powder compaction and by 
              pulsed-laser ablation.  Closely coupled with these  processing studies is
              atomic level characterization of the  nanocrystalline grain-boundary structure
              and chemistry using  high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and 
              analytical electron microscopy to provide feedback on the  effects of
              processing variables.  A goal of the synthesis  and characterization studies is
              the processing of the  nanocrystalline metals with a range of grain sizes from 
              about 2 to 50 nm and the introduction of nanodispersoids at  1 to 10 volume
              percent.  Into each nanocrystalline metal  "hard" and "soft" (polystyrene)
              nanodispersoids are  introduced during the electrodeposition process.  This 
              provides unique model systems to determine mechanical  properties as a function
              of nanocrystalline grain size, test  temperature, and strain rate.  The
              influence of the  nanoscale dispersoids on mechanical deformation and shear 
              banding is of special interest.  The data obtained should  allow us to
              construct better models for the deformation and  fracture behavior of
              nanocrystalline materials.  This award  is a selection under the NSF 98-20
              initiative on Functional  Nanocrystalline Materials.  %%%  In comparison to
              more conventional means to prepare  nanocrystalline metals (e.g., gas phase
              condensation or  mechanical attrition), electrodeposition has the following 
              advantages: i) it is a relatively simple operation with low-  cost equipment;
              ii) dense, void-free deposits can be  prepared directly  without need for
              consolidation; iii)  current or plating-bath chemistry may be used to control 
              grain size, and hence properties, of the nanocrystalline  deposit; and iv)
              nanocomposites with unique properties can  be formed by codeposition of
              nanoparticulates within the  metal matrix.  ***
