Title       : Development of Novel Instrumentation for the Growth of Low Dimensional
               Structures Using Molecular Beam Epitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9871210

Award Number: 9871210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen S. Menoni carmen@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Siu Au Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9871210  Menoni  The ability to tailor the optical and electronic properties
              of low dimensional semiconductor structures with increased quantum confinement
              makes these structures attractive candidates for the design of optoelectronic
              devices.  Fabrication of nanostructures that constrain the carriers to move in
              either one direction or within atomic clusters, as in quantum wires and quantum
              dots respectively, is a technological challenge.    The PIs propose to develop
              novel instrumentation for the growth of low dimensional structures that
              incorporates optical manipulation of atomic species during the molecular beam
              epitaxy growth of III-V heterostructures.  Laser beams will be introduced
              noninvasively into the MBE chamber.  The radiation force generated by
              counter-propagating laser beams will be used to focus the Group III specie into
              an array of lines or dots to form periodic quantum wire or quantum dot
              structures with sub- 100nm feature size.  This will create a composition
              modulation in the growth plane consisting of regions that are rich in the
              III-specie separated by regions that have been depleted of the III-specie. 
              Such composition modulation will confine the carriers in either one or two
              directions in the plane of growth, depending on whether one or two mutually
              perpendicular standing waves of light are used to focus the atomic beam. 
              Carrier confinement in the growth direction will be accomplished by sandwiching
              the composition-modulated layer with confinement layers of appropriate
              composition.    The instrument will add a radically new capability to
              conventional MBE growth process without significantly altering the growth
              conditions.  The proposed instrumentation will allow for the demonstration of a
              growth method that will provide unprecedented control in the location and size
              of the nanostructures  ***
