Title       : Decomposing the Processing Steps and Neuronal Basis of Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a9871853

Award Number: 9871853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165369             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Dickhaut jdickhaut@csom.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kip Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jose V. Pardo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin A. McCabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1294,6856,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                People in all walks of life routinely make choices between pairs of goods or
              alternatives.  Such choices range from deciding between movies to whether to
              resign in the face of impeachment. Such choices may range from home financing
              to following and/or investing in the New York Stock Exchange. We plan to
              differentiate neuronal activity of the brain on stylized versions of the paired
              choice task.  But why focus on the brain?  Certainly there is the inherent
              feeling that simply making the exploration may tell us something in light of
              the immense ground that has been broken in neurology in recent years. Given the
              improved understanding of depression,  Parkinson's syndrome and bulimia there
              is every reason to believe that the study of neuronal activity will give us an
              improved understanding of normal everyday choice, along dimensions where there
              still remain many unanswered questions.   But more specifically we wish to
              focus on individual choices that are fundamentally economic.  Why?  We see a
              need to more completely specify the individual choice process so as to get
              arrive at an understanding of the price formation process.  Recently it has
              become possible to delineate the price formation process of the double auction
              by revising models of individual choice.  Similarly it has become possible to
              isolate systematic preconscious processing behavior in the performance of
              simple economies such as the English Auction.   To come to the point that one
              can fully articulate what will happen across a large vista of economic
              phenomena using revised models of individual choice we need to begin to supply
              information on what is happening in the simplest of environments, the paired
              choice task.  In the paired choice task, we will study 2 basic questions. 
              First we ask, `Does the pattern of neuronal activity in response in a fixed
              choice paradigm change with the introduction of risk, and again of ambiguity?` 
              Then we ask, `Is there a differential pattern of neuronal activity in response
              to gains and losses? Is the pattern of neuronal activity in response to a fixed
              choice paradigm more complex (as specified below) for losses than gains?`  We
              anticipate much more parahippocampal involvement in the processing of risk and
              uncertainty than in the  other tasks.  Differential amygdala and orbital
              frontal activation is expected with losses versus gains.  Furthermore, there is
              a strong likelihood that affective processes mediated by the limbic and
              paralimbic cortices will produce increasing levels of neuronal activity in the
              ventralmedial orbitalfrontal cortex as task conditions change from certainty to
              risk to ambiguity. It is expected that medial orbital frontal cortex will play
              a modulating role with respect to episodic memory's impact on the unconscious
              mechanisms active during choice under risk and ambiguity and participate with
              the amygdala in the effects of emotional arousal on memory.   Our project uses
              PET to measure brain blood flow, an established marker of neuronal activity.
              Twenty right-handed normal subjects will participate in the task. Stimulus
              delivery and response acquisition will be generated using MEL v2.0.  In
              addition, GSR and Heart Rate Monitors will be used to provide cross validation
              of PET inferences. The PET scanner is a Siemens ECAT 953B camera, while data
              are analyzed with SPM 96.  The research will contribute fundamentally to our
              understanding of the neuronal processes that support the interplay of cognitive
              and affective information processing during the choice task.  In particular,
              the coupling of PET methodology and the paired choice paradigm promises to
              distinguish differential neuronal activity that may be triggered by risk and
              ambiguity and by gains and losses.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
