Title       : Acquisition of a High Performance Parallel Workstation Cluster for Research in
               Mechanics of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9871240

Award Number: 9871240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan F. Bower bower@isaac.engin.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rob B. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Needleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lambert B. Freund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney J. Clifton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9871240
Bower
This action is in response to the Major Research Instrumentation
              Initiative MRI'98 (NSF 98-16).  The purpose is to add a cluster of high
              performance workstations to the Computational Mechanical Research Facility at
              Brown University.  The cluster is connected to form a dedicated, high speed
              parallel computing environment, and is used to strengthen the activities of the
              Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Brown University. 
              

The primary objective of MRSEC supported research is to develop and apply
              novel computational methods to understand how phenomena at the atomic scale
              (with nanometer dimensions) and microstructural scale (with micron dimensions)
              determine the mechanical, electronic and optical properties of materials. 
              Several significant advances have been made towards this goal in recent years,
              including: development of the quasi-eontinuum method, which couples atomistic
              simulation techniques with adaptive finite element analysis; development of
              discrete dislocation models of plasticity; development of sharp interface and
              phase field models of microstructures evolution in stressed solids; development
              of finite element methods for computing strain effects on the electronic
              properties of semiconductors; and the development of physically-based models of
              fracture, which use microsructural properties of materials to predict the
              fracture resistance of structures.  

The facility is to be used to develop
              and apply scalable, parallel algorithms for simulating material behavior at a
              range of length scales and incorporating coupled physical processes.  An
              immediate impact of the facility is to allow realistic three-dimensional
              simulations of material behavior to be run routinely.  Further progress
              requires a systematic application of these techniques to explore fully the
              fundamental mechanisms of deformation and failure in materials.  This facility
              provides the necessary computing power for this effort, and holds the promise
              of major breakthroughs in understanding the behavior of materials. 


