Title       : Synthesis of Nanostructured Films for Friction and Wear Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9871863

Award Number: 9871863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $659868             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Girshick slg@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. McMurry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joachim Heberlein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Gerberich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9871863
Girshick
     The object of this project is to develop and study
              methods for the synthesis of nanostructured films for friction and wear
              resistance.  This award is made under the Partnership for Nanotechnology
              Initiative.  The research will consist of two related approaches, one involving
              high-rate deposition of continuous films, the other involving high-definition
              deposition of patterned films.  The high-rate deposition will be achieved using
              Hypersonic Plasma Particle Deposition (HPPD), with the objective of developing
              HPPD as a robust, reliable process through an improved understanding of the
              operating parameters and their effects upon the film properties. In order to
              demonstrate the feasibility of aerodynamic focusing for the deposition of
              size-selected nanoparticles to produce patterned thin films for friction and
              wear applications such as the Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS),
              experimental monitoring of the process using a new particle beam mass
              spectrometer will be conducted.   This research includes the development of
              numerical models to simulate the plasma flow and temperature distribution,
              particle nucleation and growth in the nozzle, and hypersonic deposition of the
              particles on the film substrate.
     The impact of this nanotechnology
              research is expected to be crucial for commercial viability for high-rate
              processing applications in the automotive industry, and for patterned
              nanostructure deposition for the MEMS industry.
