Title       : Nanotechnology: Electronics of Self-Assembled Nanostructures Based on
               Nanocrystallite Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a9871996

Award Number: 9871996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moungi G. Bawendi mgb@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Klavs F. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Laibinis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond C. Ashoori  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1084,1682,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871996  Bawendi  This project combines expertise in Chemistry, Physics, 
              Chemical Engineering, and Materials Science to synthesize,  process and
              characterize self-assembled quantum dot based  nanostructures. It integrates
              activities for creating  nanocrystalline quantum dots, surface derivatization,
              self-  assembly, and ultra-sensitive electronic measurements and  spectroscopy,
              to explore the chemistry and physics of single  and coupled nanocrystalline
              quantum dots. The investigators  will develop control of spatial positioning of
               nanocrystallites on a nanometer scale. Proteins or  oligonucleotides which
              self-assemble will be used as  directing agents for the formation of
              nanostructures. Each  of these biomolecules can be engineered to bind to a 
              specific ligand on the surface of a nanocrystalline quantum  dot. The
              biological system then serves as a template for the  controlled positioning of
              quantum dots on a surface. Ultra-  sensitive charge sensing methods will be
              used to probe the  electronic structure of such quantum dots. These 
              measurements will address both the energetics and the extent  of delocalizaton
              of charges inside or localized on the  surface of the quantum dots.
              Additionally, it is planned to  spectroscopically characterize charged single
              quantum dots.  The spectroscopic properties of nanocrystalline dots are 
              expected to strongly depend on the number of charges present  in the dot,
              analogous to the filling of atomic orbitals;  this may lead  to control over
              the interaction of photons  with the nanostructures through adjustment of the
              charge  density on the dots. Such a capability opens the possibility  of using
              nanocrystalline quantum dots as building blocks for  microphotonic devices. The
              interdisciplinary collaboration  combining sensitive electronic measurements
              with the  chemical control of the dots, their environment, and their  spatial
              positioning may allow optimization of the chemistry  of the self-assembled
              nanostructures and the observation of  new physics of confine d electrons.  %%%
               The project addresses basic research issues in a topical  area of science and
              engineering having high technological  relevance. The research will contribute
              new knowledge at a  fundamental level to important aspects of 
              electronic/photonic devices. The basic knowledge and  understanding gained from
              the research is expected to  contribute to improving the performance of
              advanced devices  by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for 
              designing and producing improved materials, and materials  combinations.  An
              important feature of the program is the  integration of research and education
              through the training  of students in a fundamentally and technologically 
              significant area. Graduate students will be co-advised by  the four
              investigators across the disciplines of Chemistry,  Physics, Chemical
              Engineering, and Materials Science  integrating research and education from an
              interdisciplinary  perspective. This research grant is made under the 
              Nanotechnology Initiative (NSF 98-20), and is co-funded by  the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities(OMA), the  Division of Chemical and Transport
              Systems, and the Division  of Materials Research.    ***
