Title       : Development of High Energy Resolution Anomalous X-ray Scattering Instrumentation
               for High-Brilliance Synchrotron Beamlines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9871246

Award Number: 9871246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Mini mini@anl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Graber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. James Viccaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9166,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities   (CRIF)
              Program and the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program of   the Office of
              Integrative Activities will support the development of an   accurate and
              reliable anomalous x-ray diffraction (AXD) spectrometer   consisting of a
              high-energy-resolution narrow-band-pass crystal-optics   monochromator and
              crystal analyzer.  This is a team effort involving   Susan Mini of the Physics
              Department at Northern Illinois University and   Timothy Graber and P. James
              Viccaro, both scientists at The Consortium   for Advanced Radiation Sources
              (CARS) of The University of Chicago.  The   spectrometer will allow utilization
              of full energy dispersion in   scattering cross-section of atoms near the
              absorption edge.  The   instrumentation, which will be installed on  beamline
              15 at the Advanced   Photon Source (APS), will be used primarily for
              valence-specific static   and time-resolved chemical crystallography
              experiments.  Applications   include studies on large magnetoresistive oxides,
              surfaces and   interfacial properties of soft materials and time-dependent
              studies of   polymers.    The AXD technique will help solve unknown crystal
              structures containing   mixed-valent atoms in a way complementary to neutron
              diffraction and   local probes such as x-ray absorption spectroscopy.  AXD will
              also   provide a useful method to study the behavior of an element in a single 
               oxidation state with different types of coordination geometry.    Currently,
              AXD studies are carried out with energy resolution of a few   eV, which
              prevents selective modification of the structure factor of   atoms of one
              particular valence over another.  This instrument, with its   significantly
              higher resolution, combined with the high spectral   brilliance of the APS,
              will have significant impact in solid-state and   materials science.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
