Title       : Acquisition of Advanced Engineered Wood Composites Manufacturing and Science
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9871411

Award Number: 9871411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Habib J. Dagher dagherh@maine.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric N. Landis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry S. Goodell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Shaler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1038,1189,1442,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9871411
Dagher
This action is in response to the Major Research
              Instrumentation Initiative MRI'98 (NSF-98-16).  The purpose is to upgrade a
              Composite-Reinforced-Wood (CRW) Manufacturing Science Laboratory at the
              University of Maine.  The laboratory is part of a new facility designed to
              develop the next generation of wood composites for construction.  

Recent
              research has shown that Composite Reinforced Wood (CRW) offers superior
              properties at reduced costs.  As in the development of reinforced and
              prestressed concrete, basic research is needed to unlock the full potential of
              a wide variety of CRW structural members, e.g. joists, beams, columns, panel
              and connections.  CRW hybrids are unique in that two very different classes of
              material, FRP and wood are used together; thus the principles governing the
              short and long-term structural behavior differ in many ways form those
              involving only one of the two materials.  This project will focus
              on:

Developing a new class of FRP reinforcing materials that are compatible
              with wood, particularly its hypoexpansion and visco-elastic
              properties.

Developing and maintaining over time the interface (bond)
              between the two materials needed to ensure full composite action (this will
              require a basic understanding of the mechanisms of bond
              durability).

Developing a basic understanding of the short and long-term
              behavior of CRW structural elements including performance over the full range
              of loading, ultimate strength, ductility, creep, fatigue, and
              moisture/temperature/UV cycling.

The research is conducted at four different
              levels: micro, meso, macro and structural.  A multi-disciplinary team will
              conduct the research composing ten engineers and scientists from three units at
              the University of Maine (civil/structural engineering, wood science and
              technology, and chemical engineering), the industry-supported SPI composites
              Institute, the Composites Materials Engineering Center (COMTEC) in Winona MN,
              and the USDA Forest Products laboratory in Madison.  

