Title       : MRI: Establishment of a Wafer Level Batch Packaging Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9871319

Award Number: 9871319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1072360            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin P. Martin kmartin@prism.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Meindl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871319  Martin  Early 21st century opportunities for gigascale and terascale
              integration will be governed by a hierarchy of limits whose five levels can be
              codified as: 1) fundamental physics, 2) material specific properties, 3)
              device, 4) circuit and 5) system.  At these levels of integration the most
              restrictive limits in this hierarchy will not be imposed by transistors
              performing computing functions but rather by interconnection networks
              performing communication functions.  A key interconnection level of this
              hierarchy that will be severely challenged by gigascale integration is the
              chip-to-module interconnect that integrates the packaged chip (or circuit) into
              the system (e.g. onto a printed wiring board).  The strategy for addressing
              this problem is to develop the new frontier of wafer level batch packaging
              (WLBP) technologies for chip-to-module interconnection, Wafer level batch
              packaging is envisioned as a process that creates the signal input/output (1/0)
              and external power contacts and encapsulates the finished silicon die prior to
              dicing the wafer.  At its heart, WLBP will provide an interconnection framework
              for integrated circuits (ICs) so that before dicing the wafer each die has all
              the functions (e.g. external electrical contacts, encapsulation of the finished
              silicon) of a conventional, fully-packaged IC.  Specifically, we propose that a
              scheme integrating a compliant interposer layer and flexible leads on the
              device side of the die be used to create a chip-scale package using massively
              parallel fabrication methods carried out entirely at the wafer-level: The
              purpose of this equipment request is to provide in one location the resources
              needed to conduct a majority of the steps required for developing wafer level
              batch packaging and the ability to fully characterize, test, and analyze all
              stages of the work on 125mm and 150mm wafers.  It should be emphasized that
              this work must be conducted at these wafer sizes instead of on smaller wafers
              or pieces of wafer in order to fully ad dress WLBP issues, and to produce
              results that are widely useful to other leading edge workers in the
              semiconductor chip research and technology community.  The result of this
              effort will be a set of enabling technologies (design and process) that will
              allow ICs to be fully packaged in wafer-form and ready for full testing,
              burn-in, and system assembly with no further packaging steps required.  ***
