Title       : Acquisition of a Field Emission Gun Analytical Electron Microscope for the
               University of Michigan Electron Microbeam Analysis Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9871177

Award Number: 9871177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $690000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Mansfield jfmjfm@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lumin Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney C. Ewing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoqing Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Peacor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871177
Mansfield
Analytical electron microscopy (AEM) is critical to the
              characterization of metals, ceramics semiconductors, nano-composites, catalysts
              and geological materials.  This Major Research Instrumentation proposal seeks
              support from NSF for the acquisition of a field emission gun analytical
              electron microscope (FEG-AEM).  This instrument would become the primary
              analytical electron microscope for materials research, replacing the existing
              AEMs in the University of Michigan's Electron Microbeam Analysis Laboratory
              (EMAL).  The new FEG-AEM will offer nearly two orders of magnitude higher
              electron beam current and a factor of three smaller electron probe than the
              existing instrument.  This increase in beam current will mean that analyses may
              be performed on the nanometer length scale.  The new microscope will be located
              in one of the custom -designed laboratories consisting of 360 square feet of
              temperature-controlled, low-vibration and low-field space. 
%%%
The new
              FEG-AEM, to be acquired under the National Science Foundation's Major Research
              Instrumentation program, will be the primary focus of a wide variety of
              materials research programs across a wide range of science and engineering
              disciplines.  The active departments include: Materials Science & Engineering,
              Nuclear Engineering and Radiological Sciences, Chemical Engineering, Electrical
              Engineering & Computer Science, Applied Physics and Geological Sciences.  Over
              22 research projects, funded at a total level of over $5M, with 19 faculty, 29
              graduate student researchers, and 5 undergraduate students, will be directly
              impacted by the new FEG-AEM.  The new instrument will provide essential
              capabilities to the University's research programs, attract new research
              programs and allow the training of graduate students in advanced analytical
              electron microscopy.
***


