Title       : Synthesis, Assembly, and Optical and Transport Studies of Magnetic
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9871849

Award Number: 9871849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horia Metiu metiu@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Buratto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Awschalom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey F. Strouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1084,1682,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871849  Metiu    We plan to synthesize and assemble dilute magnetic
              semiconductor  nanostructures and study their transport and optical properties 
              by using near field optical microscopy.  It is well known that by  reducing the
              size of a semiconductor structure we can affect and  control the properties of
              the electrons in it.  We know  practically nothing about the way in which this
              size reduction  affects the magnetic properties of these systems, even though
              we  expect these effects to be considerable.  We will prepare  nanocrystalline
              "dots" of II-VI semiconductor doped with divalent  transition metal ions with
              magnetic properties (Mn(II), Cr(II),  Fe(II) and Cu(II) ).  We can thus study
              the effect of confinement  on the exchange interactions and the magneto-optical
              properties  of these materials.  We plan to use a near field microscope to 
              perform femtosecond and cw studies of the magneto-optical  properties of
              individual dots and to determine how these  properties depend on dot sizes.  We
              also plan to create ensembles  of such dots so that we can study the collective
              effects created  by the interaction between the dots.  One of our most
              important  tools is the near field optical microscope.  This is a wonderful 
              tool with many exciting uses, but the quantitative interpretation  of the
              measurements is hampered by the lack of a quantitative  theory of the
              electromagnetic fields produced in the structure  being studied.  We propose to
              develop new theoretical methods for  solving this problem.  %%%  The kind of
              studies proposed here are motivated by the need of  making smaller electronic
              devices and denser computer memories.  As the elements of these devices become
              smaller the properties of  the electrons in them are being modified.  We cannot
              design these  devices if we cannot anticipate and understand how the electrons 
              in them will behave.  Our work hopes to fill this gap in our  understanding. 
              The ultimate computer will be a device in which  the electrons themselves are
              computing elements.   The main  candidates right now are systems in which
              various spin states are  being excited, since they maintain the information
              imparted to  them (coherence) for the longest time.  This is one additional 
              reason why the study of spin behavior in small structures may  impact future
              technologies. 

This award is being supported by the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities; the Division of Materials Research, Directorate
              for Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and the Division of Electrical and
              Communications Systems, Directorate for Engineering.***
