Title       : GOALI: Selectivity Crystallization of Molecules on Solid Surfaces Using
               Engineered Self-Assembled Monolayers as Nanotemplates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9871798

Award Number: 9871798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Couzis acouzis@che-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Meenan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Maldarelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1084,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9871798  A. Couzis/CUNY    This research is a joint collaboration
              between the Department of Chemical Engineering at the City College and the
              Central Research and Development Division of DuPont.  The objective of the
              research is to design solid surface nanotemplates for the heterogeneous
              crystallization as seeds of one form of a crystalline material which can exist
              in several polymorphic forms.  These polymorph specific seeds are then used to
              control the selective crystallization in a bulk industrial crystallizer.  The
              approach employs using self assembled silane or organosulfur monolayers which
              covalently link to solid supports to functionalize surfaces with chemical
              moities.  The moities are selected in such a way that the surface mimics a
              crystalline face of the desired polymorph.  In this way this face nulceates on
              the surface, and the mature crystal of the desired polymorph grows.  Two
              systems will be studied, the inorganic polymorphs calcite and vaterite of
              calcium carbonate, and the alpha and gamma forms of the amino acid glycine. In
              each of these systems, templates will be constructed for selective
              crystallization.    The research addresses Dupont's requirements for selective
              polymorphic crystallization in their drug and agrochemical industries, and
              academically contributes to the development of molecular engineering designs
              for tailoring of surfaces.  The engineered nanotemplates developed under this
              research effort, will be utilized in the design, construction, and testing at
              DuPont of a device to fabricate seeds.  This research effort there fore
              represents a directed use of nanostructures.
