Title       : MRI: Equipment Acquisition for Research in Enabling Technologies for Volumetric
               Imaging, Responsive Displays andTelecollaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9871235

Award Number: 9871235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schroder ps@cs.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Barr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9871235  Schroder, Peter  Barr, Alan H.  California Institute of Technology 
                MRI: Equipment Acquisition for Research in Enabling Technologies for
              Volumetric Imaging, Responsive Displays and Telecollaboration    This proposal
              pertains to equipment, which will support an integrated research program in
              enabling technologies for volumetric imaging, responsive displays, and
              telecollaboration.  The PIs' vision is that of an effective virtual workspace
              for collaborative scientific discovery and design.  This requires fundamental
              research in the areas of geometric modeling, visualization, concurrent
              computation and human-computer interaction.  Integrating these elements will
              enable us to develop new approaches for managing-and gaining insight
              into-complex processes and data.  It will also lead to the exploration of new
              computing paradigms at the confluence of graphics, scientific computing,
              volumetric imaging, human-computer interaction, and concurrent computation. 
              Target applications include scientific visualization, conceptual design, and
              rapid scientific experimentation both in synchronous and asynchronous
              collaboration settings.  In support of this research agenda the PIs are seeking
              funding for the acquisition of equipment necessary to create the associated
              research facility.  The centerpiece of the facility will be two
              state-of-the-art responsive workbenches, 3D stereoscopic display devices. 
              Additionally the lab will contain a responsive whiteboard display to integrate
              the research into classroom settings.  The support request will provide: (1)
              the high-performance computation and graphics hardware needed for interaction
              with large datasets on the responsive workbench; (2) equipment to construct a
              companion device, the responsive whiteboard; (3) prototype optical trackers,
              and (4) a fiber optic link to connect the 2 Caltech responsive workbenches.
