Title       : Using Satellite-derived Landuse Data to Improve Meso- and Storm-scale Numerical
               Weather Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9871807

Award Number: 9871807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $674613             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Stensrud   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Lamb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vince C. Wong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Jakubauskas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871807  Stensrud  Title:Using Satellite-Derived Landuse Data to Improve Meso-
              and  Storm-scale Numerical Weather Prediction  Improvements in numerical
              weather prediction (NWP) have been  hindered by deficiencies in the
              availability and quality of  land cover data. Capabilities to inventory and map
              land  cover conditions and to monitor land surface changes at  higher spatial
              and temporal resolution are needed. To  address these issues, a collaborative
              study between  researchers in Oklahoma and Nebraska will be carried out to 
              improve the simulation of surface heat and moisture fluxes  in mesoscale NWP
              models. This project will focus upon  weather events that are not forecast well
              by present  operational NWP models, such as extreme high and low  temperature
              events, where the incorporation of improved land  cover data is likely to have
              the greatest impact. Four  specific objectives are defined:  (1) evaluate the
              ability  to improve upon the daily coarse-resolution (1 km) satellite  data by
              blending in very high-resolution satellite data;   (2) evaluate the
              improvements from using a detailed land  surface parameterization scheme in
              mesoscale model  simulations by comparing modeled fluxes to the unique flux 
              observations available over Oklahoma;  (3) document the  improvements in
              simulating several extreme temperature  events that have occurred over the
              United States by  comparing mesoscale model simulations with and without the 
              detailed land cover data; and (4) incorporate the high-  resolution land cover
              into the Advanced Regional Prediction  System (ARPS) for use in operational NWP
              efforts. The  knowledge gained from this study will provide the  information
              necessary to improve the forecasts of extreme  weather events, particularly
              extreme high and low  temperature forecasts, that are a significant economic 
              concern. It is expected that improved forecasts of  temperatures would be of
              great use to insurance companies,  electric power utilities, agriculture, and
              the  transportation industries.
