Title       : Acquisition of an Apparatus for Precision Fabrication of Nanostructures and
               Nanoclusters for Chemistry, Materials Science, and Physics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a9871234

Award Number: 9871234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard C. Feldman leonard.c.feldman@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Weller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Haglund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871234
Feldman
Nanostructure science and technology embodies the art and
              science of fabricating 1-100 nm scale structures in order to study their
              materials properties.  University research in this area drives the scientific
              frontier and trains students for the ultrasmall-scale technologies envisioned
              for the future.  Funded by the Major Research Instrumentation program, the PIs
              will acquire and assemble a unique system comprising a finely-focused ion beam
              (FIB) coupled by a vacuum transfer line to a pulsed-laser deposition (PLD)
              apparatus.  This system will be used to produce nanostructures and
              nanostructure devices with extremely high precision in an entirely new way,
              producing nanoclusters of extraordinary uniformity and extremely well
              determined spatial periodicity.  PLD complements the FIB system as an
              extraordinarily flexible thin-film synthesis tool, widely used to synthesize
              epitaxial films of high-temperature superconductors, ferroelectrics,
              semiconductors and complex optical materials, as well as multilayer device
              structures.  The coupled system gives us the critical capability of producing
              three dimensional arrays, unusual and uncontaminated substrates, and "capped"
              implanted structures for subsequent processing and characterization.  This
              combination of equipment also enables the realization of advanced device
              structures in a variety of forefront technologies and will yield unique
              opportunities for interdisciplinary research of substantial breadth and depth.
              
%%%
This instrument combination, acquired with funds from the National
              Science Foundation's Major Research Instrumentation program, will serve a
              Vanderbilt goal of interdisciplinary research, by bringing together physicists,
              chemists, materials scientists, mechanical engineers, and electrical engineers.
               The collaborators include scientists from nearby Belmont and Fisk (a minority
              institution) Universities, and the University of Tennessee; Oak Ridge National
              Laboratory (ORNL), and the Danish Microelectronics Center (MIC).  ORNL and the
              MIC have agreed to be major supporters of the program through contributed
              expertise in ion beam science (ORNL), pulsed laser deposition (ORNL), and
              optical device fabrication (MIC).  The instrumentation It will be the nucleus
              of a new research and educational enterprise in middle Tennessee, involving
              minority-based universities and primarily-undergraduate colleges.  It will also
              be a catalyst for new undergraduate research programs, and opportunities for
              Ph.D. matriculation at non-Ph.D. granting schools.
***


