Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for a Molecular Genetics Core Facility for Research and
               Research Training in Conservation Genetics and Molecular Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9871024

Award Number: 9871024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisette P. Waits lwaits@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest L. Brannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Brunsfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1189,9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9871024  Lisette P. Waits  University of Idaho  Acquisition of Equipment for a
              Molecular Genetics Core  Facility for Research and Research Training in
              Conservation  Genetics and Molecular Ecology  This proposal supplies funds to
              equip a Molecular Genetics  Core Facility for research and training in the
              fields of  conservation genetics and molecular ecology.  This facility  will
              support a strong interdisciplinary program in  conservation biology, ecology,
              and natural resource  management at the University of Idaho.  Natural resources
               sciences have reached a new era in basic and applied  research that requires
              the use of molecular genetic tools to  address specific questions that are
              critical for these  fields.  The rapid advancement in molecular biology 
              techniques and invention of automated DNA sequencing and  genotyping has
              enormously increased the productivity,  accuracy, and safety of these
              techniques.  The result of  this advancement is the opening of an exciting new
              realm of  research directions in the fields of conservation genetics, 
              molecular ecology, molecular systematics, and molecular  pathology.  The goals
              of this equipment grant are to develop  a Molecular Genetics Core Facility to
              expand and explore  research directions by 1) improving research capabilities, 
              2) developing a new level of interdisciplinary  collaboration, and 3) providing
              new research training and  educational opportunities in the areas of
              conservation  genetics, molecular ecology, molecular systematics, and 
              molecular pathology.  Three principal investigators, seven affiliated faculty,
              and  numerous graduate and undergraduate students will initially  share the
              proposed research facility.  The three principal  investigators have strong
              backgrounds in molecular genetic  research and span the major disciplines of
              the College -  plant, animal, and fisheries sciences.  The seven affiliated 
              faculty members have less molecular genetic experience, but  propose to expand
              their research to incorporate molecular  methods  when this facility is
              established.  The inclusion of  the affiliated faculty greatly expands the
              interdisciplinary  breadth of researchers using the facility and is important 
              for achieving our goal of providing new research training  opportunities for
              faculty and students who have had little  exposure to molecular genetic
              methods.
