Title       : Collaborative Research: Role of Parasites and Disease in Health and Population
               Abundance of Adult Pacific Herring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9871982

Award Number: 9871982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary D. Marty gdmarty@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Marty 9871982

Pacific herring (Clupea pallasl) are schooling fish that
              range throughout coastal regions of the North Pacific.  They are an important
              component of the ecosystem as secondary consumers, they serve as high-quality
              prey for many marine mammals and birds, and in Prince William Sound, Alaska,
              they comprise an important seasonal commercial fishery.

Models to estimate
              fish populations commonly integrate many variables, including age, length, sex
              composition, fishing mortality, and indices of abundance such as catch per unit
              effort and survey biomass.  For Pacific herring in Prince William Sound,
              population biomass has been modeled and estimated since the early 1970s. 
              Natural mortality is usually treated as a constant in these models because it
              is difficult to estimate mortality without comprehensive information about
              disease and predation.  Recent evidence from Prince William Sound, however,
              indicates that use of a constant mortality in such models can lead to large
              errors in stock assessment estimates.  In 1993, estimates based on
              age-structured population models led biologists to predict that over 1 00,000
              metric tons of Pacific herring would spawn.  However, only 20,000 metric tons
              actually returned to spawn.  When viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus was
              isolated from several herring sampled from the population, it was hypothesized
              that a disease epidemic was responsible for the unexpectedly large natural
              mortality.

This project will evaluate the role of disease in Pacific herring
              by focusing on two specific objectives: 1) to determine prevalence and severity
              of disease in a free ranging Pacific herring population; and 2) to determine,
              through modifications of an age-structured assessment model, the contribution
              of disease in explaining Pacific herring population fluctuations.  To assess
              disease-produced mortality, adult Pacific herring from Prince William Sound
              will be sampled each year in April and October.  These will be examined to
              determine standard length and a variety of assays for general physiological
              condition  and the presence of pathogens will be performed. Prevalence of
              potential pathogens will be statistically linked to histopathologic lesions and
              changes in blood chemistry to determine significance of disease to individuals,
              and prevalence will be linked to population models of abundance to determine
              population-level significance.

Disease is a fundamental biological process
              that ultimately affects the longevity of most individuals, and any process that
              affects individuals will also impact populations.  This study will investigate
              the ecological significance of disease in a pelagic marine schooling fish
              species and will be the first to model the link between enzootic disease and
              population change.  Results from this study will answer basic questions about
              how season, gender, spawning condition, and age may affect disease processes
              cycling through a population.



