Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9871417

Award Number: 9871417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Efstathios I. Meletis meletis@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wen J. Meng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pratul K. Ajmera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871417
Meletis
A high resolution, fully analytical 200 keV transmission
              electron microscope (TEM) will be purchased under this Major Research
              Instrumentation award.  The TEM is a modern analytical instrument indispensable
              in today's materials research.  The proposed instrument will be the only TEM
              dedicated to materials research available at Louisiana State University (LSU). 
              The proposed enhancement will greatly benefit a large number of research
              programs of faculties in a broad range of units or departments such as
              materials science and engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical
              engineering, chemical engineering, physics, and chemistry.  Together with the
              existing scanning electron microscope and Auger/ESCA surface analysis
              instruments, these major pieces of equipment will constitute the nucleus of the
              centralized, campus-wide Materials Characterization Facility that will have a
              significant impact on materials research and curricular activities.  This
              centralized facility will serve all interested materials researchers at LSU. 
              
%%%
The high resolution, analytical transmission electron microscope,
              purchased under the National Science Foundation's Major Research 
              Instrumentation program, will be a major component of the Louisiana State
              University's Materials Characterization Facility.  This facility is essential
              to the ability of LSU to sustain and extend a strong, externally funded
              research program that provides the faculty and the campus with international
              visibility and contributes significantly to the economic development of the
              state of Louisiana.
***


