Title       : Arkansas EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9871906

Award Number: 9871906
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Hehr jghehr@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry D. Lindley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871906  Hehr  Arkansas EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement  The Arkansas EPSCoR
              Cooperative Agreement will increase the ability  of researchers in Arkansas to
              compete for federal funding.  Based  on the state s research and development
              plan and on current and  potential faculty expertise, four scientific areas
              will be  supported.  These are:  mass spectrometry, molecular and cellular 
              biology, biotechnology, and computational sciences.  The University  of
              Arkansas (UAF) will develop a mass spectrometry laboratory that  will provide
              equipment and support for projects across many of the  science and engineering
              disciplines.  In order to help meet the  needs of molecular science and
              technology in Arkansas, UAF will  recruit six additional cellular and molecular
              biology faculty and  provide start-up money to enable these faculty to begin
              development  of their research programs. The Department of Molecular Genetics
              at  the University of Arkansas For Medical Science (UAMS) has recently  been
              created.  Space for the new department has been identified and  the state has
              funded faculty salaries.  To enhance teaching and  research, start-up funds
              will be provided to equip eight new NSF-  eligible faculty in this department. 
              Two supporting areas will  also be funded.  In addition, the UAMS is planning
              to build a  facility for shared university/private sector activities which will
               enhance economic opportunities and build biotechnical business and  industry
              throughout the state. To help build a nationally  competitive program in
              Computation Sciences, equipment will be  purchased to support eleven
              tenure-track faculty and fellowships  will be initiated to attract high quality
              graduate students for  computation and other science departments. Currently NSF
              and state  funds are being used to build a high-bandwidth network and funds 
              will be sought to rebuild the campus backbone at both the UAF and  UAMS to
              accommodate better Internet access.
