Title       : University-Industry Partnership for Enabling Advances in Telecommunications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9871977

Award Number: 9871977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Min Xiao MXIAO@mail.UARK.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871977  Xiao  University-Industry Partnership for Enabling Advances in 
              Telecommunications    Abstract:  The research competitiveness of University of
              Arkansas  faculty and students in photonics-electronics will be enhanced by 
              formally establishing both a research and education partnership  with Lucent
              Technologies, the leader in the industry. The  partnership will address one of
              the most pressing problems facing  telecommunications today - the low
              transmission data rates of  present, long-haul, fiber optics links. The
              Arkansas-Lucent team,  working side-by- side, will focus on developing key
              optical  elements, such as light sources, fast optical switches, 
              multiplexer/demultiplexer, filters, and add/drop loops, for  wavelength
              division multiplexing. Six faculty members at the  University of Arkansas will
              spend blocks of time at Lucent  Technologies on research during summers and
              semester breaks and  shorter visits throughout the year as needed. Likewise,
              four  scientists at Lucent will spend blocks of time at the University of 
              Arkansas on research efforts and in contributing to the formal  education of
              students as adjunct professors, via classroom lectures  and seminars.
              Post-doctoral appointees and graduate students will  spend approximately half
              their time at each laboratory working on  only one project but taking advantage
              of the different skills,  point-of-view, and facilities available at each
              laboratory. The  Arkansas-Lucent partnership will provide faculty and students
              with  the opportunity to:  (1) work on significant industrial R&D  problems;
              (2) develop new technical skills important to  telecommunications, many of
              which are unique at Lucent; and (3)  participate in a new paradigm in graduate
              training leading to  broader career opportunities.
