Title       : Nanometer Scale Surface-Mounted Molecular Dipolar Rotors and Rotor Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9871917

Award Number: 9871917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $542100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Josef Michl michl@eefus.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5948,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Functional Nanotechnology award to Professors Josef Michl and John   Price
              at the University of Colorado-Boulder and Professor Mark Ratner at  
              Northwestern University is supported by the Advanced Materials and   Processing
              Program in Chemistry, the Surface Engineering and Tribology   Program in the
              Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems, the Western Europe Program in the
              Division of International Programs  and the Office of   Multidisciplinary
              Activities in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences   Directorate. The
              research deals with the design, synthesis and   characterization of nanometer
              scale surface-mounted molecular dipolar   rotors and rotor arrays. The basic
              device will be a surface-mounted   molecular dipolar rotor, whose base attaches
              covalently to a flat   insulating surface and supports an axis mounted
              perpendicularly to the   surface, which in turn supports a balanced 1-2 nm
              diameter rotor with a   large in-plane electric dipole moment.  The bearing, a
              fundamental   element of molecular-scale mechanics will consist of a
              metal-to-pi-face   bond. Both single rotors and self-assembling arrays of
              interacting rotors   will be constructed.  The size and moment of inertia of
              the rotor, its   height above the surface, the rotational friction, the
              magnitude of the   dipole, the spacing of the dipole array and its Curie
              temperature,   propagation velocities and dissipation will be controlled by
              appropriate   design of  chemical structures.  Rotor arrays have many potential
              applications as ferroelectric,   piezoelectric and pyroelectric materials, and
              will be useful in reducing   the size of voltage-tunable filters, oscillators,
              phase-shifters as well   as sensors, actuators, delay lines and resonators. 
              Such advances would   ultimately contribute to miniaturization of RF products
              such as cellular   handsets and wireless modems. Synergistic interactions
              between the   participating investigators in synthesis, characterization and
              theory   will provide a valuable, interdisciplinary learning experience for the
                students involved.
