Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Deep Reactive Ion Etching of Ultra-Thin
               Bonded Wafers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9871272

Award Number: 9871272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $467380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Farmer farmer@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhiming Ji  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Somenath Mitra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Durgamadhab Misra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871272
Farmer
Recently, researchers at the New Jersey Institute of Technology
              pioneered a key technology for future micro-electrical-mechanical systems
              (MEMS) research and development, in which ultra-thin single crystal silicon
              membranes (up to 4" in diameter and as thin as 2 micrometers) may be bonded to
              a variety of substrates.  This technology will open up a new class of device
              possibilities that require single-crystal silicon rather than the
              polycrystalline layers deposited by non-bonding methods.  However, extension of
              this technology to practical MEMS applications requires rapid, deep etching of
              localized areas through the bonded wafers to the underlying layers to create
              free standing structures.  In order to fill this need, a Deep Reactive Ion
              Etching (DRIE) system will be acquired with funding from the Major Research
              Instrumentation  program.  DRIE is a state-of-the-art process that is capable
              of extremely high silicon removal rates, high selectivity to masking materials,
              and precise etch profile control.  The DRIE system will complement the unique
              wafer bonding capabilities of NJIT and enable a wide array of research
              activities across several disciplines. The goals of this facility are 1) to
              provide access to advanced state-of-the-art process methods and equipment to
              perform complex design, modeling, simulation, process characterization and
              prototype development, and 2) to generate synergy between industry and NJIT
              students, faculty and staff, leading to joint research opportunities and
              efficient technology transfer. With over 40 graduate and undergraduate students
              across a range of disciplines using the cleanroom facility each year, the DRIE,
              as a centerpiece tool of the facility, is expected to have a significant impact
              on their research, advanced training and contacts with industry.  NJIT heads
              the state's micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) research and development
              effort through the state-supported New Jersey MEMS center in collaboration with
              Rutgers University, Stevens Institute of Technology, and a number of industrial
              partners, including Lucent Technologies, Kearfott Guidance Systems, and others.
               
%%%
The combination of the deep reactive ion etching system, acquired using
              Major Research Instrumentation funding,  and the ultra-thin wafer bonding
              capability will push NJIT to the forefront of MEMS research and development.
              The DRIE instrumentation would form the cornerstone of NJIT's MEMS effort, and,
              by extension through our industrial partners, would lead to the further
              development of this emerging technology in the state of New Jersey and beyond.
              It would enable the integration of microelectronic devices with a wide array of
              MEMS research, including sensors and actuators, microfluidics, biomechanics and
              optics, providing a unified research effort across at least six undergraduate
              and graduate degree areas in both engineering and arts and sciences, including
              physics, electrical engineering, materials science, mechanical engineering,
              biomedical engineering and manufacturing. 
***

