Title       : Acquisition of an Ultrafast Laser Spectrometer/Metrology System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9871213

Award Number: 9871213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arto V. Nurmikko arto_nurmikko@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Humphrey J. Maris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871213
Nurmikko
An exceptionally versatile Ultrafast Optical Spectroscopic
              Laser/Optoelectronic laboratory instrumentation system, based on new
              developments in the state of the art technology, will be acquired and
              implemented during this project that is funded by the Major Research
              Instrumentation program.  The research instrumentation utilizes compact
              all-solid state new laser technology based on titanium, which are integrated
              into a high performance tabletop ultrafast time-domain
              ellipsometric/photometric laboratory tool.  Incorporating multichannel spectral
              analysis with significant real-time computational power, the instrumentation is
              configured for high precision measurements of time varying optical constants
              that are induced within a broad spectrum of photoexcitation experiments, with
              time resolution below 30 femtoseconds.  The instrumentation features an
              integrated data processing capability, which will enable a rapid real-time
              analysis of the complex numerical problems in transient
              ellipsometry/photometry, such as occurring in heterogeneous optical media.  The
              optical system also integrates a near-field optical microscope that will
              combine the ultrafast time resolution with submicron spatial resolution for
              femtosecond microscopy on small material structures.  The two principal
              investigators on this project will be joined in close collaborative research by
              six other faculty co-investigators at Brown and by several industrial
              partners/collaborators.
%%%
The new instrumentation, which will be acquired
              from funding from the National Science Foundation's Major Research
              Instrumentation program, will provide an opportunity for postgraduate and
              postdoctoral training in state-of-the-art modern optical instrumentation and
              laser spectroscopy.  In addition to the basic scientific content within the
              proposed project areas, this training reaches into areas of applied technology
              that are bridged by elements within the proposed research that look for active
              opportunities in the development of optoelectronic instrumentation development
              for advanced metrology and spectroscopy.
***


