Title       : Acquisition of a SQUID Magnetometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9871267

Award Number: 9871267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105630             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Cohen dcohen@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray J. Weldon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Kevan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine J. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871267
Cohen
A sensitive and versatile SQUID (superconducting quantum
              interference device) magnetometer to be employed in the study of materials with
              interesting superconducting, magnetic, and/or electronic properties, and also
              in the characterization of the magnetic properties of geologically interesting
              samples will be acquired using funds from the Major Research Instrumentation
              program.  The instrument to be acquired offers the highest available
              sensitivity in a commercial instrument, allows the application of DC magnetic
              fields up to 5.5T, a sample temperature range from 2K to 800K, AC
              susceptibility measurements, and optical access.  The sample probe assembly
              allows for both vertical and horizontal rotation.  The instrument will be
              actively utilized in research programs in physics, chemistry, and geological
              sciences at the University of Oregon, and will also represent a unique facility
              within the state of Oregon.  Three general types of studies are made possible
              with the SQUID magnetometer.   One is in the general search for materials with
              unique magnetic or superconducting phases.  A second is in the study of
              oxidation states of rare earth or other cations as a function of the formation
              process.  The third is in the study of new semiconducting phases incorporating
              magnetic ions.  Many of the projects to be carried out using the acquired
              instrumentation will be active collaborations between groups in chemistry,
              focussing on synthesis and structural characterization measurements, and groups
              in physics, involved in more detailed analysis of the physical and electronic
              properties. 
%%%
The SQUID magnetometer, that will be acquired using funds
              from the National Science Foundation's Major Research Instrumentation program,
              will be available to a large multidisciplinary user base and will provide
              capability not currently available in Oregon.  
***


