Title       : Hierarchically Ordered Nanoporous-Macroporous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9871970

Award Number: 9871970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565103             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Pine pine@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley F. Chmelka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1084,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT - Pine - 9871970  Professors D.J. Pine and B.F. Chmelka will develop
              new monolithic porous materials containing a combination of pores of mean
              diameter ranges 2-50 nm and 0.1-10 micron. The dual pore construction will be
              achieved with a method that combines two processes: monodisperse emulsion
              templating of polymerizable inorganic precursors to fabricate the macropores,
              and amphiphilic surfactant-guided self-assembly of the precursors to produce
              the mesopores. Subsequent gelation, drying, and heat treatment will lead to the
              monoliths. The synthetic methods for the hierarchically ordered pore structures
              will allow control of the size and geometry for each range independently, and
              for a wide spectrum of inorganic oxide compositions (silica, alumina, titania,
              zirconia, oxides of antimony, tungsten, iron, zinc, magnesium, manganese,
              nickel, cobalt, lead, and gallium). The templating technique will also permit
              functional modification of the framework surfaces. Novel catalytic substrates,
              sensors, passive or active filters, or optical materials, may result.
              Physicochemical characterization of the synthesized materials will involve NMR,
              x-ray scattering, gas adsorption and optical measurements. Chemical reaction
              characterization will consist of the hydrogenation of styrene-butadiene over
              dispersed Pt in the mesopores, and the polymerization of propylene over
              Zr-metallocene-functionalized mesopores. The separation properties of the
              materials will be affected by incorporating unsaturated hydrocarbon or cationic
              sites (to increase affinity to aromatic or halogen groups, respectively), or by
              incorporating mercaptoalkylsilanes (to strongly adsorb heavy metals). The
              optical and sensor properties will be tuned by functionalization with II-VI
              semiconductor species within the large pore structure (to create infrared
              photonic optical materials).    The grant will also support an international
              exchange between UCSB and Bordeaux, with the laboratory of Prof. Jerome
              Bibette, which has expertise in formulat ion production, and processing of
              monidisperse emulsions. The primary mechanism of cooperation will be through
              graduate student extended reciprocal visits.
