Title       : Smart Pixels with Smart Illumination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9871479

Award Number: 9871479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Darling bdarling@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9871479
Darling
Smart Pixels with Smart Illumination Smart pixels with smart
              illumination (SPSI) is a new approach to image sensor and processing.  The SPSI
              concept, recently proposed by Prof Babbitt of Montana State University and
              Prof.  Darling of the University of Washington, involves the dynamic control of
              the spatial and temporal illumination of an object via feedback from the
              detected image.  The optical design of a SPSI sensor enables the light from an
              array of smart emitters that scatters off a remote object to be optically
              coupled back to an array of smart photodetectors, even if the emitters and
              detectors are spatially and electronically integrated.  Integrated emitters and
              detectors enable dynamic and efficient illumination and sensing off remote
              objects on a pixel by pixel basis, leading to enhanced image processing
              capabilities and some radically new sensor designs.  Some of the potential SPSI
              applications in sensor array technology include edge detection; dynamic
              spotlight tracking- system; a tracking- sensor that monitors focus,
              translation, and rotation of a scribe line; winner-take-all neural networks
              that highlights the "winning" pixel; precise tracking of fluorescent objects;
              intensity compression algorithms; tracking, differential sensing, and error
              correction in page oriented memory and
processing systems; pixel by pixel
              background subtraction; and ranging-

ZD I

Simultaneous Submissions of
              Proposals This proposal was written collaboratively by Prof.  Babbitt of
              Montana State University and Prof.  Darling of the University of Washington,
              who are simultaneously submitting proposals with the same technical sections,
              but with separate budgets and supporting data for their respective institution.
               The two proposals are coupled and should be reviewed jointly, as the work of
              each institution relies on the expertise contribution of the other institution
              to achieve the proposed objectives.  For each task in the research plan, the
              institution that has primary responsibility for its completion is
              identified.

Program Objectives The overall objective of the proposed program
              is the development of the SPSI concept and its potential applications from
              their embryonic stage to well defined and practical sensor systems.  The
              research objectives of the proposed program are to 1) formalize the design of
              proposed SPSI applications, 2) model their performance, 3) design and fabricate
              the electronic and optical elements needed for SPSI, 4) demonstrate those
              implementations with the most promising attributes, and 5) map out a plan for
              future development of the SPSI concept.

Research Plan The proposed program
              benefits greatly from the acceptance of the SPSI concept for participation in
              the VCSEL Foundry Service, which supplies at no cost an integrated VCSEL/MSM
              array, a custom CMOS processing chip, a custom diffractive optical element, and
              a custom lenslet array.  The initial research effort will focus on the design
              and utilization of these elements, building on our initial results with
              inteorated LEDs and MSM detectors, which demonstrated the core SPSI optical and
              electronic feedback mechanisms.  New electronic and optical devices will be
              designed, fabricated, and incorporated as needed.  Advances in other
              integration technologies, including the silicon on sapphire technology being
              developed by Prof.  Darling, will be examined and utilized to optimize SPSI
              sensor performance.  The research program will require extensive design,
              fabrication, and testing of both electronic and optical devices and is thus
              strengthened by the collaboration between Prof. Babbitt, with his expertise in
              optical design and processing, and Prof.  Darling, with his expertise in
              electronic and optoelectronic design and fabrication.
***


