Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Equipment for Telecollaboration, Telepresence and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1998 
File        : a9871440

Award Number: 9871440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Riesenfeld rfr@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Barr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Fuchs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andries van Dam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9871440    Risenfeld, Richard F.  Barr, Alan H.  University of Utah    MRI:
              Acquisition of Equipment for Telecollaboration, Telepresence and Design    This
              is a request for major research instrumentation to significantly augment the
              ongoing telecollaboration and telepresence research effort spanning all five
              sites (Brown, Caltech, Cornell, UNC Chapel Hill and the University of Utah) of
              the STC for Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization.  Telecollaboration
              and telepresence are driving themes for the STC that stimulates and builds on
              research of four core research areas of modeling, rendering, interaction, and
              performance.  The goal is to use projection display technology to "control
              light at every square millimeter, every millisecond" to create shared immersive
              environments that are sufficiently realistic to give the user a sense of "being
              there."  Some aspects of this goal can be implemented by acquiring or building
              special-purpose research instruments and other aspects only by conducting
              longer-term research on more powerful general-purpose research immersive
              sensors and displays.  This research will influence the development of advanced
              telecollaboration and telepresence, which is expected to become as ubiquitous
              in the coming decade as single-user 2D windows-based computing is today.  The
              set of requested instruments are categorized in terms of three research areas:
              networking, telecollaboration and telepresence.
