Title       : Development of Instrumentation to Measure Atmospheric Light Extinction and its
               Scattering and Absorption Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9871192

Award Number: 9871192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Moosmuller hansm@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Arnott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1522,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	In the shortwave optical regions, lack of adequate instrumentation hinders
              scientific progress across a variety of research areas.  The local measurement
              of light extinction, scattering and absorption in the atmosphere has
              applications to a number of scientific problems related to:
1.  Aerosol
              radiative forcing and its influence on climate change.
2.  Optical remote
              sensing using either active or passive systems.
3.  Atmospheric visibility as
              needed for regional air quality studies.
The Principal Investigators will
              develop instrumentation capable of measuring total atmospheric light extinction
              and its scattering and absorption components. 
The system to be developed
              includes three specific instruments:
(1)  An extinction instrument which folds
              several tens of kilometers of optical path into a one-meter length optical
              cavity and determines extinction by measuring the exponential decay of the
              optical power contained in the cavity. 
(2)  A novel scattering instrument
              concept based on the inverse nephelometer concept which collects virtually all
              scattered light including the forward scattering from large particles. 
(3) A
              light absorption instrument which yields a real time in situ measurement of
              optical light absorption by utilizing resonant photoacoustic detection of light
              absorption.  The use of an all-solid-state laser makes this instrument much
              more compact and less power hungry than its predecessors.  Innovative acoustic
              design makes this instrument more than an order of magnitude more sensitive
              than previous designs. 
The proposed development of these instruments will
              result in an instrument cluster which will be far more useful than the three
              individual instruments used separately.  For example, the combination of
              absorption and scattering measurements can determine the single-scattering
              aerosol albedo.  Addition of the extinction instrument will result in
              experimental closure on the problem of atmospheric light extinction and its
              scattering and absorption components.  This closure is extremely important for
              quality assurance purposes, i.e., measurement accuracy can directly be assessed
              by checking if the sum of measured absorption and scattering extinction equals
              the measured extinction.


