Title       : MRI: Development of a Five-Axis Rapid Metal Forming System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9871185

Award Number: 9871185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Liou liou@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wen F. Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kent D. Peaslee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hai-Lung Tsai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Owen Robert Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1189,1467,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the research and development of a five-axis
              rapid metal forming facility using laser applied metal processing.  The
              equipment will utilize a wire feeding system to improve the speed and accuracy
              of depositing metal.  Integration software will be developed for automated
              generation of process planning for five-axis direct metal process.  The
              facility will be capable of directly producing metal prototypes and parts from
              both ferrous and non-ferrous alloys.  Research and development activities will
              include developing and optimizing multi axis path planning for a five-axis
              metal forming system; vision-based processing for control of laser deposition;
              intelligent path planning and control of laser deposition machines; studies of
              deposition factors determining part microstructure; process control for
              optimizing quality of rapidly formed metal parts; studies of transport
              phenomena to improve laser deposition quality; and applying the direct metal
              forming process to allow for rapid product realization.       This project will
              result in the ability to rapidly form metal prototypes. Designers will be able
              to generate CAD drawings of a near-net shape part with functionally graded
              materials to match design requirements and then use this equipment to directly
              produce a metal prototype within a few hours.  If successful, the parts will be
              produced with high accuracy and excellent reproducibility.  The microstructure
              and properties of the parts can be optimized during the deposition process. 
              This will provide a benefit to many manufacturers that require rapid metal
              prototypes such as the tool and die industry where lead times are traditionally
              several weeks.  The will benefit manufacturers by shortening product
              development cycle times and delivering better products to market.  The
              integrated educational and research training activities will bring cutting-edge
              science and technology to the classroom.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
