Title       : Acquisition of a Continuous Flow Combustion/Gas Chromatography Isotope Ratio
               Mass Spectrometer for Use in Biogeochemical Cycling and Atmospheric Chemistry
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9871077

Award Number: 9871077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley C. Tyler styler@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1524,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Through this MRI grant, a stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer will be
              purchased, complete with front-end accessories including a
              preconcentrator/cryofocusing system, capillary gas chromatography system, and
              microcombustion furnace. Several faculty members in the UC Irvine Departments
              of Earth System Science (ESS) and Chemistry will use this system to make
              state-of-the-art isotopic measurements using gas chromatography on-line
              combustion and/or continuous flow mass spectrometry (GC/C/IRMMS). The currently
              available system has insufficient capacity for all ongoing projects. It is
              heavily used for isotope ratio measurements of methane, carbon monoxide, and
              carbon dioxide in air, soil, and freshwater, nitrous oxide in air, ocean carbon
              in dissolved and particulate organic carbon and inorganic carbon, coral, and
              soil organic and inorganic carbon and nitrogen. These measurements include the
              stable isotopes 13C/12C, D/H, 15N/l4N, and 180/160. In addition to increasing
              capacity, the new system will afford tremendous time savings associated with
              the GC/C/IRMMS technique because the need for laborious off-line preparation of
              samples will be eliminated.
The extremely high sensitivity of IRMMS compared
              to IRMS will allow isotope studies of atmospheric chemistry and biogeochemical
              systems in which larger samples are difficult or impossible to acquire and/or
              species of interest are in very low abundance and impossible to measure with
              IRMS instrumentation. These studies include analyses of methane concentrations
              in soils and in the upper atmosphere, nitrous oxide in background air,
              halogenated hydrocarbons, and other non-methane hydrocarbons. Additional
              projects will include studies of kinetic isotope effects. Overall, stable
              isotope measurements are being used at UC Irvine to study an increasingly large
              number of complex processes. These include transfer rates among compartments of
              the biotic and abiotic environment including cycling of carbon, nitrogen, and
              other elements in various forms, atmospheric motion using trace gas species,
              global budgets of trace gases and their sources and sinks, and mechanisms of
              chemical and biochemical reactions.
It is anticipated that a large number of
              principal investigators, but also graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and
              other scientists will have access to this instrument and gain valuable research
              experience. 

