Title       : Synthesis and Magnetic Properties of Large-area Periodic Arrays of Nanomagnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9871539

Award Number: 9871539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $614600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline A. Ross caross@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry I. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1084,1504,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9871539  Ross    This grant is an interdisciplinary collaboration on the 
              synthesis and magnetic characterization of two-dimensional  arrays of 50 nm and
              smaller magnetic particles, known as  `nanomagnets.'  In this size regime,
              particles of  ferromagnetic metals such as cobalt or nickel exhibit single- 
              domain behavior, and mechanisms for magnetization reversal  are observed that
              do not occur in larger particles.  These  periodic nanomagnet arrays are used
              in fundamental studies  of magnetic interactions and switching.  They are also 
              examined as functional nanostructures for data storage, in  which the
              magnetization state of each particle represents a  single data bit.  The goals
              of the research are:  i) to  establish a synthesis method for periodic
              nanoparticle  arrays with particle sizes in the 10 - 50 nm range, covering 
              areas of several square centimeters; ii) to investigate  magnetic interactions,
              switching and anisotropy as a  function of the particle microstructure,
              anisotropy, and  geometry of the array; and iii) to design and test particle 
              arrays for data storage applications in which each particle  stores a binary
              bit.  Using interferometric lithography,  structures of 100 - 200 nm period
              have been made with areas  of over 80 sq. cm and the aim is to extend the
              period down  to 50 nm.  To extend the scope of the investigation soft x-  ray
              nanolithography will be employed to make large-area non-  periodic structures,
              such as patterns with circular  geometry.  Fabrication of large-area arrays
              allows  characterization by vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) and  torque
              magnetometry (TM), as well as by magnetic-force  microscopy (MFM).  Samples
              with a range of geometries are  used to investigate inter-particle interactions
              using VSM  techniques, and time-or temperature-dependent magnetic  behavior. 
              The results are related to a micromagnetic model  for switching in arrays of
              nanomagnets.  To integrate these  nanomagnet arrays into a data storage system,
              reading and  writing schemes will b e investigated.  This award is a  selection
              under the NSF 98-20 initiative on Functional  Nanocrystalline Materials.  %%% 
              The work uses interferometric lithography to fabricate large-  area nanomagnet
              arrays.  After exposure of a photoresist  using interferometric lithography to
              form a template,  magnets of up to 500 nm in height are made by 
              electrodeposition.  This method is ideally suited to making  large-area
              periodic nanostructures quickly and economically.  In comparison, other methods
              for making particles on this  size scale are limited to very small areas or to
              high cost.  This fabrication method gives wide latitude to the range of 
              structures and geometries that can be created: square,  oblique or hexagonal
              arrays of cylindrical, disk shape, or  elliptical particles, with a range of
              interparticle spacings  with controllable saturation magnetization and
              controllable  direction and magnitude of the magnetic anisotropy.  ***
