Title       : Acquisition of a System for Combined Recording of fMRI and Event-Related
               Potentials in Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9871366

Award Number: 9871366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy K. Squires nancy.squires@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nora Volkow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jasper Brener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Springer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1391,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support and under the direction of Dr. Nancy
              Squires, the State University of New York, Stony Brook, will purchase a Neuro
              Scan Inc. system which allows integration of simultaneous data obtained through
              functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and event-related potentials
              (ERP). The system,  allows: 1. combined functional magnetic resonance imaging
              and electrophysiological recording of event-related potentials in humans; 2.
              presentation of auditory and visual stimuli to subjects in a scanner; 3.
              analyses of the fMRI and EPR data, including correspondences between the two.
              The two techniques are complementary and their combination provides an
              extremely powerful tool to understand the functioning of the brain function.
              fMRI offers a relatively high-resolution spatial view of brain activation that
              can be traced to specific anatomical regions. However, the temporal resolution
              of the conventional fMRI scan is measured in seconds and this extended time
              period may conceal important temporal details of underlying neural activity.
              While the spatial resolution of ERP is much lower, its temporal resolution is
              excellent. Using this combined approach, Dr. Squires and colleagues will
              conduct experiments in collaboration with scientists at Brookhaven National
              Laboratory and utilize the 4-Tesla MRI scanner located there.  The group will
              pursue a number of projects. These include studies on : hemisphere-specific
              activation of the visual cortex by complex hemifield stimulation;
              hemisphere-specific activation of the auditory cortex by dichotic stimuli;
              hemisphere-specific activation of motor and pre-motor cortices during
              preparation for movement; perceptual learning in the visual system; and
              reorganization of the auditory cortex by extended practice in phoneme
              discrimination. Graduate students will be involved in these projects and the
              instrumentation, therefore, will serve an important educational as well as
              research function.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
