Title       : Regional Workshops to Improve Teaching of High School Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1991     
File        : a9055405

Award Number: 9055405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $583262             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Hughes WILLIAM.HUGHES@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The University of Southern Mississippi and Jackson State                       
              University will each host a four-week summer workshop for                      
              twenty cross-over and certified physics teachers.  These                       
              workshops will be repeated for a total of three years with                     
              participants being selected from school districts in                           
              Mississippi and neighboring states.                                            
                                                                                             
              Workshops participants will construct high-quality                             
              experimental apparatus from kits of easily obtained materials                  
              so that each participant can deliver a series of model                         
              experiments to their high schools.  Included will be a wooden                  
              force table having a computer-generated paper degree circle                    
              with fishing rod eye tips for pulleys, a unique kinetics car                   
              which leaves a timed pen trace as it moves along a paper                       
              track, an optical bench which utilizes magnetically mounted                    
              components, and an Ohm's law apparatus which uses an                           
              inexpensive AC power adaptor as its power supply.                              
                                                                                             
              A cross-over teacher will work with a certified physics                        
              teacher to design experiments around the constructed                           
              apparatus.  Experimental activities for each apparatus will                    
              be written up by one member of the team, and the other                         
              member, in the role of a high school student, will perform                     
              the experiment.  Each team will then present their results                     
              for critique and improvement to the group.  The final                          
              experiments will only be defined after all teams have                          
              contributed their recommendations and improvement.  This                       
              process will generate over twenty-five tested and proven                       
              experiments which emphasize the guided discovery approach.                     
              In this manner, cross-over teachers will be trained in                         
              physics concepts by building, doing and sharing.  At the same                  
              time an attractive vehicle will be provided for high schools                   
              to improve the quality of their physics laboratories.                          
                                                                                             
              School districts will participate by supporting peer-led                       
              workshops, by designating educational supervisors and physics                  
              resource persons, by representative attendance at academic                     
              year workshop conferences, and by committing to help                           
              construct and perform experiments developed by the workshop.                   
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 20% of the NSF award.
