Title       : Interpreting Current Research on Global Environmental Issuesfor Middle-School
               Teachers and Their Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9055398

Award Number: 9055398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma L. Walton                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $531673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon H. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki J. Osis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jay R. Calkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B.Sharon Meeker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gulf Coast Research Lab
	      
	      Ocean Springs, MS  395647000    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal is designed to create among middle-school                        
              teachers and their students an enhanced awareness and                          
              understanding of global environmental issues by providing a                    
              structure for the transfer of marine and aquatic research                      
              results and methods to middle-school educators.  A total of                    
              150 teachers will participate in five, three-week summer                       
              workshops during a three-year period.  Each of the five                        
              workshops will be conducted at the Gulf Coast Research                         
              Laboratory located in Ocean Springs, Mississippi. The                          
              workshops are designed to: (a) raise the awareness and                         
              understanding of the participants concerning global                            
              environmental issues; (b) give the participants a variety of                   
              field, laboratory, and classroom teaching techniques; (c)                      
              provide a forum for teachers' interaction with research                        
              scientists; and (d) translate research into teaching                           
              applications.  The teachers participating in these workshops                   
              will represent Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, and Louisiana.                   
              Each of the workshops will recruit participants from these                     
              four states.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Each of the three-week workshops will be supported by                          
              "follow-up" participation in state, regional, and/or national                  
              meetings. During the academic year, participating teachers                     
              are expected to develop an inservice training program within                   
              their respective school districts.                                             
                                                                                             
              Four general areas of global environmental concern will be                     
              addressed by this project.  They are: (1) climatic changes,                    
              (2) marine and estuarine pollution, (3) decline in                             
              biodiversity, and (4) overpopulation.  A multi-disciplinary                    
              approach will be utilized through the interactions of                          
              research scientists, marine and science educators, and                         
              classroom teachers.  Teaching methodologies will encompass                     
              the science/technology/society philosophical approach.                         
                                                                                             
              In summary, this project, through the interaction of the                       
              middle-school classroom teachers, marine educators and marine                  
              scientists should provide an excellent opportunity for                         
              science teachers and other science educators to improve their                  
              knowledge and skills relating to the study of global                           
              environmental issues.  The 150 teachers, representing four                     
              states, have the potential of reaching more than 22,000                        
              students.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 39% of the NSF award.
