Title       : OPERATION PHYSICS: Development and Support of State Operation Physics Workshop
               Leader Training Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9055470

Award Number: 9055470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $895110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Kirwan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this final phase of the Operation Physics project 252                       
              leader teachers, who are members of nationally trained OP                      
              teams that have continued to conduct at least 72 hours of OP                   
              workshops each year, will attend  The National Operation                       
              Physics Improvement Conferences to:  1) improve OP products                    
              and services, 2) disseminate exemplary locally developed                       
              enhancements to OP materials and 3) hone skills to train a                     
              cadre of additional workshop leaders in each of their own                      
              states.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              In accomplishing (3), the OP project will continue, during                     
              the next three years, to train and support three member                        
              teams of qualified individuals to lead physics inservice                       
              programs for 4th-8th grade teachers in their local areas                       
              using workshop kits especially developed for the project.                      
              These inservice program will provide upper elementary and                      
              middle school teachers of science with a better                                
              understanding of the physics topics typically included in                      
              their science curriculum, and supply them with ideas for                       
              effectively teaching their students about these topics.                        
                                                                                             
              Leadership training programs are planned in each state, with                   
              the exception of Texas, South Carolina, and Connecticut                        
              which have already completed such programs.  Most will be                      
              held during the summer on a college or university campus,                      
              and range from 1-4 weeks in lengths.  Program presenters                       
              will include national OP staff and teams of outstanding                        
              science educators who participated in the 1988 or 1989                         
              national OP program; all presenters have conducted numerous                    
              successful OP workshops with 4th-8th grade teachers.                           
              Support for OP leadership training programs is being                           
              provided from the National Science Foundation as well as                       
              from state and local funding sources and the American                          
              Institute of Physics.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Individuals applying for participation must be professional                    
              active science educators with expertise in physics and/or                      
              pre-secondary science education.  Each participant will                        
              receive a comprehensive set of workshop materials for each                     
              physics topic to use in planning and conducting inservice OP                   
              programs.  Travel, subsistence, stipends and other support                     
              for the training programs very from state to state.  Program                   
              participants will be required to conduct a minimum number of                   
              inservice workshops for target audience teachers after the                     
              training program, and to participate in planned follow-up                      
              activities.  These peer-led workshops will introduce a large                   
              multiplier effect for OP inservice activities.                                 
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 180% of the NSF award.
