Title       : Training for Leadership and Enabling Change: A Model Inservice Delivery System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9055390

Award Number: 9055390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Dotseth   (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Dossey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack D. Wilkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly W. Nichols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The University of Northern Iowa seeks funds for a three-year                   
              program to improve the teaching of secondary school                            
              mathematics through implementation of the NCTM Standards and                   
              the use of the Addenda materials.  Forty-two Presidential                      
              Awardee middle and high school mathematics teachers will                       
              receive three weeks of intensive summer training in                            
              effective in-service skills and in algebraic thinking and                      
              its connections to various areas of mathematics.  They will                    
              then conduct 12-hour in- service programs in their local                       
              school districts during the school year. The second year                       
              participants will attend a two-week summer program, followed                   
              by their presenting one-week regional summer workshops and                     
              12-hour regional and state in-service programs.  The third                     
              year participants will attend a one-week summer program and                    
              will present one-week summer workshops.  Follow-up                             
              activities will include field-testing of materials developed                   
              for the workshops and regional meetings held during the                        
              school years. The project will include in- service packets,                    
              a monograph on evaluation methods, and a paper summarizing                     
              research on teacher change, all of which will be prepared by                   
              participants and staff.                                                        
                                                                                             
              In addition to the forty-two first-wave teachers, it is                        
              anticipated that 1680 second-wave middle and high school                       
              teachers will be enhanced.  The dissemination of the in-                       
              service packets has potential to create a third-wave of                        
              teacher enhancement.  The University of Northern Iowa's                        
              cost-sharing will account for 13% of the NSF budget.                           
                                                                                             
              This model delivery system for in-service training has high                    
              potential for becoming an exemplary                                            
              teacher-teaching-teachers model which could serve as a guide                   
              for other mathematics teacher enhancement programs.
