Title       : Northeast Louisiana University Enrichment Program for High School Teachers of
               Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1991     
File        : a9055422

Award Number: 9055422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aubrey D. Magoun   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Ohme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana - Monroe
	      700 University Avenue
	      Monroe, LA  712090001    318/342-2011

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Northeast Louisiana University seeks funds for a three-year                    
              program to upgrade secondary computer science teachers'                        
              understanding of fundamental computer science topics and of                    
              current research in the field.   Two groups of twenty-five                     
              teachers will be trained to be teacher-leaders throughout                      
              the state of Louisiana.  The method of delivery will be                        
              different for the two groups.  The first group will attend                     
              three-week summer institutes during the first two summers of                   
              the project followed by nine days of instruction during the                    
              third year. The second group will attend ten weekend                           
              sessions during each of the second and third year of the                       
              project.  These alternate delivery mechanisms are designed                     
              to meet the needs of the teachers. Teachers will be enhanced                   
              in such topics as object-oriented programming, algorithm                       
              design and analysis, computer architecture,                                    
              telecommunications, and parallel processing.  Five master                      
              teachers will assist participants in improving pedagogical                     
              and classroom management skills, in methods of recruiting                      
              females and minority students to take computer science                         
              courses, and in designing computer science curriculum for                      
              the schools.  Project Directors will write professional                        
              development materials in the form of in-service training                       
              modules for presentation to school officials and for the                       
              first-wave teachers to use in enhancing second-wave                            
              teachers.  Follow-up activities for first-wave teachers will                   
              include weekly communication by e-mail and by tele-                            
              conferencing, a mentoring program with the master teachers,                    
              and site visits from the project directors.                                    
                                                                                             
              In addition to the fifty first-wave teachers, it is                            
              anticipated that an additional 250 second-wave computer                        
              science teachers will be enhanced.  Northeast Louisiana                        
              University's cost-sharing will account for 37% of the NSF                      
              budget.
