Title       : Mathematics and Computer Science for the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1991     
File        : a9055452

Award Number: 9055452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Braunfeld                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Troyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Forest College
	      Sheridan & College Road
	      Lake Forest, IL  60045    312/234-3100

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Lake Forest College seeks funds for a two and                                  
              one-half-year program to develop 40 mathematics/computer                       
              science leader-teachers in high schools across the                             
              nation.  The program will consist of two six-week summer                       
              institutes of intensive course work in mathematics,                            
              computer science, pedagogy and leadership training; team                       
              classroom projects which will serve as models for                              
              inservice programs; and follow-up activities during the                        
              intervening school year which include a two-day                                
              miniconference, telecommunication among staff and                              
              participants, and classroom visitations.                                       
                                                                                             
              Participants will have strong backgrounds in mathematics                       
              and computer science and may earn 18 hours of graduate                         
              credit.  The three senior staff from Lake Forest have                          
              good backgrounds in mathematics, mathematics education, and                    
              computer science.  Three Presidential Award winning high                       
              school teachers will act as role models and mentors.                           
              Visiting consultants in mathematics education will                             
              complete the staff.  Mathematics topics will include real                      
              analysis and chaos; discrete mathematics and                                   
              combinatorics; and linear programming.  Computer science                       
              topics will include data structures in Pascal; and                             
              language, automata and theory of computation.  It is                           
              expected that about 400 second-wave teachers will                              
              participate in inservice activities conducted by the                           
              first-wave participants.  Lake Forest College's cost-                          
              sharing accounts for 9% of the NSF budget.                                     
                                                                                             
              The student of the 21st Century will need a proficiency                        
              in both computer science and mathematics and must be able                      
              to use the one to enhance the other.  This program will                        
              train 40 lead-teachers nationally with a proficiency in                        
              both computer science and mathematics, capable of                              
              teaching such students and of enhancing other teachers.
