Title       : Middle School Mathematics and Science Collaborative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9055510

Award Number: 9055510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $739466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Kull jkull@christa.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Oja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This four year project takes advantage of a collaborative                      
              association between the University of New Hampshire and four                   
              schools from quite different communities, and is designed to                   
              enhance middle school math and science teachers' conceptual                    
              base in mathematics and science, pedagogical skills,                           
              laboratory/ activity learning and scientific thinking.                         
              Twenty-four lead teachers from these four schools will                         
              participate in three 3-week summer institutes and academic                     
              year activities including 10 days/ year of inservice.                          
              Additional activities, focusing more on strengthening and                      
              practicing leadership skills, are planned for the fourth and                   
              final year of the project.  As the project progresses,                         
              participants will begin to provide inservice to colleagues                     
              within their own and neighboring schools, and will serve as                    
              Master Teachers to preservice teachers in middle school                        
              mathematics and science education.                                             
                                                                                             
              A unique feature of this project is a one-week course                          
              designed to acquaint university mathematics and science                        
              faculty instructors with interactive teaching methods,                         
              adolescent development, and discovery-oriented laboratory                      
              sessions, and to involve them in classroom observations and                    
              exchanges with two middle school Master Teachers who, along                    
              with teacher education faculty, will serve as instructors                      
              for this course.  Subsequently, these mathematics and                          
              science faculty instructors will be extensively involved in                    
              the summer institutes and follow-up support of participants                    
              during the academic year.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This proposal is appropriate for teacher enhancement because                   
              it  is an innovative project which will provide leadership                     
              training and extensive inservice to middle school teachers                     
              of mathematics and science.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The cost-sharing amount is approximately 29% of the amount                     
              requested from NSF.
