Title       : High School Teachers Engineering Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1994   
File        : a9055487

Award Number: 9055487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally J. Steadman steadman@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The University of Wyoming will conduct the High school                         
              Teachers Engineering Program (HISTEP), a three week,                           
              residential summer program beginning in 1991.  This three                      
              year program is designed to help recruit students for                          
              engineering careers by enhancing the capabilities and                          
              enthusiasm of mathematics and science teachers.                                
                                                                                             
              HISTEP provides thirty high school mathematics, chemistry,                     
              and physics teachers with the opportunity to explore                           
              engineering applications in a laboratory setting.  The                         
              laboratory sessions offer both enrichment opportunities for                    
              experienced, enthusiastic teachers and opportunities to                        
              expand subject matter content for less well-prepared                           
              teachers.  The teachers will build a digital circuit, smash                    
              timber trusses, and design with computer assistance, all                       
              engineering applications which directly relate to topics                       
              typically covered in high school mathematics, physics, and                     
              chemistry courses.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The engineering faculty conducting the laboratory sessions                     
              will participate in a learning strategy seminar, and will                      
              apply these teaching methodologies to their laboratory                         
              sessions.  Faculty knowledgeable in effective science                          
              teaching practices will conduct the seminars, and will also                    
              assist the participants in developing instructional                            
              materials for their classrooms.                                                
                                                                                             
              The sessions will enhance the teachers' creative thinking                      
              and problem solving skills and establish an appreciation for                   
              the role of science in our society, consequently benefiting                    
              both technically oriented students and those pursuing                          
              nontechnical careers.  The sessions, covering a wide variety                   
              of scientific topics with a significant level of                               
              participation, are intended to create a high level of                          
              interest among the participants.  The diversity of the                         
              program provides a unique, and stimulating, experience for                     
              professional growth.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The participants will conduct workshops/demonstrations for                     
              colleagues in their school district and for parent groups.                     
              The engineering faculty from the Wyoming community colleges                    
              are available for assistance with the workshops.                               
                                                                                             
              HISTEP participants will attend an annual meeting where they                   
              will have an opportunity to discuss the implementation of                      
              their summer activities, their successes, their failures,                      
              and the assessment data on their students' problem solving                     
              skills.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 45% of the NSF award.
