Title       : Teaching Science with TOYS (Terrific Opportunities for Youthin Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1993      
File        : a9055448

Award Number: 9055448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386831             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlyne M. Sarquis   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Poth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry L. Sarquis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dwight J. Portman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverley A. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Teaching Science with TOYS is a  three-year teacher                            
              enhancement project for K-12 teachers involving faculty from                   
              the Departments of Chemistry and Physics on the Oxford,                        
              Hamilton, and Middleton campuses of Miami University as well                   
              as master pre-college teachers.  The primary project activity                  
              is a series of Teaching Science with TOYS workshops for K-12                   
              teachers.  During the summers of 1992 and 1993, the three-                     
              week workshops will have 40 teachers and eight university                      
              affiliates from a nationwide pool.  During (1991-92), (1992-                   
              93) and (1993-94) academic year (AY), regional workshops will                  
              include 16 teams of 4-teachers each and (2-4) university                       
              affiliates.  Development activities begin June 1, 1991.  In                    
              the workshops participants will learn the principles of                        
              chemistry and physics embodied in commercially-available                       
              toys; they also learn and practice pedagogical strategies for                  
              engaging students in physical science education through                        
              inquiry-oriented, toy-based activities.                                        
                                                                                             
              Teachers of grades K-12 will participate as intra-district                     
              teams to strengthen the presence of hands-on collaborative                     
              science education in the schools.  Individually and                            
              collectively they will be dedicated to working together to                     
              strengthen their content knowledge, to learn pedagogical                       
              strategies and develop means for applying those strategies                     
              within their school system's present curriculum, and to                        
              assume a leadership role within their school system.  Upon                     
              completing the workshop, these teams will become resource                      
              persons and conduct peer-led workshops for others in their                     
              district, thus multiplying the effect of the project beyond                    
              the scope of the direct participation.                                         
                                                                                             
              Three written products will result.  First, a facilitators'                    
              handbook will be developed to enable University Affiliates                     
              to replicate the project regionally.  Second, a collection of                  
              toy-based activity write-ups will be tested and revised for                    
              use in pre-college classrooms.  These will be used in the                      
              workshop and incorporated into the Teacher Resource Modules,                   
              (TRM) the third written product.  The TRM will provide                         
              teachers with content background and classroom activities to                   
              supplement their existing science curriculum.  Each module                     
              will contain a general content review, pedagogical methods                     
              for applying the content in the classrooms, and related toy-                   
              based activities.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The TOYS program and its materials will be evaluated through                   
              on-going, multi-step process that will allow continual                         
              monitoring of progress towards goals.  Special attention will                  
              be given to evaluating the impact of second generation peer-                   
              led workshops.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Cost-sharing equals 179% of the NSF award.
