Title       : Science in the Twenty First Century: The Science 21 Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1991        
File        : a9055494

Award Number: 9055494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Marin azimny1@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal will provide training over a two and one-half                    
              year period to enhance content preparation for 60 under-                       
              prepared or uncertified intermediate school teachers in                        
              minority districts in New York.  Under the aegis of the City                   
              College of New York, CUNY and in cooperation with local                        
              school districts and the Bronx High School of Science                          
              Regional Resource Center (funded by the Department of                          
              Education), the City College will establish 3 District                         
              Resource Centers for intermediate school science teachers in                   
              the boroughs of Manhattan, the Bronx, and Queens.  The                         
              project entitled "Science in the Twenty-First Century:  The                    
              Science 21 Project", will provide training to the 60 teachers                  
              in minority school districts through linking college courses                   
              focused on the content of the middle school curriculum with                    
              training in inquiry pedagogy provided by university and                        
              Regional Center trained peer leaders to be located in the                      
              boroughs of the Community School Districts listed above.                       
                                                                                             
              For each of the designated years of the project, a cohort of                   
              30 under-prepared and/or uncertified intermediate/junior high                  
              school science teachers per year (for a total of 60                            
              participants) will attend courses given by the City College                    
              five days per week for four weeks (90 hours) and earn tuition                  
              free graduate credits. During the course of the project the                    
              teachers will have taken courses in physical science, life                     
              science, and earth science, earning six tuition-free graduate                  
              credits per course totalling 18 graduate credits.  Training                    
              will take place during the summer and the academic year.                       
                                                                                             
              In summary, through teaching content to under-prepared                         
              teachers in minority school districts, the program is                          
              enabling teachers to provide appropriate content to their                      
              students and to increase their own professional standing.                      
              Through linking the City College School of Education, the                      
              Bronx Science Regional Resource Center and local school                        
              districts, a network of trained teacher leaders is being                       
              created who will be in place as local trainers after the                       
              conclusion of the project and who will have ongoing access to                  
              the resources of the supporting institutions.                                  
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 72% of the NSF award.
