Title       : Quantitative Literacy in the Elementary Mathematics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9055519

Award Number: 9055519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry Kepner                            
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1003601            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cyrilla Hergenhan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Statistical Assoc
	      1429 Duke Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223143461    703/684-1221

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The American Statistical Association, in collaboration with                    
              the Baltimore City and County Public Schools, seeks funds                      
              for a three-year program to 1) develop and deliver in-                         
              service workshops for elementary school teachers which will                    
              allow them to implement a quantitative literacy strand in                      
              their teaching and for elementary school-based                                 
              administrators to inform them of the content and techniques                    
              of a quantitative literacy strand so as to ensure proper                       
              teacher support and implementation of the program; and 2)                      
              plan and develop quantitative literacy professional                            
              development materials to support teacher and administrator                     
              workshops in any elementary school.  The three-year project                    
              will develop a complete scope and sequence plan, a set of                      
              modules for the classroom, and model workshops accompanied                     
              by professional development materials.  Materials and                          
              workshops will be initially delivered to and field-tested by                   
              80 teachers and administrators, and the project will                           
              culminate in five, five-day regional summer workshops                          
              serving 225 elementary school teachers and 50 of their                         
              school-based administrators.  Field-tested follow-up                           
              activities will take place the following school year                           
              supported by the local school districts and statisticians                      
              from business and industry.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The staff for the project includes nine elementary and                         
              middle school teachers and administrators from the Baltimore                   
              City and County Public Schools, plus staff members from the                    
              American Statistical Association, and mathematics educators                    
              and statisticians from universities throughout the country.                    
              In all, 364 elementary school teachers and administrators                      
              will be enhanced through the workshops.  The quantitative                      
              literacy professional development materials should provide a                   
              second-wave effect.  The cost-sharing of the American                          
              Statistical Association, the Baltimore City and County                         
              Public School and others represents 64% of the NSF award.                      
                                                                                             
              Producing a citizenry which is quantitatively literate is an                   
              NSF, and indeed a national, priority.  This project                            
              addresses this priority by bringing a quantitative literacy                    
              strand into the elementary schools through enhancing                           
              teachers in appropriate subject matter and pedagogy.
