Title       : Microworlds for Learning Through Mathematical Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9055573

Award Number: 9055573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $579314             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. McArthur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904013208    213/393-0411

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Previous NSF-funded research has successfully developed                        
              intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) applying ideas from artificial              
              intelligence (AI). This work has also uncovered important                      
              limitations of intelligent tutoring systems. ITS are generally                 
              limited to teaching relatively well-defined, algorithmic skills                
              that they can be programmed to fully understand. This excludes                 
              many interesting areas of mathematics for which expert systems                 
              cannot yet be built. In addition, ITS are generally limited to                 
              teaching through didactic instruction. This excludes learning by               
              construction, or through inquiry - an alternate model of learning              
              that is poorly understood, yet increasingly regarded as                        
              important.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The goal is to develop and evaluate computer-based environments                
              that support the learning of mathematical skills which are not                 
              highly algorithmical and that support learning by methods other                
              than instruction. The AI approach will be applied in new ways.                 
              The main research questions are: Can intelligent AI-based                      
              software tools be developed that support learning by inquiry? And              
              can inquiry skills themselves - for example problem posing and                 
              productive guess-and-test technique - be learned by students in a              
              supportive environment? In the past, inquiry strategies have not               
              been demonstrated to be teachable, nor has inquiry been shown to               
              be a cost-effective way to learn mathematical concepts. However,               
              it is conjectured that in developing instructionist tools, ITS                 
              have provided a foundation for designing similar tools to support              
              inquiry. New tools will be built to help computer environments                 
              guide students' explorations, productively manage "thrashing",                 
              and organize students' conjectures and explanations.                           
              "Microworlds" will be constructed for various mathematical                     
              content areas, and evaluate software products.
