Title       : Center for Quantized Electronic Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9120007

Award Number: 9120007
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21587285           (Estimated)
Investigator: Evelyn L. Hu hu@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Horia Metiu  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Larry A. Coldren  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 9171      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 0000,7259,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Research and education programs of the Science and Technology                  
              Center for Quantum Structures address a class of artificially                  
              structured materials now being explored for use as ultra-                      
              miniature electronic or photonic devices.  Low-dimensional                     
              semiconductor structures that exhibit quantum effects are                      
              synthesized using novel atom-by-atom techniques.  The focus of                 
              the research is to study quantum phenomena in the resulting                    
              structures, whose size is comparable to the electron wavefunction              
              in these materials.  Unusual physical properties have already                  
              been observed in these structures, and revolutionary new devices               
              may ultimately be forthcoming.  The Center combines the efforts                
              of specialists in compound semiconductor technology with                       
              expertise in crystal growth, advanced processing, and device                   
              fundamentals and design, with those of surface chemists and                    
              condensed matter theorists to address these issues.  Faculty                   
              members from five academic departments are involved in the                     
              research.  The Center offers broad, multidisciplinary experience               
              for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral associates              
              as well as an outreach program for precollege teachers and their               
              students.  It also supports visiting scholars, engages in                      
              collaborative programs with researchers in industry, national                  
              laboratories, and other universities, and is involved in course                
              development in the area of quantum structures.  The Center for                 
              Quantum  Electronic Structures is directed by Professor James L.               
              Merz.
