Title       : Materials Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1996 
File        : a9120521

Award Number: 9120521
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: W. Lance Haworth                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11956000           (Estimated)
Investigator: R. P. H. Chang r-chang@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) at Northwestern Univ-                  
              ersity supports interactive, interdisciplinary research with the               
              overall theme of "the science of new materials".  The research is              
              organized in five major thrust areas.                                          
                                                                                             
              Research on electroactive polymeric and molecular materials                    
              addresses charge transport phenomena in these materials.  It                   
              includes synthesis, processing, characterization, and theory.                  
              Emphasis during the current funding period is being broadened to               
              include the coupling of charge transport with magnetic,                        
              photochemical and redox processes.  The thrust on heteroepitaxial              
              growth of strained layer structures addresses the epitaxy of                   
              compound semiconductor materials, with emphasis on nucleation,                 
              growth, and relaxation mechanisms in strained layer structures;                
              electronic and optical properties of these structures; and                     
              theoretical modelling and simulation of experimental results.                  
              Research on macromolecular nonlinear optical materials is                      
              concerned with the design, synthesis, processing,                              
              characterization and theory of polymeric materials whose                       
              nonlinear optical characteristics make them promising candidates               
              for eventual use in optical and optoelectronic devices.  The                   
              growth and properties of novel electronic and photonic metal                   
              oxide thin films is being investigated in a fourth thrust area.                
              Finally, a new thrust group addressing unconventional                          
              superconductivity in heavy fermion materials is studying a                     
              uranium-platinum compound, both theoretically and experimentally,              
              in order to understand its superconducting properties and                      
              elucidate the change in electronic structure that leads to                     
              delocalized electronic behavior.  A long range goal is to provide              
              a basis for better understanding of other superconducting                      
              materials, including the high temperature oxide superconductors.               
                                                                                             
              The MRL also supports the development, operation and maintenance               
              of major central facilities for materials research.  It provides               
              seed funding for exploratory research, supports programs in                    
              education and the development of human resources in the materials              
              field, and is developing a range of programs for outreach to                   
              industry.  The MRL currently supports the activities of about 30               
              faculty members from five academic departments, 8 postdoctoral                 
              research associates, 28 graduate students, 20 undergraduates                   
              including about 10 minority students, and 6 technical and                      
              scientific staff members.  The MRL central facilities also                     
              support a substantial amount of research that is funded from                   
              other sources.  The Northwestern MRL is directed by Professor                  
              Robert P.H. Chang.
