Title       : Dissertation Research: Intra-Regional Economies and _ Exchange in the Valle de
               la Plata, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1991   
File        : a9120749

Award Number: 9120749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale W. Quattrin  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Professor Robert Drennan, Mr. Dale                      
              Quattrin will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will              
              conduct excavations at 4 to 5 sites situated  at different                     
              altitude levels in the Valley de la Plata, which is located at                 
              the headwaters of the Rio Magdalene in southwestern Colombia.                  
              While the Andean region provides the best known examples of                    
              prehispanic civilizations in South America, within the Rio                     
              Magdalene region a wide scale, complex prehistoric culture                     
              developed which was marked by a complex funeral cult and by                    
              monumental architecture. Dr. Drennan has worked for many years to              
              document this phenomenon. The Magdalene area covers a wide range               
              of altitudes and at the present time different crops are grown at              
              different heights. Mr. Quattrin wants to determine how ancient                 
              this pattern is and the role that possible exchange may have                   
              played in the development of the Magdalene culture. To accomplish              
              this he will locate sites which are spread vertically across the               
              zone and excavate them. He will then analyze both pollen samples,              
              which show what plants were grown at each altitude, as well as                 
              macrobotanical and phytolith remains which indicate what was                   
              consumed. By this means it will be possible to reconstruct both                
              production and consumption patterns and infer whether or not and               
              food moved over space, and if so what foods were involved.                     
                                                                                             
              Archaeologists have used ethnohistoric and ethnographic data from              
              the Andes to describe a number of exchange models. It is clear                 
              that in areas such as Peru where resources varied by attitudinal               
              zone, complex strategies were devised to minimize risk by moving               
              different crops across zones. However it is neither known how far              
              back this practice extends in time nor the role it may have                    
              played in the development of complex Andean societies. Given the               
              excellent data base collected by Dr. Drennan, it will be possible              
              for Mr. Quattrin to examine this question in Colombia.                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will both                   
              address a significant theoretical issue and provide data of                    
              interest to a large number of archaeologists. It will also assist              
              in the training of an extremely promising scientist.
