Title       : UNIDATA: Implementation of the UNIDATA PC McIDAS Weather System into the
               Broadcast Meteorology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1992    
File        : a9120015

Award Number: 9120015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford A. Jacobs                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10641              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Binkley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1520      COMPUTING FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Funds are provided for the purchase of three UNIDATA PC-McIDAS            
              work stations to be used to enhance the teaching and research                  
              efforts within the Broadcast Meteorology Program at Mississippi                
              State University.  This program is designed to train television                
              weathercasters through on-campus and off-campus courses.                       
                   The PC-McIDAS work stations will receive weather charts and               
              imagery via satellite and ingest, store, loop, analyze, and print              
              the requested data.  Broadcast Meteorology Program faculty and                 
              students will utilize the data in both the classroom and laboratory            
              settings for on-campus students and in video tape format for off-              
              campus students.  Undergraduate and graduate meteorology courses               
              and special meteorology courses for secondary education students               
              will utilize the data.  The current array of research being                    
              conducted by both faculty and students will increase with the new              
              work stations and the ability to create local weather forecasts                
              will expand.                                                                   
                   The weather graphics in the PC-McIDAS will also be transmitted            
              to the Universities' mainframe and then sent to other terminals                
              across campus through the Ethernet communication system, allowing              
              a continuous monitoring of the current weather activity.  Weather              
              data and information will also be exchanged between MSU and other              
              meteorological universities through the internet system.
