Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Diversity and Evolution of Grass
               Mycosymbionts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9120283

Award Number: 9120283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Schardl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5941      NEW ZEALAND
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
              Title:  U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  Diversity and                  
              Evolution of Grass Mycosymbionts                                               
                                                                                             
              This award supports a long-term visit by Dr. Christopher L.                    
              Schardl of the University of Kentucky to the laboratories of                   
              Professor David Berry Scott at Massey University and Dr. G. C. M.              
              Latch at the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research                  
              (DSIR) both located in Palmerston North, New Zealand.  The                     
              objectives of the research visit are to elucidate the processes                
              of endophyte evolution as related to host species and                          
              geographical locale, and to determine whether the sequence-based               
              phylogeny relates to biological characteristics such as                        
              morphology, host range and alkaloid profiles of the endophytes.                
                                                                                             
              The study will make use of the collections of grass-endophyte                  
              association at Palmerston North.  The host collaborators have                  
              extensive research experience with endophytes (Latch) and                      
              molecular plant-microbe interactions (Scott).  Dr. Schardl will                
              explore coevolutionary relationships among fungi and grasses                   
              using the tools of molecular systematics.  The mycosymbionts are               
              stably maintained for many host generations through seed                       
              dissemination.  The ecological and agricultural importance of                  
              these mycosymbionts stem from the benefits they confer to their                
              hosts, including herbivore resistance and drought tolerance.
