Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Joint: Seminar/Workshop on Molecular Evolution; December, 1992;
               Rotorua, New Zealand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1992        
File        : a9120081

Award Number: 9120081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Clegg michael.clegg@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 5941      NEW ZEALAND
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1127,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the participation of nine U.S. scientists              
              in a joint seminar on Molecular Evolution to be held in early                  
              December 1992 on the campus of the Forest Research Institute at                
              Rotorua, New Zealand.  Participation of the New Zealand                        
              scientists is supported through the Ministry of Research, Science              
              and Technology.  The New Zealand Journal of Botany will publish                
              the seminar proceedings.  Organization of the seminar is being                 
              conducted by Dr. Michael T. Clegg from the University of                       
              California at Riverside and Dr. Bruce S. Weir from North Carolina              
              State University on the U.S. side, and by Dr. Michael Hendy and                
              Dr. David Penny from Massey University in New Zealand.                         
                                                                                             
              Many sets of DNA sequences of the same gene from different plant               
              taxa are now available.  Evolutionary comparisons of homologous                
              sequences provide a powerful means of resolving functionally                   
              important regions such as the sequence motifs in chloroplast gene              
              regions.  Once such motifs are identified, the relationship to                 
              gene or protein function can be further explored with mutagenesis              
              experiments.  Research in both theoretical and plant molecular                 
              evolution has been pursued in the U.S. and New Zealand and it now              
              seems appropriate for some combining of forces to benefit both                 
              communities.  The speakers will describe their current work in                 
              molecular evolution.  The plant scientists will gain from                      
              learning of new techniques for modelling evolution and analyzing               
              data, while  the theorists will learn of biological advances that              
              require model or methodology development.  The central theme of                
              the seminar will be that of managing and using molecular data for              
              a study of plant evolution.  The organizers believe the seminar                
              will act as a foundation for future long-term collaborations.
