Title       : Energy and Product Partitioning in Chemicals Excited by Light
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9120931

Award Number: 9120931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Wagner wagnerp@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A thorough investigation of the geometric parameters which                     
              govern the interaction of one part of a molecule with another                  
              part of the same molecule will be conducted. The interactions                  
              to be investigated will include processes which result in                      
              energy transfer and/or chemical reaction. The base absorbing                   
              chromophore to be investigated will be an aromatic ketone. By                  
              careful choice of geometry in the aromatic ketone, it will be                  
              possible to define for the first time the restrictions imposed                 
              by atomic and electronic orientation on chemical processes of                  
              excited aryl ketones. The projects to be investigated will                     
              include: (1) measurement of the kinetics of processes involving                
              triplet cycloaddition, hydrogen abstraction and intramolecular                 
              triplet energy transfer; (2) observation of biradical                          
              partitioning; and (3) determination of the spin multiplicity of                
              benzene-halogen cleavage reactions. Classical photochemical and                
              photophysical methods will be utilized throughout the project                  
              to provide a thorough examination of the mechanisms involved.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Peter J. Wagner at Michigan State                 
              University. The investigation will be aimed at probing the                     
              means by which energy is transferred from one part of a                        
              molecule to another. This work is particularly important since                 
              the process of how two parts of the same molecule interact is                  
              at the heart of many chemical processes which occur in both                    
              natural and synthetic molecules. The work to be conducted will                 
              provide the chemist, as well as other scientists, with a basic                 
              understanding of how chemical processes occur upon absorption                  
              of a photon of light. From this project will emerge a                          
              fundamental understanding of the constraints placed upon light                 
              induced processes by geometrical configurations of the groups                  
              comprising photoreactive molecules.
