Title       : Coronary Flow Regulates Heart Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1992     
File        : a9120353

Award Number: 9120353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafael Rubio   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Adequate blood perfusion of the heart (coronary flow, CF) is                   
              essential for its performance and survival and until recently it               
              has been believed that the sole purpose of CF is that of mass                  
              transfer; namely, to provide nutrients and remove waste from the               
              myocardium.   However,  recent evidence from our laboratory                    
              indicates that besides the mass transfer function CF is also a                 
              stimulus for the cardiac utilization of glucose and oxygen                     
              (metabolic effects, ME) and a stimulus for the transmission of the             
              electrical impulse from atria to ventricle (dromotropic effect,                
              DE).  In addition, associated with changes of CF there are changes             
              in two forces that act on the blood vessel wall and consequently               
              could act as stimulus.  These forces are distention of the vessel              
              wall (pressure) and frictional forces acting on the surface of the             
              vessels (shearing).  Our preliminary results have indicated that               
              shearing is the important stimulus.  Moreover, we reasoned that the            
              mechanism by which shearing could have a ME and a DE may be via                
              deformation of cellular structure(s) on the intravascular wall that            
              are oriented perpendicularly to the direction of the force.                    
              Specifically, we are concerned with the sugar-containing protein               
              (proteoglycans) chains that are embedded in the cell membrane blood            
              vessels.  To test this hypothesis we decided to "clip" selectively             
              some of these proteoglycans with enzymes; that act as scissors                 
              removing specific protein chains.  Our preliminary studies show                
              that removal of specific proteoglycans containing the sugar heparin            
              caused the stimulatory effects of shearing on ME and DE to be                  
              significantly reduced.  Our proposed studies will establish that               
              the deformation by shearing forces of specific endothelial                     
              proteoglycans will result in modified cardiac function possibly by             
              the release of chemical messengers that cause a ME and DE in the               
              adjacent cardiac cells.  These studies will open new avenues in the            
              understanding of cardiac function and metabolism.
