Title       : Spatial Information Processing in the Hippocampal Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1992     
File        : a9120131

Award Number: 9120131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen Sigvardt                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Sharp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The hippocampal formation is part of the brain known to be                     
              critically involved in learning and memory.  Hippocampal damage in             
              humans caused profound, nearly global amnesia for events which                 
              occur after the lesion.  One type of ability affected is spatial,              
              or navigational learning.  Individuals with hippocampal damage                 
              cannot learn their way around a new environment.                               
                                                                                             
              Some insight into how the hippocampus may accomplish its role in               
              spatial learning has come from studies which examine the activity              
              of single cells in the hippocampus in vertebrates as they navigate             
              in an environment.  In each part of the hippocampal region studied             
              to date, cells show striking spatial correlates.  Cells in one                 
              region fire in a location-specific manner, so that they are active             
              only when the animal is within a particular, circumscribed region              
              of space.  Cells in another area fire only when the animal is                  
              facing a particular direction, regardless of its location.  In yet             
              a third area, cells fire as a function of both direction and                   
              location.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Dr. Sharp will examine the spatial firing correlates of the cells              
              in the hippocampal area.  She will examine the basic spatial firing            
              properties of cells in part of the hippocampal region which have               
              not yet been studies.  This will provide novel information about               
              the nature of the spatial signal in the hippocampal formation.  In             
              addition, Dr. Sharp will conduct analytical studies to discover the            
              sensory and mnemonic determinants of the spatial firing properties             
              of cells in these areas, as well as in areas in which the basic                
              spatial properties are already known.                                          
                                                                                             
              Another aspect of her work will be to examine changes in                       
              hippocampal physiology which result from exposing animals to                   
              spatially-complex environments.  These long-lasting changes are                
              thought to possibly reflect information storage mechanisms in the              
              hippocampus.  Thus, examination of the timecourse, mechanisms, and             
              conditions of such neuronal plasticity could provide insight into              
              how the hippocampal area orchestrates learning.                                
                                                                                             
              Dr. Sharp's results will be used to try to understand the role                 
              played by the hippocampus in learning and memory, specifically as              
              it relates to the onset of Alzheimer's disease in the aging                    
              brain.***//
