Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Nonlinear Dynamics of Soil Moisture Climate at
               Continental Scales: The Climatic Origins of Droughts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1991    
File        : a9120367

Award Number: 9120367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : October 1,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Dara Entekhabi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this collaborative research project will identify             
              and analyze the interactions and feedbacks between the land and                
              atmosphere that result in observed complexities and lack of                    
              predictability of hydroclimatology.  In particular, it is intended             
              to study the dynamics of soil moisture and its excursions into dry             
              (drought) and wet (flood) states.                                              
                   The first hypothesis is that local recycling of moisture at               
              continental scales, and time periods on the order of seasons to                
              years leads to soil moisture dynamics that can be described by a               
              stochastic differential equation with multiplicative noise.  The               
              solution to such nonlinear system is a probability distribution of             
              soil moisture with at least two modes; that is, two preferred                  
              states, one dry and one wet.  This contrasts with the traditional              
              unimodal view of the soil moisture distribution.  This distribution            
              can be studied to obtain answers like the probability of the onset             
              of drought or vice versa the end of a drought period.  Another                 
              question of interest is the duration of droughts.  The multimodal              
              distribution can also be the basis of a new classification of                  
              climatic regions.                                                              
                   The second hypothesis is that at time scales on the order of              
              the occurrence of individual events (i.e., weeks) the soil moisture            
              has a delayed effect on atmospheric dynamics.  This phenomena is               
              due to the moisture supply as well as to dynamic influences                    
              resulting from soil moisture effect on surface temperature and                 
              atmospheric pressure.  The implication of this hypothesis is a                 
              highly nonlinear delayed differential equation for the description             
              of soil moisture.  The solution of this equation leads to a fixed              
              equilibrium, a limit cycle with bifurcations or to chaos.  This                
              will be used to study amplification of seasonal effects over                   
              continental regions like the Amazonia as well as the predictability            
              of soil moisture and hydroclimatology in general.  Principal                   
              Investigators and staff from the University of Arizona and the                 
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology will collaborate on this                 
              project.
