Title       : Children's Representation of Linguistic Stress and Function Morphemes in Early
               Language Acquisition (REU Supplement)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1993        
File        : a9120952

Award Number: 9120952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69980              (Estimated)
Investigator: LouAnn Gerken   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              The research examines children's representations of two potential              
              cues to the location and grammatical category of words and                     
              phrases: linguistic stress and function morphemes.  The                        
              overwhelming majority of English words begin with a strongly                   
              stressed syllable.  If children were aware of this regularity,                 
              they could use it to identify the beginnings of words in the                   
              speech stream.  Function morphemes, such as articles and verb                  
              inflections, occur at the beginnings and ends of phrases, and                  
              could help children to isolate these units.  Function morphemes                
              also provide cues about the type of unit that has been isolated,               
              such as Noun Phrase or Verb Phrase.  However, we know little                   
              about children's representations of stress and function                        
              morphemes, and therefore about whether they are able to use such               
              cues in language acquisition.  One set of experiments explores                 
              the phonological and syntactic nature of function morpheme                     
              representations with the use of imitation picture pointing tasks.              
              Another set of experiments is designed to extend previous work on              
              the effect of stress patterns on children's morphemic and non-                 
              morphemic weak syllable omissions, and to provide new information              
              about their representation of the canonical stress patterns of                 
              their language.
