Title       : US-Bulgaria Research on Flexoelectricity in Bilayer Lipid Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9120135

Award Number: 9120135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janos H. Fendler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 5958      BULGARIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1940,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Bulgaria research project between Dr.                                
              Janos H. Fendler of Syracuse University and Dr.                                
              Alexander G. Petrov of the Laboratory of Liquid                                
              Crystals and Molecular Electronics of Georgi                                   
              Nadjakov University, Sofia, will examine                                       
              flexoelectricity in bilayer lipid membranes.  The                              
              Bulgarian researchers have found that periodic                                 
              bending of a bilayer lipid membrane (BLM) results                              
              in microvolt-range transmembrane potential.  The                               
              Bulgarians have a theoretical rationalization of                               
              the phenomenon and have examined it by electrical                              
              measurements which included the direct                                         
              determination of Uf and indirect determination of                              
              c.  The Americans have used optical                                            
              interferometry to determine ultrasmall,                                        
              hydrostatic-pressure-induced movements of BLMs.                                
              In this proposal, the researchers propose to: (1)                              
              use real-time stroboscopic interferometric                                     
              measurements to determine directly c in the                                    
              periodically bent BLMs; (2) determine                                          
              simultaneously electrical and optical                                          
              flexoelectric coefficients of BLMs, to test                                    
              theories of flexoelectricity; (3) investigate a                                
              variety of structurally different BLMs; (4) study                              
              converse flexoelectric effect (transmembrane                                   
              voltage-induced membrane curvature) with                                       
              interferometric holography and optical                                         
              interferometry; (5) establish a correspondence                                 
              between the direct flexoelectric effect                                        
              (curvature-generated membrane polarization) and                                
              the converse one on the same BLM preparation; (6)                              
              investigate changes of the flexoelectric response                              
              of a photosensitive BLM under illumination to                                  
              reveal a new phenomenon, photoflexoelectricity;                                
              and (7) attempt to observe photoflexoelectric                                  
              phenomena by applying repetitive laser pulses to                               
              a pigmented BLM.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This project in biophysics fulfills the program                                
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by                                 
              enabling leading experts in the United States and                              
              Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents                                
              and pool resources in areas of strong mutual                                   
              interest and competence.
