Title       : Development of the Integrative Properties of LGN Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1993      
File        : a9120730

Award Number: 9120730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven C. McLoon                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Guido   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project considers the cellular mechanisms underlying                      
              development and experience-dependent plasticity in the visual                  
              system of mammals.  An in vitro slice preparation is employed and              
              dye-filled electrodes are used to record intracellularly and label             
              immature (visually-naive) neurons and neurons affected by visual               
              deprivation.  The focus is the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus               
              (LGN) which is the thalamic relay between the retina and the visual            
              cortex.  The LGN is the most peripheral site along the visual                  
              pathway where severe morphological and physiological deficits                  
              develop in response to brief periods of visual deprivation during              
              the critical period of development.  Its functional organization               
              is well-known and its neurophil simpler than that of more central              
              structures such as the visual cortex, thus making it more amenable             
              for analysis.  There are two main goals of Dr. Guido's research.               
              His first goal is to examine the cellular integrative properties               
              of visually-deprived LGN neurons, and then to determine the degree             
              to which any changes in these properties correlate with the                    
              reported morphological abnormalities.  His second goal is to study             
              the postnatal development of these properties to determine the                 
              extent to which their normal expression depends on visual                      
              experience during the critical period of development.  The specific            
              properties that Dr. Guido will be examining are membrane properties            
              and synaptic events, especially those that rely on the activation              
              of the glutamatergic-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor.  This project              
              is important from the point of view of understanding the origin of             
              visual deficits in humans.***//
