Title       : Dynamics of Multicomponent Polymer Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1994  
File        : a9120360

Award Number: 9120360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald G. Fuller ggf@rio.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9162,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is directed at the development and application of                
              methods in optical rheometry to measure the dynamics and structures            
              of multicomponent polymer liquids when subjected to processing                 
              conditions.  Such liquids are characterized by dynamics associated             
              with specific structural constituents that should be separated to              
              properly understand the response of these materials to external                
              fields.  This separation can refer to the isolation of the dynamics            
              as a function of length scales existing in the liquid, or                      
              associated with specific chemical components.  The former class of             
              systems would include phase-separated blends where the response of             
              the domain structure must be isolated.  Scattering techniques are              
              the obvious choices for these cases and for structural length                  
              scales in the range of 0.5 to 20 um, small-angle light scattering              
              and scattering dichroism will be used for this purpose.                        
              Spectroscopic techniques are required when the dynamics of                     
              individual chemical elements must be identified.  Infrared                     
              polarimetry and Raman scattering will be developed and applied to              
              single-phase polymer blends and melts.  The specific tasks that                
              will be carried out are:                                                       
                                                                                             
              1.)  For miscible, single-phase blends, it is important to                     
              understand the composition and temperature dependence of the                   
              friction factors of the individual components.  An additional piece            
              of information that is required is the entanglement molecular                  
              weight as a function of composition.  To address these goals,                  
              infrared dichroism and a new technique, polarization modulated                 
              Raman scattering, will be used to spectroscopically identify                   
              specific chemical constituents.                                                
                                                                                             
              2.)  In systems where shear can affect the phase behavior of a                 
              multicomponent system, both scattering and spectroscopic techniques            
              will be used to examine the structure over a wide range of                     
              structural length scales.  For systems with a dispersed phase,                 
              small-angle light scattering will be used to monitor the                       
              deformation of those droplets.  This will be carried out for                   
              systems where the viscosity ratio of the components making up the              
              mixtures is varied.  To examine the interactions that drive                    
              miscibility or phase separation, a new technique, two-dimensional              
              Raman scattering will be developed.  This method will offer the                
              capability of measuring orientation correlations between distinct              
              elements comprising a sample.  Finally, excimer fluorescence will              
              be developed as a technique to probe interactions over extremely               
              small (10 angstrom) length scales.                                             
                                                                                             
              This research is jointly supported by the Polymers Program in the              
              Division of Materials Research and the Fluid, Particulate and                  
              Hydraulic Systems Program in the Division of Chemical and Thermal              
              Systems.
