Title       : Prediction of Soil Liquefaction in Centrifuge Model Tests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1992   
File        : a9120414

Award Number: 9120414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stein Sture stein.sture@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hon-Yim Ko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Y. Pak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This action is in response to the NSF                                          
              Announcement of Program Initiative No. 91-55:                                  
              "The 'Class A' Prediction Phase of the                                         
              VELACS (Verification of Liquefaction Analysis                                  
              by Centrifuge Studies) Project".  VELACS is                                    
              an NSF-funded coordinated study of the effect                                  
              of simulated earthquake loading on a variety of                                
              model geotechnical structures, such as earth                                   
              dams and embankments, in order to investigate                                  
              the mechanisms of liquefaction-induced failure,                                
              and to acquire data for the verification of the                                
              various analysis procedures for the liquefaction                               
              problem.  The experiments are run on the                                       
              geotechnical centrifuges at the California                                     
              Institute of Technology, University of California                              
              at Davis, University of Colorado at Boulder,                                   
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Princeton                                    
              University and Cambridge University, England.                                  
                                                                                             
              The "Class A" prediction phase of the                                          
              VELACS project involves making                                                 
              analytical/computational predictions before the                                
              experiments are performed; then the                                            
              experiments are run, and the measured results                                  
              compared with the predictions.  "Class A"                                      
              predictions are analogous to "single-blind"                                    
              studies in medical research.  A workshop,                                      
              scheduled to be held at the University of                                      
              California, Davis, in September, 1993, will                                    
              compare the predictions to the experimental                                    
              results, and conclusions will be drawn regarding                               
              the effectiveness of the analytical/computational                              
              methods used.  Sixteen research groups from                                    
              around the world (nine in the U.S.; one in                                     
              Canada; three in Japan; and three in the U.K.)                                 
              are participating in this prediction exercise.                                 
                                                                                             
              This study at the University of Colorado,                                      
              Boulder, is examining the effectiveness of the                                 
              computer codes SOFIA (Soil-Fluid Interaction                                   
              Analysis) and LIQCA (Coupled Analysis of                                       
              Liquefaction) for liquefaction analysis.
