Title       : Experimental Population Genetics of Drosophila Mitochondrial DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9120293

Award Number: 9120293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $602000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rand david_rand@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9104,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The general focus of this research is to test the hypothesis              
              that different mitochondrial genomes affect the reproductive rate              
              or "fitness" of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster.  The                    
              research will employ experimental population cages where flies                 
              carrying different mitochondrial DNAs (mtDNAs) are competed                    
              against one another to determine whether certain mitochondrial                 
              genotypes have consistent reproductive advantages over other                   
              genotypes.  The experiments will involve genetic crosses to                    
              construct strains of flies that have the same nuclear chromosomes              
              but differ only in their mtDNAs.  Several pairwise tests of                    
              competitive ability will be conducted between strains of flies                 
              from different populations.  The populations have been chosen so               
              that the pairwise tests will involve strains of flies with                     
              little, moderate and large amounts of DNA sequence difference                  
              between the competing mitochondrial genomes.  This should provide              
              a test of the effect of DNA sequence difference on the strength                
              of the fitness different between strains.                                      
                   The research also involves a complementary set of                         
              experiments to test the "fitness" of different mtDNAs inside                   
              cells.  Using a microinjection technique to transplant intact                  
              mitochondria between strains of fruit flies, one can create a                  
              miniature "population cage" inside the reproductive cells of                   
              female flies.  By creating reproductive cells with mixtures of                 
              different mtDNAs, one can test the hypothesis that  different                  
              mitochondrial genomes have an advantage in inheritance from                    
              mother to offspring.  This approach will be employed with the                  
              same strains of flies used in the population cage experiments                  
              described above.  This "two-level" approach to the study of mtDNA              
              variation will provide information on the functional significance              
              of naturally occurring variation in mtDNA and serve as a model                 
              system to study the coevolution of nuclear and mitochondrial                   
              genomes.  Furthermore, this research will test the critical                    
              assumption for many studies of population dynamics that mtDNA                  
              variation is neutral.
