Title       : Prediction of Soil Liquefaction in Centrifuge Model Tests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1992   
File        : a9120028

Award Number: 9120028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46516              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Herve Prevost prevost@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This action is in response to the NSF                                          
              Announcement of Program Initiative No. 91-55:                                  
              "The 'Class A' Prediction Phase of the                                         
              VELACS (Verification of Liquefaction Analysis                                  
              by Centrifuge Studies) Project".  VELACS is                                    
              an NSF-funded coordinated study of the effect                                  
              of simulated earthquake loading on a variety of                                
              model geotechnical structures, such as earth                                   
              dams and embankments, in order to investigate                                  
              the mechanisms of liquefaction-induced failure,                                
              and to acquire data for the verification of the                                
              various analysis procedures for the liquefaction                               
              problem.  The experiments are run on the                                       
              geotechnical centrifuges at the California                                     
              Institute of Technology, University of California                              
              at Davis, University of Colorado at Boulder,                                   
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Princeton                                    
              University and Cambridge University, England.                                  
                                                                                             
              The "Class A" prediction phase of the                                          
              VELACS project involves making                                                 
              analytical/computational predictions before the                                
              experiments are performed; then the                                            
              experiments are run, and the measured results                                  
              compared with the predictions.  "Class A"                                      
              predictions are analogous to "single-blind"                                    
              studies in medical research.  A workshop,                                      
              scheduled to be held at the University of                                      
              California, Davis, in September, 1993, will                                    
              compare the predictions to the experimental                                    
              results, and conclusions will be drawn regarding                               
              the effectiveness of the analytical/computational                              
              methods used.  Sixteen research groups from                                    
              around the world (nine in the U.S.; one in                                     
              Canada; three in Japan; and three in the U.K.)                                 
              are participating in this prediction exercise.                                 
                                                                                             
              This study at Princeton University is examining                                
              the effectiveness of the computer codes                                        
              DYNA1D and DYNAFLOW for liquefaction                                           
              analysis.
