Title       : Implicit Attitudes, Implicit Stereotypes, and Prejudice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1992    
File        : a9120987

Award Number: 9120987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahzarin Banaji mahzarin.banaji@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACTS                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              This research will investigate implicit sterotypes and attitudes.              
              These evaluations are predicted to occur when critical attributes              
              of a social stimulus that control judgment (e.g., stimatizing                  
              attibutes such as gender, race, SES) are not at the respondent's               
              focus of attention.  In Part 1, a procedure will be used in which              
              the attribute of fame is incorrectly assigned as a result of a                 
              bias in memory caused by perceptual familiarity.  This procedure               
              is used to identify that equal familiarity with male and female                
              names results in a higher probability of assigning false fame to               
              male than female names.  Variations of this procedure will be                  
              used to identify the unconscious nature and limiting conditions                
              of this bias, Part 2 will establish the generality of this                     
              phenononmenon to another social category, by using names that                  
              vary in perceived race and ethnicity, and judgments such as                    
              criminal and politician.  Part 3 will present a method to study                
              implicit attitudes, and attempts to conceptually differentiate                 
              the (cognitive) stereotype construct from the (affective)                      
              attitude construct.  This research is designed to examine whether              
              discrimination can be controlled by implicit stereotypes even in               
              the presence of positive implicit attitudes.  Together, the 3-                 
              part program of research seeks to demonstrate the value of                     
              implicit measures of stereotyping and prejudice, to provide                    
              understanding of the subtle yet powerful information processing                
              mechanisms by which biases in evaluation are produced, and to                  
              question the currently dominant conception that such evaluations               
              operate primarily within consciousness.
