Title       : Neural Pathfinding in an Insect Wing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1994      
File        : a9120557

Award Number: 9120557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John S. Edwards                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128843             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Nardi j-nardi@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              To understand how axons of nerve cells navigate in particular                  
              directions along defined pathways, the substratum for axonal growth            
              is being examined in the simple system.  Growth of axons can easily            
              be studied in an insect wing where neurons form a simple, two-                 
              dimensional network nestled in the space between two monolayers of             
              epithelial cells.  Transposition of grafts from the upper monolayer            
              suggests that growing axons are guided in a distal to proximal                 
              direction by graded cues in their epithelial substratum.  Using                
              scanning electron microscopy, the topography of this substratum has            
              been viewed in its entirety.  Axons encounter an increasing density            
              of basal cellular processes as they grow proximally.  The                      
              distribution of surface molecules along the neural pathway can be              
              modulated by extension and retraction of these basal processes.  A             
              novel protein (2F5) found on surfaces of the substratum at the time            
              of axonal outgrowth is thought to be involved in the interaction of            
              axons with substrata.  This protein has been purified and its                  
              ability to promote outgrowth of axons will be studied using                    
              functional assays in situ and scanning electron microscopy.  In                
              addition, an immunosuppression technique will be used to generate              
              antibodies to other surface proteins that may be involved in axonal            
              pathfinding. These studies promise to identify novel molecules that            
              play a role in neuronal development and regeneration, not only in              
              the insect, but in other species, as well.
