Title       : Molecular Biology and Genetics of Calmodulin in Paramecium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9120090

Award Number: 9120090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Hinrichsen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : F Hutchinson Canc Res Ctr
	      1100 Fairview Ave. N.
	      Seattle, WA  98109    206/667-4868

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is an investigation of calmodulin in Paramecium.              
              It will extend the previous observation that a point mutation in               
              calmodulin causes the Paramecium to swim backward. Calmodulin is               
              involved in calcium-regulated potassium channels and cell viability            
              in this organism. Other mutant calmodulins will be prepared and                
              their sensitivity to barium ions will be examined; the mutant cam1             
              has been shown to have increased sensitivity to barium, which can              
              replace calcium in its four binding sites. Intergenic suppressors              
              of the calmodulin mutants cam1 and cam 11 will be sought, to try               
              to find other genes involved in the regulation of ion channels and             
              cell viability. Intragenic and intergenic suppressors which affect             
              activation of the calcium-dependent potassium channel                          
              differentially from the barium sensitivity will be sought. Proteins            
              which bind wild-type Paramecium calmodulin better than its mutant              
              calmodulins will be searched for in mammalian cells, and the genes             
              coding for these proteins will be isolated.                                    
                                                                                             
              Calmodulin is a protein which is present in all cell types which               
              have been examined. It binds calcium and is involved in regulation             
              of many aspects of cellular function.  Among these are the                     
              regulation of channels which permit entry of ions into cells and               
              regulation of the cell cycle. In the protozoan Paramecium, a                   
              mutation in a single amino acid has been shown to cause the                    
              organism to swim backward. In addition, this mutation increases the            
              sensitivity of the organism to barium, which can substitute for                
              calcium at specific binding sites. The proposal involves a search              
              for additional calmodulin mutants by a variety of techniques, a                
              search for intergenic suppressors of the proteins, and a search for            
              proteins in mammalian cells which bind differently to wild-type and            
              mutant calmodulins from the protozoan. Proteins which do not affect            
              the activation of the calcium-dependent potassium channel but do               
              affect the ability of calmodulin to bind barium will also be                   
              sought. The study should increase understanding of how calmodulin              
              regulates cell processes.
