Title       : Birth Order and Cell Fate in an Embryonic Neuronal Lineage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1995     
File        : a9120863

Award Number: 9120863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John S. Edwards                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melody V. S. Siegler msiegler@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The nervous system contains a stereotyped complement of neurons                
              with different properties.  Neurons have different shapes, respond             
              to and release different biochemical messengers, and exert their               
              effects on unique subsets of target neurons.  The processes                    
              underlying the development of this neuronal specificity will be                
              investigated in the simple nervous system of the grasshopper.  The             
              investigator has previously characterized a group of 100 midline               
              neurons that arise from a single identified precursor stem cell.               
              This group of neurons contains three basic cell types that function            
              in different sets of behaviors. It will be determined how the final            
              complement of neurons in the group arises temporally during                    
              development, over what time course neurons are added to the                    
              population and when and to what extent cell death reduces the                  
              population to its final size.  In addition, the birthdays of                   
              identified neurons, i.e. the timing of a neuron's final cell                   
              division, will be correlated with cell lineage to test the                     
              hypothesis that birth order and cell type are related, with                    
              sequential switches occurring during development to produce                    
              efferent neurons, local interneurons, and then intersegmental                  
              interneurons.  Differential staining of cell types and birthdating             
              of individual neurons by labeling DNA during cell divisions will be            
              applied.  The system is unique in the high degree of resolution for            
              identifying individual neurons of a population and the potential               
              for spanning several levels of inquiry in studying the                         
              relationships between developmental events and the functioning of              
              mature neuronal circuits.  The study of neurogenesis in this simple            
              nervous system that is easily accessible to experimental                       
              manipulation promises to increase our general knowledge of                     
              processes involved in the formation of different kinds on neurons.
