Title       : Oxidation-Reduction Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1994  
File        : a9120158

Award Number: 9120158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Taube HF.CPI@FORSYTHE.STANFORD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Henry Taube, Chemistry Department, Stanford University,                    
              supported by an award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                    
              Organometallic Program, will conduct research in three areas.                  
              First, he will study vanadium complexes in non-aqueous                         
              solvents.  The effects of back-bonding on the chemistry of                     
              V(II) will be explored using acetonitrile as a solvent, but                    
              some effort will also be devoted to characterizing the higher                  
              oxidation states of vanadium and generating higher oxidation                   
              state species by aerobic oxidation.  The second area is the                    
              study of mixed valence molecules.  Here work on molecular                      
              hysteresis will continue.  In specific systems in which                        
              electron transfer is accompanied by structural change, light of                
              energy corresponding to that of the mixed valence band will be                 
              used to convert one isomeric form to the other and determine                   
              the efficiency of the conversion.  Also, molecules based on                    
              aromatic poly-ring systems with osmiumammines bound in the                     
              eta-2, -4 or -6 modes will be investigated.  Linkage isomerism                 
              in mixed valence molecules based on simple derivatives of                      
              benzene will be studied.  In the third area, the mechanism of                  
              activation for substitution on a ligand by a co-ligand which is                
              an oxidizing agent will be explored.  The particular system                    
              will involve cyclopentadienone bound to Ru(II), the effect of                  
              which on the rate of substitution of co-ligand                                 
              cyclopentadienide has been measured.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              These fundamental studies involve electron transfer and                        
              substitution reactions of transition metal complexes of                        
              vanadium, ruthenium and osmium.  The results of these studies                  
              are relevant to the mechanism of action of catalysts for                       
              organic reactions and to conversion of solar to electrical                     
              energy.
