Title       : The Drosophilists: Studies in Scientific Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1992      
File        : a9120071

Award Number: 9120071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Kohler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Kohler is examining the history of Drosophila and Drosophila               
              geneticists as an example of the history of experimental                       
              practice.  He is exploring four key ideas.  First, "standard"                  
              experimental organisms can be understood as constructed                        
              technological artifacts.  Second, experimental practices are                   
              shaped by tacit moral rules that govern the ownership and sharing              
              of tools, resources, ideas and credit.  Third, these "moral                    
              economies" of practice are embodied in institutionalized career                
              patterns.  Fourth, experimental practice in biology often                      
              involves a dynamic interaction between laboratory and field,                   
              domesticated and wild organisms and work styles.                               
                                                                                             
              Dr. Kohler is using these four themes to explore five closely                  
              related topics:   the initial construction of Drosophila as a                  
              genetic instrument by the Morgan school;  the operations and                   
              tacit rules of the mutant exchange network which defined                       
              Drosophilists as a community of practitioners;  the                            
              diversification of Drosophila from an instrument for chromosome                
              mapping into a multi-purpose instrument; and the invention by                  
              George W. Beadle and Theodosius Dobzhansky of new modes of                     
              practice in developmental and evolutionary genetics.                           
                                                                                             
              These case studies are being used to develop concepts and methods              
              that may be applied to experimental practice in any discipline of              
              natural science.  The aim is an empirically based, integrated                  
              account of experimental practice:  one that may make science                   
              understandable to non-specialists not as a finished product but                
              as a dynamic and evolving process of production.
