Title       : Theoretical Studies of Structure and Spectra of Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1992   
File        : a9120100

Award Number: 9120100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Tossell tossell@chem.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Theoretical Studies of Structure and Spectra of Glasses - Quantum-             
              chemical methods at the level of ab initio Hartree-Fock Self-                  
              Consistent Field Molecular Orbital Theory will be applied to a                 
              number of problems in glass science.  The basic goal will be to                
              characterize both the short and medium range order of species in               
              glasses by calculating values for their geometries, energetics, and            
              spectra, and comparing with experiment.  NMR spectra of various                
              species in glasses will be calculated for several short range                  
              ordered species, e.g., boroxol rings and silicate tetrahedra in                
              their respective glasses.  Structural and spectral properties as a             
              function of charge state and degree of polymerization will be                  
              calculated to assist in monitoring sol-gel reactions.  Finally,                
              methods will be developed to calculate polarizabilities of oxygen              
              in various environments found in glasses and to calculate spectral             
              energies for free and complexed probe ions used to evaluate the                
              optical basicities of different oxidic environments in glasses.                
              This proposal will be cofunded by DMR-Materials Theory (67%) and by            
              CHEM-Physical Chemistry (33%).                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              It was once thought that crystalline and glassy solids were very               
              much different structurally, with crystalls possessing both short              
              and long range order and glasses possessing order in any meaningful            
              sense only at the local level if at all.  It now seems clear that              
              in many cases glasses possess substantial medium range order, i.e.,            
              order on a length scale corresponding to several molecular units.              
              Increased knowledge of the types of local and medium range order               
              existing in glasses and the influence of such order upon the                   
              properties of the glass will make it possible to create glasses                
              with tailored properties using nonempirical atomistic approaches.              
              Application of quantum chemical methods to this problem is the goal            
              of this proposal, which will be cofunded by DMR-Materials Theory               
              (67%) and by CHEM-Physical Chemistry (33%).
