Title       : Acquisition of an Argon Laser for Phase Fluorometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9120260

Award Number: 9120260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Stevens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Newkome  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Barber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry P. Solomonson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An argon laser will be used in fluorescence decay studies of                   
              creatine kinase, cascade polymers, nitrate reductase and an                    
              investigation of the static quenching limit.                                   
                                                                                             
              Intrinsic and extrinsic fluorescence lifetime and anisotropy                   
              investigations of creatine kinase folding and conformation are                 
              proposed.  A comprehensive set of equilibrium and kinetic                      
              experiments, including quenching studies are proposed to describe              
              intermediates in the folding pathway and the temporal                          
              relationship between folding and association of subunits.                      
                                                                                             
              Experiments will assess the internal environment of cascade                    
              polymers in relation to synthetic micelles, using lipophilic                   
              probe lifetimes and anisotropies.  Experiments are proposed to                 
              evaluate the solvent characteristics of the internal domain and                
              the degree of packing using diphenylhexatriene, a well-                        
              characterized probe of micelle dynamics.                                       
                                                                                             
              A study is presented to characterize the relationship between                  
              catalytic properties and the conformations of the dimer, tetramer              
              and isolated domains of nitrate reductase.  Experiments are                    
              proposed to examine the assembly of the tetrameric state, using                
              the intrinsic fluorescence and thiol-labelled protein as                       
              reporters of conformational changes in the presence of effectors               
              of activity.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Lifetime measurements will be used to obtain quenching constants               
              for perylene and 9,10 dicyanoanthracence by carbon tetrachloride               
              and used in calculation of the static quenching limit.                         
                                                                                             
              The argon laser is a high intensity excitation source required                 
              for examining intrinsic fluorescence lifetimes and extrinsic                   
              fluorophore anisotropies.  The multiple excitation wavelengths                 
              will be useful in global analysis of overdetermined data sets to               
              characterize decay laws using discrete and distributed models.
