Title       : Materially-Predictive Theory of Magnetic Behavior and the Heavy Fermion State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1993  
File        : a9120333

Award Number: 9120333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard R. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is aimed at exploiting and extending capabilities for            
              treating the reduced magnetic ordering and related phenomena,                  
              including magneto-optic behavior, associated with the highly                   
              correlated f-electron state on approaching or being in the heavy               
              fermion state.  Essentially, we have learned how to exhibit                    
              magnetic ordering properties in the correlated-electron state by               
              projecting onto a site-centered basis.  Our materially-predictive              
              methodology involves two major stages: (1) the parameters in a                 
              lattice model hamiltonian containing both band-f hybridization and             
              band-f coulomb exchange are calculated by a sequence of electronic             
              structure calculations and, (2) a two-step sequence for finding the            
              magnetic ordering properties (ground state and equilibrium                     
              behavior, magnetic excitations, critical behavior) first                       
              transforming the model hamiltonian into the language of resonant               
              scattering theory to get an effective multipolar two-ion                       
              interaction and then using various methods we have developed to                
              predict the observable properties on a wholly ab initio basis (no              
              adjustable parameters or empirical information used).  We will use             
              this methodology to predict the approach to and nature of magnetic             
              ordering in the heavy fermion state for seveal isostructural                   
              systems of experimental interest.  Our methodology will be extended            
              to include predicting (1) incremental specific heat associated with            
              magnetic ordering, (2) pressure effects and elastic properties, (3)            
              effects in high applied magnetic fields, (4) alloying including                
              diluting the f-electron species.  In addition, we will initiate                
              studies on the role of explicit (interconfigurational) correlation             
              effects on the magneto-optic behavior and on the conduction bands.             
              %%%                                                                            
              Computationally-intensive research will be undertaken to study the             
              magnetic properties of materials in which the electrons behave as              
              if their masses are many times their usual mass, ie, so-called                 
              heavy fermion systems.  These highly correlated systems are                    
              difficult to treat using conventional techniques.  The                         
              calculations proposed here are unique in coupling electronic                   
              structure calculations for these systems with many-body theory to              
              describe these highly correlated systems from a first-principles               
              approach.
