Title       : The Molecular Organization of Yeast Chromosome I: Control of Meiotic
               Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1994       
File        : a9120264

Award Number: 9120264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Kaback kaback@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    973/972-4400

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Chromosomes are the organelles that express, replicate and                     
              faithfully transfer the genetic material.  We are interested in the            
              mechanism of meiotic chromosome function in the model recombination            
              and then segregate from each other.  Meiotic recombination is                  
              required for the proper segregation of homologues.  However, the               
              mechanisms that control and insure that all chromosomes undergo                
              meiotic recombination are not understood.  Chromosome I is the                 
              smallest S. cerevisiae chromosome and has a significantly higher               
              rate of meiotic recombination than larger S. cerevisiae                        
              chromosomes.  The high rate of recombination is necessary to insure            
              that chromosome I homologues always recombine with each other.  We             
              will examine the mechanisms that control recombination on this well            
              characterized chromosome.  We propose that there is a global                   
              control that affects the entire chromosome and may be mediated by              
              crossover interference.  Evidence for global control comes from                
              studies that show recombination rates are directly affected by                 
              chromosome size.  We will characterize this control by studying the            
              effects of moving large regions of chromosome I to larger and                  
              smaller chromosomal DNA molecules.  We will quantitate the extent              
              of the control and determine whether specific chromosomal sequences            
              are involved.  To better understand the mechanism of crossover                 
              interference, we will determine the amount of DNA affected by it               
              and isolate mutants that are defective in this control. Finally we             
              will construct a minimal size meiotically functional chromosome                
              fragment that undergoes meiotic recombination at the maximum                   
              possible rate.  This minichromosome will serve as a model for                  
              physical studies on meiotic recombination.  The information we                 
              obtain in these studies will enable us to better understand how                
              recombination is controlled so that chromosomes pair and segregate             
              properly during meiosis.
