Title       : Regulation of Amino Acid Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1992    
File        : a9120469

Award Number: 9120469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Paulus paulus@bbri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston Biomed Res Inst
	      64 Grove Street
	      Watertown, MA  024722829    617/926-8040

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The enzyme aspartokinase plays a central role in bacterial amino               
              acid biosynthesis.  It catalyzes the first step in the aspartate               
              pathway, whose products include four of the eight amino acids that             
              are essential for the nutrition of the adult human.  The control of            
              the aspartate pathway depends largely on the presence of isozymes              
              of aspartokinase, which differ in the regulation of their synthesis            
              and activity.  Our major research accomplishments in the last two              
              years include the general definition at the genetic, enzymatic, and            
              physiological level of the complete aspartokinase isozyme pattern              
              of Bacillus subtilis and the detailed characterization of the                  
              operon that encodes one of these isozymes, aspartokinase II (AKII).            
              The primary aim of the proposed research is to study the molecular             
              mechanisms controlling the expression of the AKII operon, the mode             
              of allosteric regulation of AKII by its feedback inhibitor L-                  
              lysine, and the physiological function of the two non-identical                
              subunits of AKII.  A parallel line of investigation, to be begun               
              while the studies on AKII are in progress, will focus on the other             
              aspartokinase isozymes of B. subtilis, of which one (AKI) is                   
              inhibited by the cell wall constitute diaminopmelate and the other             
              (AKIII) by threonine and lysine.  AKI functions primarily in the               
              synthesis of diaminopimelate during growth in rich media and in the            
              production of diaminopimelate and dipicolinate during sporulation,             
              whereas AKII and AKIII serve in the biosynthesis of lysine,                    
              threonine, and methionine in growth cells.  Initial experiments                
              will involve the cloning and sequencing of the genes encoding AKI              
              and AKIII and will be following by the study of the mechanisms that            
              regulate the synthesis and activity of these enzymes.  The in-depth            
              study of the control of these important regulatory enzymes will                
              contribute fundamentally to our understanding of the principles and            
              strategies  of metabolic regulation.
