Title       : Theoretical Studies of Anyon Superconductivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1994     
File        : a9120361

Award Number: 9120361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Laughlin rbl@large.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander L. Fetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical Studies of Anyon Superconductivity - The occurrence of             
              fractional statistics in nature (anyons)-, the capacity of                     
              fractional statistics to cause superconductivity, and the natural              
              appearance of fractional statistics in formal descriptions of                  
              strongly correlated model systems (e.g., the Hubbard and t-J                   
              models) are now firmly established.  As a result, anyon pairing                
              must be accepted as a potential case for high-Tc superconductivity.            
              As yet unclear is whether anyonic superconductivity actually occurs            
              in these (or indeed any) real materials.  This question will remain            
              open until mathematical tools sufficiently powerful to describe                
              anyonic effects both accurately and correctly are developed.  The              
              proposed research includes both the development of formal                      
              procedures, based on perturbative techniques, to describe anyonic              
              superconductivity in realistic settings, and the use of these                  
              procedures for computation of spectroscopic properties of high-Tc              
              materials.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              This work is intended to develop an accurate picture of anyonic                
              superconductivity, that is, superconductivity whose elementary                 
              objects are pairs of odd-fractioned spin entities, rather than the             
              paired electrons which produce normal superconductive phenomena.               
              This new form of superconductivity is important in itself, but is              
              also a plausible model for the recently-discovered phenomenon of               
              high-Tc superconductivity.  The central feature of the present                 
              work is the development and application of mathematical machinery              
              suitable for detailed discussion of this phenomenon.
