Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Scientific Conference on Hamiltonian Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1992  
File        : a9120524

Award Number: 9120524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Meyer ken.meyer@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   From its origins nearly two centuries ago, Hamiltonian                    
              dynamics has grown to embrace the physics of nearly all systems                
              that evolve without dissipation, as well as a number of branches               
              of mathematics.  The power and elegance of Hamiltonian methods                 
              were first seized upon in the mid-nineteenth century by                        
              theoretical astronomers, who reduced problems in their discipline              
              to the task of finding enough "integrals" of an appropriate                    
              Hamiltonian system; these integrals were difficult to find except              
              for the simplest systems.  Poincare showed that the emphasis                   
              should not be placed on solving the equations for a physical                   
              system, but rather that the important features of a system's                   
              behavior could be found by other means.  These new methods had a               
              strong effect on mathematics itself, as the fields of topology                 
              and dynamical systems arose out of Poincare's qualitative,                     
              geometric vision of problems in celestial mechanics and                        
              Hamiltonian systems.  The qualitative approach to dynamical                    
              systems has remained an active research area, especially now that              
              computers provide a "laboratory" in which to view systems of                   
              increasing complexity.  Driven partly by the discovery in these                
              experiments of new phenomena and partly by the maturation of the               
              mathematical disciplines arising out of Poincare's work, the                   
              results and methods of Hamiltonian systems have grown and                      
              penetrated neighboring fields of research.                                     
                   This project will support an International Conference on                  
              Hamiltonian Dynamical Systems to be held from March 25-28, 1992                
              at the University of Cincinnati.  The conference will gather                   
              together leading and newer researchers to discuss the latest                   
              results in Hamiltonian systems and its applications, and to gain               
              an overview of how those results relate to each other and to the               
              discipline as a whole.  To emphasize the comprehensive aspect of               
              the conference, at least one of the plenary speakers will be a                 
              professional historian of science, and will discuss the subject                
              in the broadest possible terms.
