Title       : Assembly and Stability of Microtubules from Antarctic Fish at Low Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1994      
File        : a9120311

Award Number: 9120311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388590             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. William Detrich ICEMAN@NEU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-range goals of the proposed research are to determine,                
              at the molecular level, the structural adaptations that enable                 
              the tubulins of Antarctic fishes to polymerize at the low body                 
              temperatures (-2 to +2 C) experienced by these cold-adapted                    
              vertebrates, and to examine the dynamics of the fish                           
              microtubules.  The specific objectives of this project are five                
              in number:  1) to compare the assembly energetics of brain                     
              tubulins from Antarctic and temperate nototheniid fishes; 2) to                
              clone and to sequence cDNAs (DNAs complementary to messenger                   
              RNAs) that encode the brain tubulins of Antarctic and temperate                
              nototheniid fishes; 3) to determine the structures of tubulin                  
              genes from an Antarctic fish, and possibly from a temperate                    
              nototheniid; 4) to determine the structural features responsible               
              for the functional differences between brain and egg tubulins of               
              an Antarctic fish; and 5) to characterize the dynamic behaviors                
              of Antarctic fish microtubules at low temperatures.  Molecular-                
              biological experiments will be performed on tubulin cDNAs and                  
              genes derived from the nucleic acids of the Antarctic cod,                     
              Notothenia coriiceps neglecta, and of its temperate congener, the              
              New Zealand black cod, N. angustata.  Additionally, the dynamics               
              of Antarctic fish microtubules at low temperatures will be                     
              examined by video-enhanced light-microscopic methods.  Comparison              
              of the primary sequences and posttranslational modifications of                
              tubulins from Antarctic fishes with those of tubulins from                     
              related temperate fishes and warm-blooded vertebrates should                   
              reveal the molecular interactions and structural features                      
              necessary for microtubule assembly at low temperatures.  This                  
              work will provide valuable information concerning the structure                
              of tubulin genes from an extreme Antarctic poikilotherm.
