Title       : Center for Particle Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9120005

Award Number: 9120005
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Morris L. Aizenman                      
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19700176           (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Davis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Bernard Sadoulet sadoulet@cfpa.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9171      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,7258,9171,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Research in the area of particle astrophysics will be carried out              
              at the Center for Particle Astrophysics (CfPA) which has been                  
              established at the University of California, Berkeley (UC-B).                  
              The Director of the Center is Professor Bernard Sadoulet of the                
              University of California, Berkeley.  There is cooperation and/or               
              collaboration with scientists in the Physics and Astronomy                     
              Departments at UC-B; the University of California, Santa Barbara;              
              the University of California, Santa Cruz; the University of                    
              California, Irvine; Stanford University, San Francisco State                   
              University; Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory; University of Chicago;               
              University of Hawaii, Brown University; Temple University and                  
              Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.                                        
                                                                                             
              Astrophysics and particle physics are increasingly complementary               
              and interdependent sciences.  The CfPA provides a way to coordi-               
              nating and focussing research in particle astrophysics and brings              
              together  and/or coordinates the major theoretical and experimen-              
              tal skills to attack the fundamental problems of the discipline.               
              The Center is focussing its effort on the problem of dark matter               
              in the universe.  The dark matter is optically invisible, but it               
              is estimated that up to 90% of the mass in the universe may be in              
              dark matter.  Gravitational effects are observed that are thought              
              to be caused by dark matter.  A search for non-baryonic dark                   
              matter will be carried out by developing and using cryogenic                   
              detectors.  There will be observations of the cosmic background                
              microwave (CMB) radiation to try to detect any anisotropy in the               
              CMB.  Theoretical studies indicate that there should be an aniso-              
              tropy in the CMB radiation, but there has not been a definitive                
              measurement up to now.  Recent observations have shown that the                
              universe has structure at very large scales, and observations of               
              the universe at large scales will be carried out.  A new project,              
              the Deep Extragalactic Evolutionary Probe (DEEP), will have sup-               
              port to do a design study for a multi-barrel super spectrograph                
              that would be used on the new 10m Keck telescope.  Theoretical                 
              activities relating to the problem of dark matter will be                      
              supported.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The Center will sponsor scientific workshops, carry out educa-                 
              tional and outreach activities, and be active in working with                  
              industries to improve the transfer of technology from the results              
              of research at the Center to industry and other scientists.
