Title       : Archaeological Investigations of a Mississippian Period Production for Exchange
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1993      
File        : a9120222

Award Number: 9120222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Cobb ccobb@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Charles Cobb will conduct two seasons of archaeological site               
              survey and excavation in the Mill Creek region of Southern                     
              Illinois.  The region is important to archeologists because it                 
              contains quarries for stone which was manufactured into hoes.                  
              Finds from numerous other sites demonstated that these prized                  
              objects were then distributed throughout the lower Ohio and                    
              Mississippi River Valleys.  Dr. Cobb will first conduct an                     
              intensive sample survey of the area to obtain information on the               
              variety, distribution and function of sites related to digging                 
              implement production.  In the second stage of the work he will                 
              excavate a small sample of sites to learn how actual production                
              of the implements was organized.  Materials collected will also                
              help to date the sites and shed light on the subsistence                       
              practices followed.  Recovery of exchange items such as non-local              
              flint, galena, shell artifacts and copper will provide                         
              information on trade networks.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Although they did not develop all the features commonly                        
              attributed to "civilizations", late prehistoric (ca. 900-1500 AD)              
              societies in the American Midwest developed a high degree of                   
              social complexity in which individual groups were bound together               
              into larger organized trade networks.  Archaeologists have                     
              postuated that a tight link exists between the development of                  
              social complexity, political centralization and control of trade.              
              Because Mill Creek contained such a valuable product, it makes an              
              excellent region to examine this issue.  Through his excavations               
              Dr. Cobb wishes to learn how the production of stone hoes and                  
              their exchange was organized and functioned at both a local and                
              an interregional level.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              insight into how complex societies were developed and maintained.              
              It will yield data of great interest to many U.S. archaeologists.
