Title       : The Organization of Moche Ceramic Production: Excavations atthe Cerro Mayal
               Workshop, Chicama Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1994    
File        : a9120783

Award Number: 9120783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54386              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Spencer Russell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Russell will conduct archaeological excavations at the site                
              of Cerro Mayal which is located in the Chicama Valley of northern              
              coastal Peru.  The site, which dates to Moche times, consists of               
              a ceramics workshop, a ca. 5000 square meter area with numerous                
              piles of wasted ceramics which protrude up to one meter above the              
              ground surface.  Also associated with this is a habitation area                
              where the remains of buildings of both masonry and adobe brick                 
              architecture can be discerned.  During a single season of                      
              fieldwork, Dr. Russell and colleagues will excavate in the                     
              workshop area to identify the spatial organization of features                 
              and artifacts.  They hope to reconstruct the ceramic technology                
              and associated labor organization.  Dr. Russell will also dig in               
              the waste pile area to recover tools, molds and partially                      
              competed vessels.  Finally, he will focus on the habitation zone               
              associated with the workshop.  He hopes to learn how this group                
              was organized and how the products were distributed over a                     
              broader area.  Dr. Russell will also conduct laboratory analysis               
              of clays and ceramic materials from both Cerro Mayal as well as                
              other Chicama Valley sites in an attempt to reconstruct the trade              
              network.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The Chicama Valley served as the focus for the Moche culture                   
              which built monumental architecture in the form of temples and                 
              associated habitation complexes.  They also produced fine craft                
              items.  The Moche spread over a large area, controlled large                   
              numbers of people and dug and administered an extensive system of              
              canals which captured water from the Andes Mountains and                       
              permitted agriculture in this extremely dry desert environment.                
              It is unclear how large societies such as this arise and are                   
              maintained and many archaeologists believe that control of                     
              manufacturing and trade play an important role in this process.                
              Cerro Mayal is important because its large size suggests that                  
              pottery production was under centralized control.  This research               
              will help to determine whether this hypothesis is correct.                     
                                                                                             
              The project will produce data of interest to many archaeologists               
              and will increase our understanding of how complex societies                   
              arise and are maintained.
