Title       : Nitrogen Dynamics in a Salt Marsh
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9120183

Award Number: 9120183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iris C. Anderson iris@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Wetzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Coastal lagoon-type estuaries such as the Virginia Coast Reserve               
              are often nitrogen-limited.  The availability of nitrogen                      
              controls aquatic primary productivity in the estuary.  The                     
              effects of N-loading on the estuary due to agricultural runoff                 
              depends to a large extent upon the N-cycling processes that occur              
              in the intertidal sediments.  Processes such as nitrification-                 
              denitrification result in losses of N from the sediment, whereas               
              dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium tends to conserve N                
              in the sediment.  Efforts to develop models to predict the                     
              effects of nitrogen influx to estuaries due to natural or                      
              anthropogenic processes have been limited by the difficulties                  
              involved in measuring the rates of the various N-cycling                       
              processes in wetland sediments.  Many of the techniques currently              
              used to measure the rates of these processes are disruptive,                   
              utilize inhibitors of questionable effectiveness, or require                   
              additions of substrates at higher than ambient concentrations.                 
              Such techniques may at best then measure potential rather than                 
              in-situ reaction rates.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project will develop the methodologies required to apply 15N              
              isotope pool dilution techniques to intact sediment cores taken                
              from vegetated and unvegetated intertidal wetland ecosystems.                  
              These measurements will allow the determination of the relative                
              importance of nitrification, followed by denitrification v.s.                  
              dissimilatory nitrate reduction to the overall N-budget.                       
                                                                                             
              The study will be performed at a Long Term Ecological Research                 
              site in the Virginia Coast Reserve.  Taken together, this                      
              information will improve the accuracy of rate estimates of                     
              nitrogen cycling reactions in wetland and near shore sediments                 
              and permit an evaluation of the role of these processes in the                 
              ecology of coastal marine ecosystems.
