Title       : Dissertation Research: Late Pliocene Archaeology at the GonaRiver, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1992  
File        : a9120040

Award Number: 9120040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sileshi Semaw  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jack Harris, Mr Sileshi Semaw will                  
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct                    
              archaeological research in the Awash Valley region of Ethiopia.                
              Prior work by Mr. Semaw as well as others has revealed the                     
              presence of archaeological materials in the Gona River drainage.               
              Based on geological analysis the Gona sites date to approximately              
              2.5 million years ago and this makes them among the oldest known.              
              Mr. Semaw will now follow up on this earlier work.  He will                    
              conduct a survey of the Gona region to locate additional sites.                
              He will undertake a large scale excavation to study the nature                 
              and character of in situ archaeological occurrences.  Data thus                
              gathered from surface and excavated settings will provide                      
              evidence on the ecology and activities of the hominids who                     
              manufactured the artifacts.  Finally studies will be initiated to              
              determine the presence or absence of culturally modified bones.                
                                                                                             
              While it is known that early humans began to make recognizable                 
              stone tools ca. 2.5 million years ago, little else is known about              
              their behavior.  This, in large part, results from the fact that               
              very few sites dating from this time period are known.  Because                
              the Gona site includes both in situ lithics as well as faunal                  
              remains, it is extremely important.  The excavations and analyses              
              that Mr. Semaw will conduct may answer questions on the dietary                
              and cultural adaptations of these hominids.  It is not known for               
              example whether hunting or meat eating was practiced.                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to many anthropologists.  It will also assist in              
              the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
