Title       : Dispersion of Optical Nonlinearities in Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1994      
File        : a9120590

Award Number: 9120590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Van Stryland ewvs@creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Hagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marion J. Soileau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mansoor Sheik-Bahae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will pursue a basic research program                              
              aimed toward developing a fundamental                                          
              understanding of the nonlinear response of optical                             
              materials.  Our past research was initially aimed at                           
              two-photon absorption (2PA) in semiconductors.                                 
              This goal led to a predictive capability for 2PA                               
              coefficients not only for semiconductors but also for                          
              wide gap dielectrics.  A difficulty encountered in                             
              these experiments is that nonlinear refraction always                          
              accompanies nonlinear absorption so that an                                    
              understanding of the origins of this nonlinear                                 
              refraction is also needed.  Therefore, we broadened                            
              the scope of the program.  We have developed a new,                            
              accurate and sensitive measurement technique, the                              
              Z-scan, which can give the sign and magnitude of                               
              nonlinear refraction as well as nonlinear absorption.                          
              This technique is rapidly gaining wide acceptance as                           
              a standard measurement and gives complementary                                 
              information to other methods that we use such as                               
              four-wave mixing.  This technique is being used to                             
              rapidly increase the data base of nonlinear materials                          
              constants.  Our measurements to date show both                                 
              bound and photogenerated carrier nonlinearities.                               
              The free-carrier nonlinearities are well predicted by                          
              band blocking models.  The fast bound electronic                               
              refraction n2 is given by a Kramers-Kronig (KK)                                
              integral of the nonlinear absorption spectrum                                  
              including 2PA, electronic Raman and AC-Stark                                   
              contributions.  We established this theory and                                 
              demonstrated agreement with experiment over a four                             
              orders of magnitude change in n2 including a sign                              
              change for semiconductors and dielectrics.  We                                 
              propose to study the nondegenerate nonlinearities                              
              (eg. n2 at w1 due to w2) which are also predicted by                           
              the theory.  The outcome of these studies, besides the                         
              data base, will be the establishment of a predictive                           
              capability for use by optoelectronic device researchers                        
              to determine nonlinear coefficients of other materials                         
              at other wavelengths including dual wavelength                                 
              applications.  These materials constants are                                   
              important, for example, for applications in all optical                        
              switching, optical limiting, and laser-induced damage.                         
              In addition, we have recently observed an effective                            
              X(3) caused by the cascading of X(2):X(2) in a second                          
              harmonic generating crystal (KTP) that looks quite                             
              promising for obtaining large nonlinear refraction for                         
              the fundamental.  As several organic materials have                            
              been shown to have very high X(2)'s, we are initiating                         
              studies in organic materials of the cascaded as well as                        
              other nonlinearities (eg. in phthalocyanine dyes).                             
              Questions of the applicability of the KK analysis to                           
              classes of organic materials will be examined.
