Title       : Biogenesis of a Neurosecretory Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1992      
File        : a9120961

Award Number: 9120961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Neurotransmitters and hormones are synthesized in specialized                  
              tissues and are secreted from the cells of those tissues in                    
              response to environmental stimuli.  When secreted, these molecules             
              provide signals to other cells which enable these cells to adapt to            
              the physiological conditions.  The requirements of the cell for                
              increased or decreased amounts of transmitter or hormone changes               
              with the environmental status of the organism.  The synthesis of               
              neurotransmitters and hormones is catalyzed by enzymes which are               
              present only in those cells destined to secrete the                            
              neurotransmitter or hormone.  The focus of this study is to                    
              understand the mechanism of biosynthesis of the enzyme which                   
              catalyzes the synthesis of norepinephrine, a hormone and                       
              neurotransmitter which is important for cardiovascular function and            
              adaptation to stress.  This enzyme, dopamine beta-hydroxylase, is              
              localized to the cellular secretory granule, which is the                      
              compartment which stores the neurotransmitter.  Within this                    
              compartment, the enzyme is in two forms; one form is in the soluble            
              contents of this granule, while the other form is attached to the              
              membrane which forms the boundary of the granule.  This research               
              project will study the biochemical differences between                         
              these two forms which are important for the different                          
              localizations.  An antisera will be prepared which specifically                
              recognizes amino acid residue, which may be present in the                     
              membrane-bound, but not the soluble portion of the protein.  This              
              antisera will be used to monitor the presence of this segment on               
              two forms of the protein.  The results of these experiments may                
              uncover a novel mechanism of protein biogenesis.
