Title       : Generation and Utilization of Monoclonal Antibodies as Probes of Slow NGF
               Receptor Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9120836

Award Number: 9120836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart C. Feinstein feinstei@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Intercellular biochemical communication is a ubiquitous feature in             
              biology serving to mediate an enormous range of regulatory                     
              functions.  In vertebrate nervous systems, targets of innervation              
              secrete proteins known as neurotrophic factors, which are                      
              subsequently received by the innervating neuron.  Acquisition of               
              sufficient neurotrophic factor by individual innervating neurons               
              is essential for the proper development and maintenance of the                 
              nervous system.  Interruption of the flow of neurotrophic factor               
              from the target to the neurons result in the rapid neuronal                    
              destruction of the affected region.  In Dr. Feinstein's project,               
              he will examine the molecular mechanisms by which Nerve Growth                 
              Factor (NGF), the best understood among the neurotrophic factors,              
              mediates its action upon responsive neuronal cells.  NGF action is             
              known to be initiated by the interaction of NGF with "slow" (also              
              known as "high affinity") NGF receptors located in the neuronal                
              plasma membrane.  He will first utilize a variety of immunological             
              strategies to generate novel molecular probes.  Then, he will use              
              these probes as tools to investigate the molecular composition of              
              the slow NGF receptors as well as the functions mediated by the                
              slow NGF receptors.  These studies should markedly contribute to               
              our understanding of neurotrophic factor action and the development            
              and maintenance of the nervous system.*** //
