Title       : LTER: Succession, Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning at the Prairie-Forest
               Border
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9411972

Award Number: 9411972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3860998            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. David Tilman tilman@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Reich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Grigal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9411972  Tilman    The Cedar Creek Natural History Area is important because of
              its location on the climatically and edaphically controlled boundary between
              prairie and forest.  This "tension zone" between forest and prairies is  highly
              sensitive to climatic variation and strongly impacted by edaphic factors,
              especially soil nitrogen availability fire frequency and by herbivores and
              predators.  The dominant vegetation of the region, oak savanna, itself has
              unusually high species richness because its flora and fauna include both
              prairies and forest species.    It is the diversity and dynamics of these
              ecosystems that form the focus of  their research.  Three major questions guide
              their research:    (1)  What factors, interactions and positive and negative
              feedback effects control the species composition and species dynamics of our
              successional  grasslands and native savanna ecosystems?    (2)  What forces
              determine how many species can persist on various trophic levels within our
              ecosystems, i.e., what controls biodiversity?    (3)  What are the impacts of
              species composition and biodiversity on the functioning of these ecosystems?   
              Succession and biodiversity are tightly linked.  They are interested in 
              succession because it is the process of ecosystem assembly.  Disturbances often
              cause the local loss of species.  The factors that drive the successional
              processes, are thus the processes that control and maintain diversity.    They
              have performed numerous long-term experiments that have provided insights into
              the impacts of biodiversity on the stability and functioning of these
              ecosystems.    They will continue to seek the underlying mechanisms that cause
              broad scale patterns in ecosystem composition, diversity, and productivity in
              their successional grasslands and prairie openings, and will expand their
              efforts in oak savannas.  Their ongoing studies will further quantify the
              effects of biodiversity on ecosystem resistance to and resilience from climatic
              variability.  Their new biodiversity e xperiment should provide some of the
              first direct field evidence of the  effects of species and functional diversity
              on numerous aspects of population and ecosystem stability and functioning.
