Title       : LTER: Biome-level Constraints on Population, Community, and Ecosystem Responses
               to Climate Fluctuation, Sevilleta LTER II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9411976

Award Number: 9411976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4195523            (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Gosz jgosz@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce T. Milne  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ann S. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Duszynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Yates  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB9411976  MILNE   The Sevilleta Long-Term Ecological Research Program (LTER)
              is designed to address a suite of ecological hypotheses concerning climate
              dynamics and the responses of organisms in a biome transition zone in central
              New Mexico.  The Sevilleta straddles several major biomes of the Southwest,
              including the Great Basin, Great Plains, and Chihuahuan Desert, and is at the
              epicenter of the mid-elevation Mogollon Conifer Woodland Flora.  Additional
              ecosystems in the study region include Rio Grande riparian cottonwood forests,
              mid-elevation ponderosa pine forests, mid-elevation ponderosa pine forests, and
              higher-elevation mixed-conifer / aspen forests.  The region is strongly
              influences by the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), with major fluctuations
              in precipitation on semi-decadal times scales.  The major theme of the
              Sevilleta LTER relates to the synthetic understanding of ecological responses
              at various levels of organization (e.g., organismal, population, community,
              ecosystem, and landscape) and at multiple spatial and temporal scales.  The
              research is organized to address (1) the role of water in the region in driving
              major ecosystem processes, (2) the fate of carbon as it is controlled by
              processes of assimilation, decomposition, and redistribution, (3) land use
              practices which regulate the extent and distribution of carbon processing, (4)
              the assembly, distribution and maintenance of biodiversity, and (5) the direct
              and indirect consequences of changing climatic conditions.   Mathematical water
              balance models will provide a unifying synthesis of the LTER core topics and
              the various levels of organization studied by the participating investigators. 
              The water balance approach will take advantage of continued studies from the
              first six years and will provide a conceptual and quantitative context for a
              modest number of new studies that provide a richer and more complete
              characterization of the Sevilleta.  In addition, LTER scientists will implement
              a systems model of the CENTURY  class in a geographical context, in which the
              water balance will be driven by the nonequilibrium water model.  Thus, the
              models will provide a synthesis of existing and future data concerning the core
              areas of organic matter processing, primary production, and inorganic inputs. 
              The synthesis will be of immediate use in relation to the disturbance and
              population core topics, including vegetation-environment relations, nutrient
              dynamics, species distributions and abundances, animal population studies, and
              population genetics.  These field and laboratory studies will provide the
              necessary biological components that represent the contingencies and feedbacks
              that are both the responses to, and the constraints on, the dynamics of water.
