Title       : The Origins of Logical Empiricism: Philosophy of Science in the Context of
               General Relativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1994   
File        : a9411582

Award Number: 9411582
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1995   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63686              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Ryckman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Contemporary American scientists and philosophers of science have built their
              views of the nature of science on a foundation of what became known as  logical
              empiricism.  While contemporary philosophy of science in the US has largely
              rejected much of this philosophy developed between the two world wars, logical
              empiricism still shapes how science is understood.   Dr.  Ryckman, under this
              grant, argues that an examination of the response of some of the founders of
              logical empiricism to a revolutionary scientific theory--Einstein's theory of
              general relativity--may encourage a clearer  understanding  of practices and
              methods of approach in contemporary philosophy of science and will also
              illuminate the problems surrounding the construction of philosophical
              interpretations of science.    Dr. Ryckman is investigating the formation and
              subsequent influence of philosophical interpretations of the general theory of
              relativity that were fashioned in the period immediately following the theory's
              inception.  In view of logical empiricism's preeminent role as a precursor of
              much of contemporary philosophy of science, the focus is on those
              interpretations of the theory's philosophical significance offered by
              philosophers who were to become its leading figures.       This project
              requires both careful attention to scientific, historical and philosophical
              context and detailed knowledge of published and archival material.   Under this
              grant, Dr. Ryckman is examining Han's Reichenbach's solution to the problem of
              the metric of space-time.  This task involves an examination of correspondence
              and perhaps other unpublished materials in the Hermann Weyl papers.  Second, he
              is studying the philosophical influence of Sir Arthur Eddington's work on
              general relativity and his attempted "generalization" which sought to bring the
              gravitational and the electromagnetic field into a common framework.
