Title       : Dissertation Research: Tracing Organizational Changes in Mississippian Chiefdoms
               of the Etowah River Valley, Georgia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1994   
File        : a9411359

Award Number: 9411359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1994   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7226               (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Hatch jwh7@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hatch    Under the direction of Dr. James Hatch, Mr. Adam King will  collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his  research is to reconstruct
              the development of different  organizational forms of chiefdoms in the Etowah
              River Valley of  Georgia during the period of ca. AD 950-1550. The Etowah site
              is  famous because of its large size and the raised earthen mounds  which it
              contains. For many years it has provided a focus for  archaeology in this
              region of the U.S. In addition to work at the  site however, a number of
              additional surveys have been conducted  and many sites of varying size located.
              Mr. King will work with  these data in an attempt to reconstruct the regional
              system of  which Etowah formed a part and to determine how this developed  and
              changed over time. In particular, he is interested in  learning how - and to
              what extent - the region was integrated  into a single political and economic
              unit. To accomplish this  goal, he will synthesize data from past excavations
              and conduct  small scale excavation to fill in several blanks. He will examine 
              size relations among sites to determine the degree to which a  hierarchical
              system existed. He will also focus on the analysis  of ceramic assemblages from
              a large number of sites to determine  the extent to which different types of
              pottery are shared among  sites. Pottery provides a good indicator not only
              exchange but  relative status.    Archaeologists know that many U.S.
              prehistoric native American  societies were organized into chiefdoms or complex
              social  entities which grouped large numbers of people into organized  social
              units. The large sites and impressive earthworks in the  Southeastern U.S.
              attest to such a large regional system. However  it is not clear how it
              developed and was maintained. The degree  to which centralization took place is
              also not known. Because of  long term archaeological interest in this region a
              great deal of  data is available. However it has not been synthesized and Mr. 
              King will undertake t his task. The result will be of interest to  many
              archaeologists. It will shed new light on the growth of  complex society and
              aid in the training of a promising young  scientist.
