Title       : American University Observatories and Nineteenth-Century Timekeeping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1994   
File        : a9411696

Award Number: 9411696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5025               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Bartky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              American time keeping was initially nourished by the need to publish time
              schedules for the railroads and was later expanded by the use of electric
              telegraph networks.  With the need for accuracy in time keeping, professional
              astronomers assumed the arbiter's role in public time keeping,  selling their
              observatory's time to cities and railroads.  These astronomers were in conflict
              with others trying to make money by selling time, and battles for customers -- 
              carried out in the name of "public service" -- raged for decades.  Throughout
              the period, astronomers did little to improve their time keeping equipment;
              major advances in technology and dramatic changes in the public's time keeping
              habits finally ended the university astronomers' role.  Now, the public's time
              comes via the U.S. Naval Observatory's noon signal.    Dr. Bartky is using this
              grant to complete his research on both the social and technical history of time
              keeping in the United States.  He is examining primary materials at several
              university archives to determine how astronomers addressed the needs of the
              general public.  This is a fascinating story which will enrich both the history
              of science and technology and serve as an example of the impact of
              commercialization on scientific development.
