Title       : Analyis & Visualization of Evolutionary Response Characteristics for Stochastic
               Dynamical Eng Systems: Solution of the Multidimensional Fokker-Planck Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9411589

Award Number: 9411589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133114             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. F. Spencer spencer@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 0000,1038,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               9411589 Spencer  The accurate prediction of the response of  a dynamical system
              is a necessary first step toward its design and eventual control.  Formulation
              of accurate models of the structural system and excitation processes provides
              the means to determine system response, assess the adequacy of the system in
              terms of its performance and safety, and suggest corrective actions.  Recent
              seismic activity in southern California serves to remind us that environmental
              loads are random in nature.  Furthermore, a degree of uncertainty exists in the
              properties of virtually every physical system.  Thus, the responses of many
              engineering systems will be stochastic processes, and the complete and accurate
              determination of these responses is generally a nontrivial matter.    The
              solution of many of these problems is facilitated by the appropriate
              construction of the model such that the response process is Markovian and is,
              thus, completely characterized by a transition probability density function,
              usually obtained by solving a forward Kolmogorov or Fokker-Planck equation. 
              The object of this project will be to develop efficient algorithms to solve the
              multidimensional Fokker-Planck equation for linear and nonlinear systems
              subjected to both additive and multiplicative (i.e., parametric) excitations
              and to introduce these algorithms into engineering practice.  Several classes
              of solution methods will be examined, including finite element methods combined
              with direct, particularly explicit, solvers.  These eliminate the need to upper
              triangularize the operational matrix that occur ion high dimensional phase
              spaces.  The solution will yield not only the first order probability density
              function of the response process but also,  after software development, the
              marginal densities, response moments, and upcrossing and peak Statistics of the
              response, thus completely characterizing the fundamental nature of the
              stochastic response process.  Visualization of the solution as it evolves in
              time permits the analys t to observe the rich behavior of the dynamical system.
               Thus, significant effort will be expended to determine optimal methods of
              viewing the solutions of higher dimensional problems in low dimensional spaces
              in order to preserve the maximum amount of important information.  In many
              applications in the Fokker-Planck equation possesses a second derivative for
              only one of the independent variables.  Methods that take advantage of this
              special structure offer significant advantages.  For example, operator
              splitting methods seek to reduce a multidimensional problem, with its
              prohibitively large memory and computational requirements, to a sequence of
              small, simpler problems.  In the present situation, the differential operator
              can be split into an approximating sequence of one dimensional problems.  Each
              of these one dimensional problems is alternately solved numerically over  a
              portion of each time step, and the solution is propagated from one side of the
              mesh to the other, column-by-column.  These methods are  sometimes referred to
              as alternating direction methods, and their applicability to the current class
              of problems will be examined in great detail.   It is anticipated that other
              computational approaches such as boundary element methods will also be
              evaluated.  Furthermore, the visualization aspects of the problem as defined
              above will be examined cooperatively.
