Title       : Dissertation Research: Self-incompatibility and Pollination in Two Species of
               Linanthus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1994    
File        : a9411869

Award Number: 9411869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6414               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Schemske   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9411869  Schemske       The great diversity of reproductive systems is a
              distinctive  feature of higher plants.  Self-incompatibility, a genetic system 
              that prevents fertilization by self-pollen in hermaphroditic  plants, is one of
              a number of mechanisms that promote outcrossing  in higher plants.  It is
              estimated to be present in over half of  all angiosperm species.  This
              phenomenon has important implications  for plant breeding, and as a result its
              physiological and molecular  bases have been the focus of extensive research. 
              Self-  incompatibility also plays an important role in the evolution of  higher
              plants.  The loss of self-incompatibility and evolution of  selfing is thought
              to be a common evolutionary pattern in a number  of angiosperm families.  Yet
              despite an extensive literature on the  major ecological and genetic factors
              favoring self-vs. cross  fertilization, little is know about the specific
              factors involved  in the origin or loss of self-incompatibility.       The
              co-occurrence of two closely related annuals in the genus  Linanthus presents
              an opportunity to investigate the relationship  between self-incompatibility
              and mating system evolution.  The two  species are ecologically and
              morphologically similar, yet they are  distinguished by their breeding systems:
              Linanthus parviflorus is  self-incompatible, while an undescribed sympatric
              species is self-  fertilizing.  In comparing a number of ecological and genetic
               aspects of the two species, the proposed research will address the  functional
              significance of self-incompatibility, focussing on  unique features of the
              phenomenon.  For instance, while a number of  mechanisms of higher plants
              prevents self-fertilization, self-  incompatibility is unique in that it also
              may prevent mating  between close relatives.  The evolutionary significance of
              this  will be investigated.  Another focus of the research will be the 
              relationship between self-incompatibility and morphological floral  characters
              that influence the deposition of se lf-pollen on the  stigma.  Information
              gained from this study will contribute to our  understanding of the factors
              that influence the loss of self-  incompatibility, a critical turning point in
              the course of mating  system evolution in higher plants.
