Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Molecular Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9411128

Award Number: 9411128
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Randal Linder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1159      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN MOL EVO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9125,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The composition of seed oils varies widely between taxa and could   either be
              the result of relaxation from selection or selection   for or against certain
              compositions given the particular   circumstances of the seeds of a species. 
              Preliminary analyses   show clearly that there is a latitudinal shift in the
              proportion  of saturated vs. unsaturated fat in seeds; on average, tropical  
              species have 2 to more than 4 times the saturated vs. unsaturated   fat content
              of temperate species.  The work proposed here seeks   to determine whether the
              adaptive significance of this difference   lies in selection for lower oil
              solidification temperatures in   cool germinating temperate species.  Both
              phylogenetic and   experimental methods are employed to strengthen the
              investigation.    Two groups of plants are employed: the Viguiera complex 
              (Asteraceae) and the tribe Cyclantherae (Cucurbitaceae).  For selected species
              in each, oil solidification temperature  and composition are determined and
              then mapped on phylogenies  to determine the pattern of evolution of these
              traits.  The   phylogeny of the Viguiera complex is known, and that of the  
              Cyclantherae will be determined from DNA sequence data.  Experiments will be
              conducted to determine the degree of  plasticity of oil solidification
              temperature in response  to growing temperature.  Finally, the performance of
              seeds  germinating at different temperatures will be assessed and  checked to
              see if it is in accordance with the hypothesis.
