Title       : Modelling Electrical Bursting and Calcium Waves in Pancreatic beta-Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1997   
File        : a9411244

Award Number: 9411244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa R. Chay trcl@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9411244  Chay    In pancreatic beta cells the ion channels, the
              phosphatidylinositol  signal, and the receptor controlled adenylate-cyclase
              pathway are  intricately interwoven so as to control insulin release. 
              Modelling  studies will certainly help clarify the main events that take place 
              in these complex interwoven phenomena.  The goal of this research  is to
              formulate a mathematical model that explains the interplay  between the ion
              channels, receptors, intracellular calcium stores,  and intercellular calcium
              wave propagation in pancreatic beta-cells  in the islet of Langerhans.  This
              project has two major goals.  The  first is to incorporate recent patch-clamp
              experiments and  spectrophotometric data into the mathematical bursting model 
              developed by this group over a number of years so as to link the  membrane
              oscillator model with a receptor-controlled calcium  oscillator model.  With
              this refined model, the role each channel  plays in triggering the bursting and
              intracellular calcium  oscillations will be quantified, and the coordination of
              release of  calcium from internal stores with the influx of extracellular 
              calcium will be investigated.  In addition, how electrical activity  and
              intracellular calcium concentration change in response to  intra-islet hormones
              and neurotransmitters released from  sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers
              will be explored.  The  second major goal is to develop user-friendly software
              which  simulates beta cell electrophysiology and intracellular calcium 
              dynamics for researchers studying excitable cells as well as for  teachers in
              the classroom.  %%%   Insulin is a hormone that plays a key role in regulating
              the level  of sugar in blood.  Insulin is produced in specialized cells of the 
              pancreas, the beta cells.  Beta cells release insulin in response  to a number
              of external stimuli such as increases in the blood  concentration of the simple
              sugar, glucose, as well as certain  neurotransmitters and some other hormones. 
              Understanding the chain  of events  between the cell's detection of these
              chemical stimuli  and the release of insulin is the goal of much research in
              many  laboratories.  It is known that the chain of events involves bursts  of
              electrical activity at the beta cell membrane and oscillations  of the cell's
              internal calcium levels.  Each of these is caused by  certain biochemical
              changes in the cell and results in other  biochemical changes.  The goal of
              this research is to develop  detailed mathematical models that will aid in
              clarifying the  relationships among these complex and interdependent sequences
              of  biochemical and biophysical events.  Mathematical models are useful  not
              only in helping to interpret existing experimental data but  also in suggesting
              further experiments that ultimately will allow  us to understand the
              transduction of the extracellular signals that  stimulate pancreatic cells to
              release insulin.  A second goal of  this project is to develop user-friendly
              software that will  facilitate studies by other researchers and students
              interested in  similar biophysical and biochemical phenomena.  ***
