Title       : Dynamic Social Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9411603

Award Number: 9411603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bibb Latane latane@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9411603  Latane                              ABSTRACT         Conceiving society
              as a nonlinear dynamical system of  interacting individuals, this program of
              research will explore  how individual influence processes lead to the temporal
              evolution  of groups into self-organized entities. Changes in the attributes 
              (eg.,moods, attitudes, habits) of spatially distributed  individuals resulting
              from the interactive, reciprocal, and  recursive operation of social influence
              processes can be modeled  by social impact theory, a simple but very general
              theory of  social influence. Surprisingly, several macro-level phenomena can 
              be predicted to emerge from the operation of these micro-level  processes,
              including dynamic equilibria with stable diversity, an  incomplete polarization
              of positions resulting in coherent  clusters of minority members protecting
              each other from exposure  to majority influence, and a tendency for people's
              positions on  different issues to become correlated. As in other complex 
              systems, these tendencies toward self-organization are  accentuated by the
              introduction of randomness. Empirical research  will determine whether
              laboratory and real groups show the  predicted signs of self-organization. 
              Field studies in a   factory town in China will produce information about the
              nature  of social space and the spatial patterning of work- and 
              housing-related attitudes. Longitudinal studies of individuals  interacting via
              e-mail will document the existence of  polarization, clustering, and
              correlation and determine the  effects of varying the geometry of social space
              on the  maintenance of diversity.       This research will contribute to
              understanding the complex  interaction between individual psychological
              processes and social  outcomes in groups ranging in size from families and
              other small   groups to organizations, communities, and even nations. Concepts 
              and procedures developed in this research should be applicable to 
              understanding the historical development of regional differe nces  in customs,
              values and beliefs, social determinants of moods,  norms, life styles, and
              behaviors, both constructive and  maladaptive, and such elusive phenomena as
              social movements,  national mood, and public opinion. This approach aligns
              social  psychology with the interdisciplinary study of complex  self-organizing
              systems, and will contribute to and draw on  related work in physics,
              economics, and biology. Finally, the  empirical research will contribute to
              predicting the consequences  of the increasing use of electronic communication
              in work groups  and society.  ***
