Title       : Optically Probing the Chemistry of Thin Film Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1996   
File        : a9411504

Award Number: 9411504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irving P. Herman iph1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,1775,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9411504  Herman    This research is concemed with the development of optical 
              diagnostic techniques for obtaining a detailed view of the  chemistry that
              occurs on and near the surface during thin  film processing. These in situ
              techniques are used to  identify the chemical steps in representative materials
               processes, specifically plasma-assisted chemical etching. The  proposed work
              consist of two related phases. The first is the  development and use of
              laser-induced thermal desorption  (LITD) to study the steady-state surface
              layer that is formed  during etching in a high charge density plasma,
              specifically  an ECR (electron cyclotron resonance) plasma. The chemistry  of
              the formation and desorption of this layer, which is often  only a monolayer
              thick, is key to understanding the etching  process. Plasma-induced optical
              emission and laser induced  fluorescence (LIF) will be used to examine the
              desorbed  products. Laser-induced thermal desorption and other optical  probes
              will be used to investigate the ECR etching of  important prototype alloy
              materials in real time. The second  phase of the proposed investigation is the
              development of  high-spatial resolution optical probes of pattemed thin film 
              processing, such as the etching of films with a pattemed mask  on the surface.
              Understanding the details of the chemistry  that occurs on and immediately
              above the surface of the  exposed film and mask, and near the sidewalls of the
              mask, is  complex. The proposed approach is to probe the gas near the  surface
              with LIF and the surface itself wih Raman microprobe  spectroscopy, at times
              simultaneously, both with 1 micron  lateral resolution. This will be done in
              situ and usually in  real-time.  %%%  The processing of materials often depends
              critically on the  chemistry that occurs on and near the surface. This is true 
              for applications in microelectronics and optoelectronics,  which includes
              patterned etching and the atomic  layer-controlled growth of heterostructures,
              monolayers and  films, in nanoma nufacturing, and in the manufacture of 
              optical films and protective coatings.  However, a  fundamental understanding
              of the chemical steps that occur is  often lacking in such materials
              processing. This occurs, in  part, because of the complex nature of the
              processes which  may include the interplay between events on the surface and 
              in the overlying gas phase, and, in part, because of a lack  of diagnostics to
              identify species and to measure their  concentrations with sufficient spatial
              resolution. The linked  goals of this proposal are to develop in situ, real
              time  optical diagnostics that are necessary to obtain a detailed  view of
              these chemical processes, and to use them to identify  the chemical steps
              involved in the processes of several key,  yet representative, materials
              processes.
