Title       : ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT: Differential Scanning Calorimeter for Liquid
               Crystal Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9411604

Award Number: 9411604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22645              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaw H. Chen shch@lle.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Marshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9411604  Chen      Equipment funds are requested for the procurement of a
              Perkin Elmer DSC-7 differential scanning calorimeter to help initiate a project
              on low molar mass glass-forming liquid crystals.  It should be noted that both
              single crystals and liquid crystals have found numerous potential applications
              in optical and laser systems.  Whereas single crystals are difficult to
              process, liquid crystal devices lack environmental durability.  To overcome
              these problems, liquid crystalline polymers capable of vitrificaton have been
              explored in recent years.  However, the highly viscous nature of polymeric
              materials has presented a processing problem where device uniformity is
              critical.  Hence, ideal materials should possess low melt viscosity besides
              requisite optical characteristics.  Few low molar mass liquid crystals capable
              of vitrification with glass transition temperature above the ambient have been
              reported to date.  Furthermore, there is little understanding of glass-forming
              liquid crystals from the perspective of chemical structure.  It is proposed
              that two seemingly opposing structural features, a mesogenic core and a
              volume-excluding moiety, be chemically bonded to each other via a flexible
              spacer.  To strike a subtle balance between the types of mesogenic core and
              volume-excluding moiety, the number of mesogenic cores per volume excluding
              moiety, and the flexible spacer length is the key to accomplishing liquid
              crystal mesomorphism and glass formation in a single molecular entity. 
              Representative structures have been proposed for synthesis and
              characterization, and molecular simulation will subsequently be performed to
              furnish new insights into glass formation and liquid crystal mesomorphism by
              organic molecules.  Other on-going projects on high birefringence nematic
              polymers, hydrogels, and cycloaliphatic polymers for eye wear and optical
              systems applications will also benefit from the DSC system to be acquired.  ***
