Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Molecular Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9411066

Award Number: 9411066
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Vrana   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1159      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN MOL EVO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                It has been known for a number of years that parental genomes are  not
              functionally equivalent. Later studies have identified specific  genes which
              are functionally non-equivalent and such genes are  considered to be
              "imprinted". The best studied cases are in mice  although indications are that
              imprinted genes are found in  organisms as diverse as plants and humans. The
              evolution of such a  genetic mechanism is largely unknown. I propose to begin
              such  studies by determining whether the known imprinted genes are  imprinted
              in other eutherians, marsupials and other amniotes,  beginning with birds. I
              will also analyze bison and cow sperm and  oocytes as well as pre-implantation
              embryos from those organisms.   The genes known to be imprinted in humans or
              mice will be cloned  from these taxa by the use PCR primers based on conserved
              gene  regions or, if necessary, by other techniques. Imprinting will be 
              determined in various ways and at various stages in all taxa.  Insight into the
              origins and evolution of gene imprinting should be  enhanced by this study. 
              %%%  The laws of Mendel explain most of what we observe in the  inheritance of
              genetic information. However, observations have been  made which cannot be
              explained by Mendel's laws. One such area is  that of imprinted genes; genes
              which are either expressed or not  depending upon which parent contributes the
              gene copy. Much work is  underway to determine the mechanism of imprinting but
              little or  none on the origin and evolution of such a mechanism. This study 
              should give some insight into those questions.
