Title       : Service Sector Conflict: Application of a Computerized Semantic Grammer Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9411739

Award Number: 9411739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Franzosi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9139,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This is a study of conflict in the service sector of the economy, employing
              a new computer system for analyzing written text.  It will systematically
              examine some of the hypothesized ways that prior case studies suggest labor
              strikes in the service sector may differ from strikes in the industrial sector:
              1) threats of strikes and actions short of strikes but greater willingness to
              resolve disputes without resorting to open conflict; 2) positional power of
              some workers; 3) third-party involvement in labor relations, particularly the
              state and the public; 4) political vulnerability of state officials as
              employers.  Data on 3,767 individual labor disputes, in both service and
              industrial sectors, have been coded from 14,016 newspaper articles.  The
              present project will carry out data analysis after some further data checking
              and validation.  %%%   The research employs a linguistic, computer-based
              methodology for collecting and analyzing text, based on semantic grammars.  The
              investigator has developed a prototype software system, "Program for
              Computer-Assisted Coding of Events," that follows closely the linguistic
              underpinning of the grammar and that structures narrative text in relational
              form.  Once the data are in this form, a set of procedures using Structured
              Query Language extracts the desired information.  The present research project
              is a demanding test of this computer-based approach to the analysis of textual
              materials.  Success would permit scaling the system up to larger computers and
              potentially to the National Information Infrastructure, and results of this
              work will inform the development of alternative linguistic tools for the NII. 
              %%%   Given the shift of emphasis in modern societies from industry to service,
              this research will increase scientific understanding of the labor conflict
              dynamics of a major sector of the economy.  Thus it will contribute to
              industrial sociology, economic sociology, and economics.  In addition the
              methodological innovations in the computer-assisted  analysis of text has the
              potential to contribute to a wide range of social sciences.
