Title       : Dissertation Research: Sex Allocation and Reproductive Success in a Perennial
               Hermaphrodite, Solanum carolinense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1995 
File        : a9411513

Award Number: 9411513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Meagher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9411513  Meagher       Ecological theories have predicted that the size or
              number of  flowers on a plant should have a large effect upon the resulting 
              reproductive success of that plant, particularly in terms of pollen  spread, so
              that a plant with more or larger flowers will increase  its reproductive
              success as a male parent.  On the other hand, a  plant has a limited resource
              pool which must be allocated not only  to attracting pollinators, but also to
              filling fruit (a component  of female reproductive success), growth, storage,
              and survival.   This leads to a basic conflict within a plant.  Synthesis of
              these  two ideas--reproductive success gained through each gender and 
              allocation-level-conflicts--has been hampered in hermaphroditic  plants by
              problems associated with determining gender-specific  fitness and assigning
              specific characters, such as corolla (petal)  size, to either male or female
              success.  This study will integrate  allocation and fitness-component
              approaches to identify the precise  role of different floral characters in
              reproductive success.  The  proposed research will determine resource
              allocation to gender  functions in the perennial plant Solanum carolinense, and
              relate  allocation patterns to realized fitness through both male and  female
              functions.  Experimental populations of S. carolinense have  been planted,
              within which individual fruit and seed set over two  growing seasons (female
              fitness) and male paternity (determined  through genetic analysis) will be
              related to individual variation  in the size and number of flowers.  This study
              will therefore  provide insight into the effect of resource allocation on the 
              fitness gained through each gender in a hermaphroditic plant, and  into the
              interrelationships of allocation  and fitness between  genders.  In addition,
              controlled crosses will be performed between  plants to determine the
              heritability of floral characters, so as to  ascertain the potential for
              evolution of allocation regime.  If  flower size is environ mentally determined
              (for example, if larger  flower parts are found on individuals growing in areas
              of slightly  higher nutrient concentrations), any difference in reproductive 
              ability due to allocation regime will not be passed on to  offspring, and
              flower size and its relation to reproductive success  is a random effect.      
              In addition to contributions to basic understanding of plant  reproductive
              success, this project will also have potential applied  significance.  The
              study species for this project, Solanum  carolinense,  was named one of the ten
              worst pasture weeds in 1980,  due to the  presence of toxic alkaloids,
              prickles, and thick  persistent roots which aid in clonal spread of individual
              plants.   It is therefore a commercially important species.  Understanding 
              allocation tradeoffs in this weed could contribute to control  efforts
              currently practiced by farmers.  In addition, the specific  questions addressed
              concerning tradeoffs have direct applications  to food plant breeding efforts,
              in that the results will help to  explain cultivar variation in fruit
              production as a function of  variation in floral allocation.
