Title       : LTER: The Luquillo Experimental Forest II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1996     
File        : a9411973

Award Number: 9411973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3350000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Waide   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ariel E. Lugo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jess K. Zimmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick N. Scatena  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9411973  Waide    The Luquillo Experimental Forest (LEF) Long-Term Ecology
              Research Program began in 1988 with the goal of integrating studies of
              disturbance regime and forest structure and dynamics with a landscape
              perspective.  Two central research questions addressed 1) the relative
              importance of different disturbance types within the four tropical rain forest
              life zones of the LEF and 2) the importance of the biota in restoring ecosystem
              productivity after disturbance.  The long-term monitoring program initiated as
              part of the Luquillo LTER was critical to the evaluation of immediate and
              subsequent effects of Hurricane Hugo, which struck Puerto Rico in 1989.  The
              occurrence of a hurricane soon after the initiation of the LTER program
              provides an opportunity to study the long-term dynamics of a tropical forest as
              it recovers from a major disturbance.    Integration of the spatial and
              temporal patterns of the different disturbances affecting the LEF (tree falls,
              landslides, hurricanes, and human land use) indicated that even the effects of
              large disturbances are not homogeneous over the forest landscape.  A strong
              gradient in damage from Hurricane Hugo occurs from northeast to southwest in
              the LEF, corresponding to the direction of the strongest winds.  However, even
              in severely disturbed areas, many forest attributes were approaching their
              pre-hurricane values within four years of the storm.  Forest response depended
              both on the successional status of the site at the time of disturbance and the
              intensity of disturbance.  In many areas, the legacy of past human activities
              was apparent in forest composition and structure even after Hurricane Hugo.   
              The long-term experiments and measurements initiated in 1988 will remain the
              central focus of the Luquillo LTER as it moves into its second phase.  Analysis
              of the dynamics of recovery after the hurricane and its associated landslides
              and synthesis of the interaction of multiple disturbances continue to be the
              primary goals of collaborating investi gators.  New initiatives will
              concentrate on defining the distinctive characteristics of anthropogenic
              disturbance and on evaluating the importance of pivotal species in shaping the
              path of succession.  As before, a major emphasis of the Luquillo LTER will be
              to provide information and ideas for cross-site and network-wide syntheses.
