Title       : Hormones, Behavior and Reproductive Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9411216

Award Number: 9411216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Sue Carter carter@zool.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster) exhibit a constellation  of traits
              associated with a monogamous social organization  including the formation of
              pair bonds between males and  females.  Among characteristics of pair bonding
              are  preferences for a familiar partner, usually of the opposite  sex. 
              Preliminary data indicate that in male prairie voles  corticosterone treatment
              produces a dose-dependent increase  in the preference for a familiar female
              partner; in contrast  in females it appears that treatment with corticosterone 
              inhibits partner preference formation.  Conversely  adrenalectomy, which
              eliminates corticosterone secretion,  reduces pair bonding in males and
              facilitates pair bond  formation in females.  In the proposed research, this 
              investigator will:  (1) examine the behavioral and endocrine  parameters
              associated with the behavioral effects of  corticosterone.  These studies will
              document the amount of  stimulation necessary to form a clear partner
              preference in  males versus females.  Concurrently, she will (2) examine  the
              time course of changes in endogenous corticosterone  titers following exposure
              to a member of the opposite sex.  In addition, she will (3) continue her
              studies of the  behavioral effects of corticosterone to determine dose 
              response curves for the above behavioral changes.  Finally,  she will (4)
              compare the behavioral effects of exogenous  corticosterone to those of a
              stress-induced release of  corticosterone.  The results of this research will 
              contribute to our understanding of the physiology of social  attachment and
              social organization.  The existence of social  bonds is widely accepted, but we
              know relatively little -  especially in adults - about the factors that
              regulate the  formation of social attachments.
