Title       : Disclosure, Language, and Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9411674

Award Number: 9411674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80806              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Pennebaker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Pennebaker   The failure to disclose upsetting thoughts or feelings places
              people at higher risk for physical and mental health problems, whereas being
              induced to write or talk about these feelings yields improvements in health. 
              This program of research will investigate the psychological mechanisms
              mediating these effects.  Specifically, it will evaluate the degree to which
              verbally labeling and describing experimentally induced anger and sadness
              reduces autonomic nervous system activity, as indexed by skin conductance
              level.  It will also evaluate the degree to which verbalizing negative emotions
              promotes a coherent cognitive organization of  upsetting events, as indexed by
              ratings of  the succinctness, coherence, and emotionality of essays written
              about prior emotional events. In addition to investigating the effects of
              verbalizing emotions that have been experimentally induced, this research will
              examine the effects of describing traumatic events that have occured outside of
              the laboratory, such as a recent job loss.    Recent research has demonstrated
              that when individuals are unable or unwilling to disclose upsetting thoughts or
              feelings to others, they are at higher risk for physical and mental health
              difficulties.  Conversely, when people are induced to write or talk about
              upsetting personal experiences, improvements in health are found.  This
              research will determine the psychological mechanisms underlying these effects
              by investigating the cognitive, physiological, and emotional consequences of
              translating stressful events into language.
