Title       : RUI: Transnationalism in Local Context: Songhay Migrant Experiences in New York
               City's Informal Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9411625

Award Number: 9411625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Stoller pstoller@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rosemary J. Coombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9411625  STOLLER  This project is an exploration of the migratory experiences of
               Songhay-speaking peoples from the Republic of Niger and their on-  going
              participation in the informal economy of New York City.   The study will be the
              first full-length anthropological study of  a West African community of
              migrants in the area.  The research  will focus particularly on the legal
              dimensions of the economic  practices of migrants in the informal economy of a
              major U.S.  city, generating empirical data on how migrants become conscious 
              of and learn to interpret local laws.  The study will make a  major
              contribution to the scientific knowledge base about migrant  behavior and will
              be useful for policy makers concerned with  issues posed by the recent growth
              of immigration to U.S. cities  and the migrant impact on informal urban
              economies.     The principal investigators, who speak the Songhay language,
              will  conduct interviews with street-vending migrants, with migrants in  other
              informal occupations, with local business people in Harlem  and other areas
              affected by the informal economic activities of  West African migrants, and
              with city, regional and federal  officials familiar with problems associated
              with immigration and  the informal economy of New York City.  The principal 
              investigators will also conduct ethnographic fieldwork, engaging  in extensive
              observation of West African migrant activities in  New York City's informal
              sector.  ***
