Title       : Regulation of Basic Fibroblast Growth Factor Gene Expressionin Reactive and
               Neoplastic Astrocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9411226

Award Number: 9411226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michal K. Stachowiak mstacho@mha.chw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Josephs Hosp Med C/BNI
	      350 West Thomas Rd
	      Phoenix, AZ  850134409    602/285-3006

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The two major cell types that form the nervous system are  neurons and glial
              cells.  Genesis of glial and neuronal  cells, their differentiation and
              maturation in developing  nervous system are thought to be controlled by
              proteins  (growth factors) expressed at individual developmental  stages. 
              Controlled expression of growth factors may also  underlie the plasticity that
              occurs in the adult nervous  system during learning or regeneration of nervous
              tissue  (stimulation of cells).  Aberrant expression of growth  factors has
              been implicated in the transformation of normal  glial cells to tumorigenic
              glioma cells.  Hence, to  understand development, adult plasticity of the
              nervous  tissue, and tumorigenic transformation it is essential to  elucidate
              mechanisms that control expression of genes  encoding growth factor proteins. 
              One such protein is basic  fibroblast growth factor (bFGF).  Elucidation of the
               mechanisms controlling expression of the gene that encodes  the bFGF protein
              is of the highest priority.  Very little is  known about regulation of this
              protein which is critical for  neural and glial development and plasticity.  
              The PI's have  revealed that expression of the BFGF gene is transiently 
              increased during reversible transition of quiescent  (nondividing) glial cells
              to reactive (actively dividing)  glia.  Such reversible activation of glia is
              thought to play  a role in neural development and in the  support of adult
              neural plasticity. The PI has also shown  that expression of the bFGF gene is
              permanently increased in  irreversibly transformed tumorigenic glioma cells. 
              In both  cases increased expression of bFGF gene was responsible for  the
              changes in the biology of glia (transient and permanent  induction of cell
              proliferation).  The overall aim of this  project is to determine the molecular
              mechanisms underlying  the above-mentioned changes in bFGF gene expression. 
              The  analysis of the bFGF gene has indicated that there are  fundamental
              differences in the mechanisms by which t his gene  is regulated as compared to
              other genes, and that novel  mechanisms are involved in the regulation of bFGF
              gene.  Identification of those mechanisms will lead to a better  understanding
              of the molecular events controlling the  biology of glial cells in the
              developing and adult nervous  system.
