Title       : The Incorporation of Scientific Causal Knowledge into the Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1994     
File        : a9411006

Award Number: 9411006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Laymon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9411006  Laymon  The existence of causation is a central consideration in both
              civil  and criminal law.  In general, there exists legal responsibility or 
              culpability only if there is a causal connection between  defendants' behavior
              and alleged harms.  Questions of causation  also play a central role in science
              and technology.  The overall  aim of the proposed research is an analysis of
              the importation of  causal knowledge from science and technology to the law. 
              The major  questions to be dealt with are:  (1) what opportunities does the 
              law provide for the incorporation of relevant scientific and  technological
              causal knowledge, and (2) are these opportunities  sufficient for the just
              resolution of legal controversy?  In order  to begin to answer such questions,
              the principal investigator will  isolate the differing ways that value
              judgments are built into  causal claims in the law.  The presence of such value
              judgments  should reflect itself in difficulties that the law has in the 
              utilization of scientific causal knowledge.  The analysis of these 
              difficulties will allow the investigator to test a proposal of  legal scholars
              to conceive the law as operating with an initial set  of causal paradigms which
              have built in both objective and  normative aspects.  The problem for this
              approach is to determine  the process whereby the initial set of causal
              paradigms gets  applied as well as expanded or modified.  The investigator does
              not  believe in a unique and consistent set of fundamental principles  that
              determines or controls this process.  This belief is motivated  by recent
              advances in the understanding of language, argumentation,  and science.  These
              advances, and changes in the law itself --  expansion in the kinds of causal
              claims made and the types of legal  action now permitted -- make the situation
              ripe for reconsideration  and analysis of the kind proposed.  This phase of the
              research will  result in one or more articles providing a detailed look at how 
               probabilistic considerations  affect the processes described  above,and how a
              Bayesian approach can be brought to bear on the  analysis.  ***
