Title       : RUI: Secreted alpha-amylase and stress-related starch metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0238053

Award Number: 0238053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Monroe monroejd@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Starch is an important energy-storage compound for plants and makes up a
              significant portion of the human diet.  In leaves, starch accumulates in
              chloroplasts during the day and is broken down at night to provide energy for
              the plant.  The full details of the enzymatic pathway for starch degradation
              are not understood but it probably involves a-amylase, b-amylase, debranching
              enzyme, a-glucosidase, and starch phosphorylase.  Interestingly, much of the
              activity of these enzymes is located outside the chloroplasts and, as such,
              probably plays no role in normal starch metabolism.  Several plants contain a
              secreted a-amylase that is induced by biotic and abiotic stress.  The
              Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains three a-amylase genes, one of which
              (AtAMY3) has a predicted signal sequence targeting it to the secretion pathway.
               The primary goal of this research is to understand the function of this
              secreted a-amylase in Arabidopsis. 

Plant pathogens and abiotic stress (e.g.
              salt, heat, drought, heavy metals, and ozone) cause a number of changes to
              plant tissues including inhibition of phloem transport, accumulation of
              carbohydrates (including starch), and increased respiration.  When the stress
              is severe, cells generate reactive oxygen species that can induce programmed
              cell death.  During cell death membranes disintegrate, allowing the mixing of
              molecules from different compartments.  It is in these dead cells that the
              secreted a-amylase is thought to act on starch.  The resulting sugars would
              then be available to meet the increased respiratory demand of the neighboring
              cells that will ultimately survive the stress. 

The objectives of this
              research are 1) to purify and characterize the properties and regulation of the
              secreted a-amylase, and 2) to identify the function of the enzyme. 
              Purification of the enzyme from mustard (Brassica juncea) and Arabidopsis will
              make use of cycloheptaamylose affinity chromatography.  Wild type plants will
              be treated with various forms of stress to observe the effects on induction of
              the secreted amylase, starch accumulation and subsequent degradation, and on
              cell death.  An Arabidopsis mutant with a T-DNA insertion in AtAMY3 will be
              used to confirm the link between the AtAMY3 gene and the apoplastic a-amylase,
              and to test the hypothesis that the enzyme plays a role in survival of a severe
              stress. 

The benefits of the proposed work are three.  First, the PI hopes
              to define the role of a leaf amylase that has been known for some time but
              whose function has been a mystery due to its location in cell walls.  If it can
              be demonstrated that the enzyme plays a role in the response to severe stress,
              the results will add to a growing body of knowledge that is directly beneficial
              to agriculture.  Second, the grant will help to train a number of
              undergraduates, many of which pursue careers in science, and a
              teaching/research postdoctoral fellow choosing to pursue a career at a
              predominantly undergraduate institution.  Third, the grant will enable the PI
              to continue his activities of developing investigative laboratories for
              undergraduate courses and mentoring younger faculty at predominantly
              undergraduate institutions through the Council on Undergraduate Research and
              the American Society of Plant Biologists.

