Title       : CAREER: Using Multimedia Digital Technology to Advance Understanding of the
               Achievement Motivation and the Life Stories of Successful African American
               Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0238485

Award Number: 0238485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia E. Winston cewinston@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of the proposed project is to use digital technology to
              construct the life stories of successful African American STEM professors at
              Howard University, the largest producer of African American STEM Ph.D.s in the
              nation, in order to develop psychological theory about motivation and
              achievement.  It can be argued that, within the field of psychology, research
              on the achievement motivation of African Americans has failed to yield
              consistent support for existing achievement motivation theories, suggesting
              that new achievement motivation theory development is warranted.  Although life
              stories have been widely used in psychology to understand complex self and
              identity processes, life stories have not been used to generate new knowledge
              about the achievement motivation of African Americans, a group for whom
              identity, particularly identity related to race, is extremely complex and not
              well understood.   
The proposed project will be carried out using an
              integrated education and research model developed by the investigator to
              cultivate synergistic and sustained research collaborations between electrical
              engineering and psychology researchers at Howard University.  A multimedia
              digital technology research and learning laboratory will be established. 
              Within this research and learning laboratory, engineering and psychology
              faculty and students will collaborate on the development of new life story data
              collection, processing, analysis, and dissemination.  This model is structured
              not only to facilitate an increase in understanding of the achievement
              motivation and life stories of African Americans in STEM, but also advance the
              research and mentoring training of graduate and undergraduate students at
              Howard University.  Moreover, it is a model that can be replicated within other
              institutions, disciplines, and research projects. 
Among the potential broad
              impacts of the project is the development of research instrumentation,
              analysis, and findings, which will be disseminated in peer review engineering
              and psychology journals.  In addition, plans call for the life stories to be
              disseminated broadly to teachers, parents, and educators through the National
              Science Digital Library (NSDL) and will be archived at the Howard University
              Moorland Spingarn Research Center (MSRC) for use by scholars who study African
              Americans.  Collectively, the integrated education and research activities of
              the project will build a firm foundation for the early career development of
              the investigator and would facilitate the establishment of a national center of
              research on African American success in science at Howard University. 


