Title       : CAREER: Watersheds and Fisheries as Foci of Human Impacts and Ecological
               Responses: A Research and Teaching Agenda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0238121

Award Number: 0238121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karin E. Limburg KLimburg@esf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Dr. Karin Limburg's five-year CAREER award will establish a highly
              integrated and interdisciplinary research and education plan to develop
              research and learning experiences in settled watersheds and connected receiving
              waters (including fresh, brackish, and coastal marine). Guiding thematic
              questions include the role of societal drivers in land use change, how such
              change affects watershed ecosystems and especially their receiving waters, how
              altered watersheds and receiving waters affect fish habitat and fisheries, and
              how we can determine thresholds in metastable ecosystems beyond which they will
              undergo a change to an alternate stable state, particularly one that is
              inimical to society and ecosystem services.

Limburg proposes a bold agenda
              for integrating ecosystem science with fisheries and societal drivers in linked
              teaching and research projects. The programmatic theme that unifies the
              elements is watershed science, which is emerging as a major focus at SUNY
              College of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF). All of these questions are
              ones the PI has begun to work on, but for which much remains to be done. The
              PI's expertise in fisheries, ecosystem analysis and ecological economics will
              be brought to bear and further developed by collaborative projects, teaching,
              mentoring, and workshops. The proposed program will interface well with extant
              ESF programs in Hydrosystems Science, Fisheries and Aquatic Science, Ecological
              Economics, and Urban Ecology. By working with the Department Chair and a suite
              of mentors both internal and external to ESF, the PI will assess the success of
              the program in its ability to produce meaningful, life-long learning and
              scholarship.

Too often today, research and teaching are splintered into
              narrow disciplines, and as a consequence, students and researchers often find
              it difficult to deal with complex environmental problems. This program will
              enable a new generation of interdisciplinary scientists to be trained in a
              combination of a wide array of subjects, including fish migration, the use of
              biochemical markers and ecological economics.




