Title       : Behavioral Responses of Elk to Predation by Wolves: Physiological Costs and
               Dynamical Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0238169

Award Number: 0238169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Creel screel@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Most theoretical models of the impact that predators have on prey populations
              focus exclusively on direct offtake and its impact on the survival rate of
              prey.  However, most prey species modify their behavior when predators are
              present, to reduce the risk of predation.  Because these behavioral responses
              require time and energy, they are likely to affect the survival and
              reproduction of prey species in ways that should be incorporated into
              predator-prey models.  This research will examine the behavioral responses of
              elk to the risk of predation by wolves, in three ways. (1) Most fundamentally,
              it will test for behavioral responses of elk to spatial and temporal variation
              in the risk of predation by wolves.  The behavioral responses to be examined
              include patterns of herding, individual time budgets, movement patterns,
              spatial distributions, and habitat selection.   (2)  It will then test for
              physiological costs associated with antipredator responses, using fecal
              glucocorticoids to measure stress, snow-urine allantoin:creatinine ratios to
              measure foraging success, and fecal progestins to measure pregnancy rates.  (3)
               Finally, it will determine the impacts of antipredator behavior on patterns of
              survival and changes in population size.   The reintroduction of wolves to the
              Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem has produced a rapidly growing and geographically
              expanding population.  The steady growth and expansion of wolves has generated
              enormous controversy among  wildlife managers, conservation biologists, state
              and federal lawmakers, the media, and the general public.  Sitting at the heart
              of this controversy is the potential impact of wolf predation on wildlife
              populations, particularly elk.  This research  will produce substantial data on
              rates of wolf  predation and its effects on elk demography, distribution and
              dynamics.  These data will play a critical role in establishing policies for
              the management of wolves and elk.  
