Title       : CAREER: Model-Based Microstructure Evaluation of Hydrating Cementitous
               Materials: Development of a Test System and Experimental Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0238692

Award Number: 0238692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kolluru Subramaniam ksubram@ce.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Requirement of high performance concrete places high demands on achieving
              superior 
performance in both strength and durability. Producing these new,
              engineered concretes often involves improving the microstructure of the
              cementitous phase of the concrete to achieve the desired properties. Successful
              production of high-performance concrete generates research needs in the
              following areas: (a) developing methods to monitor and assess the
              microstructure, and (b) developing a fundamental understanding of the
              relationship between the microstructure of the cementitous phase and the
              strength and durability characteristics of the concrete. Techniques that
              provide for assessing the internal structure of the cementitous phase and a
              rational way of predicting the development of its material properties are
              required.
 
Sustaining high level of research activity in universities
              requires the enthusiastic 
participation of students. Therefore scientific
              achievements have to be concordant with 
advancements in education and
              outreach. In academia there is a need to provide an environment conducive to
              learning. In particular, an environment that increases the participation of
              minority students in engineering practice and research is required. There is a
              need for better outreach to the minority students and increasing their
              involvement in research related activities.
  
This career plan addresses the
              dual objectives: (a) advance the state-of-the-art 
in monitoring the
              microstructure development in cementitous systems and (b) provide for
              
increased participation of minority students in research related activities.
              An essential aspect of the study is the educational and professional
              development of not only the Principal Investigator, but also the student
              participants and collaborators from engineering practice.
  
This research
              plan will commence with the development of an ultrasonic test procedure for
              obtaining the acoustic properties of hydrating cementitous systems. The two
              main components are: (a) to relate the acoustic properties with information
              pertaining to microstructure of a hydrating cementitous system, and (b) to
              provide a rational approach for predicting property development in these
              materials. The model-based representation of the cement microstructure will be
              formulated using the poroelastic theory.Fundamental understanding of the
              relationship between the internal structure variables within the framework of
              the poroelastic theory and the properties of cement systems (such as elastic
              moduli, strength, shrinkage etc.) will be researched. Finally,
              microstructure-based predictive approaches for property development will be
              developed.

The proposed multi-disciplinary research approach involves
              developing collaborations with the departments of Chemistry, Electrical, and
              Computer Engineering. The research tasks involve synthesizing the knowledge and
              understanding developed in these areas. Minority student participation
              throughout the course of this study will be enacted at the graduate,
              undergraduate and high school levels. The participating students will be better
              prepared for further study or for practice and, it is hoped, will be excited by
              the challenging nature of the research. Educational outreach is specifically
              targeted at women minority high schools students in the Harlem area of New York
              City with the objective of increasing their enrollment in the engineering
              program at the City College of New York (CCNY). Dissemination of the study
              results to more distant researchers will be achieved through publishing of the
              results and 
participating in international collaborative studies. In
              addition, the development of an innovative web-based virtual laboratory is an
              essential component of this study.s educational component. 




