Title       : CAREER: The Adaptation of Plant Development to Environmental Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0238529

Award Number: 0238529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $625000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jocelyn Malamy jmalamy@bio.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1111,1187,9109,9178,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0238529
Malamy

Plant survival depends on adaptation to adverse conditions. 
              Harnessing the plant's own complex machinery for adaptation to environment
              stresses has tremendous potential as a strategy for improvement of crop yields
              and extending the geographical range for crop growth.  One plant adaptation
              mechanism is to optimize organ number and location in accordance with the
              availability and distribution of resources.  Despite the importance of this
              developmental response, the molecular mechanisms that underlie morphological
              adaptation are essentially unknown.  The Principal Investigator has found that
              the development of lateral roots in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana is
              dramatically repressed by mild drought stress, providing a model in which to
              study adaptation.  To this end, her lab has isolated lateral root development
              (lrd) mutants that are defective in this response.  Based on wild-type and
              mutant studies, they have defined the LRD pathway that directs root system
              adaptation.  Key feature of the pathway are: (1) the plant hormones abscicic
              acid (ABA) and auxin (IAA) play critical opposing roles in mediating the
              pathway; (2) lrd mutants show aberrant phenotypes in several ABA-mediated
              responses, including a marked tolerance to dehydration; and (3) the ERECTA
              gene, which encodes a putative shoot-specific receptor protein kinase, plays an
              essential role in the osmotic repression of lateral root formation.  Based on
              these findings, the researchers will characterize the function of the LRD and
              ERECTA genes in adaptation, and study the role of hormone accumulation and
              localization in the LRD pathway.  The long-term goal of the project is to learn
              how to use a plant's innate ability to adjust to environmental stress for crop
              improvement.  The Principal Investigator's interest in innovative approaches to
              solving the worldwide problem of food deficit has also led her to design a
              course to expose students to this complex problem.  The course is designed to
              allow upper level undergraduates from many disciplines to become personally
              invested in issues of global importance such as famine and unequal distribution
              of food.  Working with a multi-disciplinary team of instructors, students will
              learn about the biological, political and economic issues involved in world
              hunger and discuss possible solutions.  A key part of this course will be the
              involvement of students in research projects conducted by the instructors, and
              the opportunity to continue this research beyond the scope of the class.  Such
              early awareness and involvement in this global problem will hopefully influence
              students in their career choices, guiding them into areas which will generate
              further knowledge and progress in providing adequate food to afflicted
              areas.


