Title       : CAREER: A Peer-to-Peer Framework for Decentralized Resource Administration and
               Management in Grid Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0238379

Award Number: 0238379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $461197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Charlie Hu ychu@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data mining is the process of automatically extracting useful information hidden
              in large
data sets. This emerging discipline is becoming increasingly
              important as advances in
data collection have lead to the explosive growth in
              the amount of available data. This
project aims to develop a wide-range of
              novel data mining algorithms suitable for the
characteristics of scientific
              data sets arising in genomics and fluid dynamics. 

Our research will focus
              on developing algorithms both for sequential datasets and for
datasets that
              can be represented by directed labeled graphs. The graph-based
              modeling
enables us to capture in a single and unified framework many of the
              spatial, topological,
geometric, and other types of relational characteristics
              present in scientific datasets.

The specific research tasks that we plan to
              address are: (i) Development of scalable
algorithms for finding frequently
              occurring patterns in graph data sets and algorithms for
finding patterns
              whose frequency decreases as a function of the pattern-length.
              (ii)
Development of scalable and high quality clustering algorithms for
              sequence and graph
data sets which operate directly in the native feature
              space. (iii) Development of scalable
and accurate classification algorithms
              based on automated sequential or relational feature
extraction approaches.
              These algorithms will be validated by analyzing data sets arising
in genomic
              and turbulent fluid flow.

 The project integrates the data mining research
              with an educational plan that focuses on initiating undergraduate and graduate
              students to the various computational and data analysis aspects of genomic
              research and developing a comprehensive bioinformatics curriculum whose goal is
              to foster multi-disciplinary research and collaboration. In addition, a
              comprehensive set of software tools will be developed and made available that
              can be used both to train students in using data mining techniques and to
              conduct novel research expanding the levels of understanding in various
              scientific disciplines.

