Title       : CAREER: ELECTRONS, PHONONS AND THE PROPERTIES OF STRONGLY CORRELATED MATERIALS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0238188

Award Number: 0238188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Serguei Y. Savrassov serguei.savrassov@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1753,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research on strongly
              correlated electron materials with an aim to incorporate recent advances in
              quantum many-body theory into electronic structure methods. Research will have
              a focus on the interaction of electronic and lattice degrees of freedom. The
              PI's approach aims to merge density-functional linear-response theory with
              dynamical mean field theory. As advances are made toward more realistic
              modeling of strongly correlated electron materials, new theoretical methods,
              algorithms, and computer codes will be developed. These tools have the
              potential to help guide the search for new materials. Specific applications
              include: the study of the effect of electronic correlation on lattice dynamics
              in Mott insulating oxides and Multiferroics, the study of the electron-phonon
              contribution to the pairing interaction in materials where superconductivity
              and magnetism coexist, the study of the spin-Peirels transition. Computer
              programs will be designed to enable materials exploration by non-experts, by
              materials scientists and engineers, and by theoretical solid-state physicists.
              These will be accessible via the Internet. The project will promote teaching,
              training and learning via intensive integration of undergraduate and graduate
              students of New Jersey Institute of Technology into the research process. It
              will involve students in materials design, development of analytical methods
              and software, computations of solid state properties and comparisons with
              experiments, and the creation of WEB-based materials research databases. The
              project will expose Newark area high-school students to today's world of
              materials engineering with emphasis on the participation of underrepresented
              groups. This will be accomplished by motivating the students to learn
              fundamental mathematics and physics via the use of user-friendly software
              packages developed for PC platforms and training the students to use programs
              such as simulations and visualizations of properties of solids using this
              software.
%%%
This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
              research and education aimed at enhancing our capabilities to predict the
              properties of materials involving strongly correlated electrons. These display
              intellectually intriguing phenomena with potential for technological
              application. These phenomena include high-temperature superconductivity,
              colossal magnetoresistance, giant optical non-linearities and large
              thermoelectric coefficients.  The research will have a particular focus on the
              interaction of strongly correlated electrons with the crystalline lattice. The
              PI will work to merge recently developed theoretical methods with
              density-functional-theory based techniques to create more realistic models of
              strongly correlated materials. This work involves developing new algorithms,
              and computer programs that may amplify the level of comparison of sophisticated
              theories with experiment and may help guide searches for and assist in the
              design of new materials with desired properties. Computer programs will be
              designed with an aim to allow materials exploration by non-experts, by
              materials scientists and engineers and by theoretical solid-state physicists.
              These will be available through the Internet. The project will promote
              teaching, training and learning via intensive integration of undergraduate and
              graduate students of New Jersey Institute of Technology into the research
              process. It will provide educational experience via involvement of students
              into material design, development of analytical methods and software,
              computations of solid state properties and comparisons with experiments, and
              creation of WEB-based materials research databases. The project will expose
              Newark area high-school students to today's world of materials engineering with
              emphasis on the participation of underrepresented groups. This will be
              accomplished by motivating the students to learn fundamental mathematics and
              physics via the use of user-friendly software packages developed for PC
              platforms and training the students to use programs such as simulations and
              visualizations of properties of solids using this software.
***


