Title       : CAREER: Signal Processing Research in Ultra Wideband Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0238174

Award Number: 0238174
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi Tian ztian@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  
0238174
Zhi Tian 
Michigan Tech Univ.
 
With the recent release
              of the Ultra Wideband (UWB) signal spectral mask by the Federal Communications
              Commission (FCC) in 2002, UWB has emerged as an exciting technology whose
              ``time has come'' for commercial wireless communications, and local area
              networking. Conveying information over Impulse-like Radio (IR) waveforms, UWB
              comes with uniquely attractive features: low-power-density
              carrier-free
transmissions, ample multipath diversity, low-complexity baseband
              transceivers, a potential for huge increase in capacity, and the capability to
              overlay existing RF systems. However, to bring the potency
of IR to fruition,
              UWB research and development has to cope with formidable challenges that
              include: high sensitivity to timing the reception of ultra-short pulses,
              mitigation of fading propagation effects with pronounced frequency-selectivity,
              low-complexity constraints in decoding high-performance multiple access
              protocols, and the strict power limitations imposed by the desire to minimize
              interference between UWB communicators, and co-existing RF systems. 

This
              research addresses timely signal processing issues arising in UWB
              communications, with focuses on: (1) The development of optimal and
              low-complexity sub-optimal timing epoch estimators along with metrics to assess
              their performance, and influence on the bit error probability and throughput of
              UWB systems. (2) The derivation and convergence analysis of low-complexity
              near-optimal soft-decision based multiuser detectors, and multi-channel
              equalizers for UWB multiple access protocols. (3) The investigation of overlay
              issues, modulation schemes, coding, decoding, and interference suppression
              algorithms to enable UWB spectral mask compatibility, and co-existence with
              other wireless services. (4) The deployment of multiple transmit-receive
              antennae to improve performance of low-complexity decoding, timing estimation,
              and multiuser detection.  The outcome of this research will impact the basic
              theory, design, and deployment of forthcoming multiple access UWB wireless
              systems. 
