Title       : CAREER: Strategic Choices During Institutional Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0238820

Award Number: 0238820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mike W. Peng peng.51@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              How do organizations make strategic choices during the time of fundamental and
              comprehensive institutional transitions such as those sweeping emerging
              economies? This project addresses this question both theoretically and
              empirically. It first develops a two-phase model of market-oriented
              institutional transitions. It then focuses on the longitudinal process to move
              from a relationship-based, personalized transaction structure calling for a
              network-centered strategy to a rule-based, impersonal exchange regime
              suggesting a market-centered strategy. The central hypothesis is that as
              institutional transitions progress, networks and connections, previously
              thought to be imperative for business success, may become less important.
              Instead, competitive resources and capabilities are likely to be more
              significant determinants of firm performance.

Empirically, the project
              proposes three large-scale, multi-year studies. Study 1 will collect
              longitudinal case data from two partner organizations with operations in over a
              dozen cities in China. Study 2 will employ a two-wave survey methodology to
              collect data from approximately 300-450 firms in China, separated by two years
              between each survey. Finally, Study 3 will replicate and extend the China
              studies in two other important emerging economies, Thailand and Russia, using a
              similar two-wave survey methodology.
The project.s dynamic integration of
              institutional and strategic choice theories and its longitudinal and
              multinational empirical design promise especially interesting insights. It
              synthesizes a diverse but scattered literature on emerging economies to form a
              coherent contribution. It explains, predicts, and aims to empirically document
              the mechanisms through which the importance of networks is gradually eclipsed
              by the importance of capabilities. This project thus highlights the relative
              decline of networks and connections (albeit still important) vis-a-vis
              competitive capabilities during institutional transitions.

In terms of its
              broader impacts, the project advances discovery while promoting teaching,
              training, and learning. The primary educational component includes the
              development of three .Emerging Markets Field Study. courses, one for MBAs, one
              for Executive MBAs, and another for undergraduates, that capitalize on the
              learning from this project. It also allows me to infuse the excitement of
              research into general courses/modules in International Business and Strategy at
              the MBA, undergraduate, and executive levels. It also enhances infrastructure
              for international research and education in Asia and Europe. It facilitates
              broad dissemination through publications in practitioner-oriented journals and
              online media as well as briefings to partner organizations and other
              interdisciplinary outreach activities. Finally, it fosters connections between
              discoveries and their benefits to the global society. Given the rising
              importance of emerging economies, our research and teaching activities need to
              move out of our familiar OECD mindset and pay more attention to emerging
              economies, if we endeavor to remain globally relevant. This project aims to
              help steer the research and education agenda toward focusing more needed
              attention on emerging economies.

