Title       : Collaborative Research: Lagrangian Studies of the Transport, Transformation, &
               Biological Impact of Nutrients Contaminant Metals in an Estuarine Plume
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0238849

Award Number: 0238849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399502             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Moline   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              P.I. Chant, Robert (Rutgers)	Proposal #: 0238957

Proposal Title:
              COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Lagrangian studies of the transport, transformation,
              and biological impact of nutrients and contaminant metals in a buoyant plume
              

Project Summary
	The PIs propose a coordinated program of field and
              numerical experiments to examine processes that control the fate and transport
              of nutrients and chemical contaminants in the Hudson River plume. Urban
              estuarine plumes such as this one represent a major pathway for the transport
              of nutrients and chemical contaminants to the coastal ocean. The fates and
              transports of this material are controlled not only by the plume dynamics but
              also by biological and chemical processes coupled to the dynamics of the plume.
              To investigate these processes, the PIs propose to conduct a series of dye
              experiments along with continuous underway chemical and biological sampling
              using a towed vehicle. These experiments will occur within the framework of the
              LEO-15 Observatory to enable interpretation of the dye study by placing the
              Lagrangian surveys in context with shelf-wide observations from satellite
              imagery, surface currents and far-field subsurface hydrography. LEO-15 will be
              augmented by a cross shelf array of moored instruments to provide detailed
              estimates of subtidal circulation, stratification and Reynold stresses. In
              addition, data-assimilative numerical simulations will provide high resolution
              and realistic hindcasts of the coastal ocean during the field experiments. The
              modeling will assimilate the dye-tracer data into a 3-D coastal circulation
              model and guide future efforts to assimilate other tracers into circulation
              models with complex sources and sinks. 
	The major aims of this work are to
              distinguish between physical processes that transport/mix material in a buoyant
              plume from biological and chemical transformation processes as well as the
              quantification of biological and chemical interactions in a Lagrangian
              perspective to provide a means to assess their importance in determining the
              fate and transport of nutrients and chemical contaminants in a buoyant plume.
              The proposed experimental plan will contrast the response of physical,
              biological, and chemical processes in the Hudson plume during upwelling and
              downwelling conditions. A major outcome of this work will be the determination
              of the extent and biological impact of contaminants in the plume along the New
              Jersey coast and Middle Atlantic Bight and will improve the ability to predict
              the fate and transport of contaminants and the rate that they enter the base of
              the food chain in the coastal ocean.

