Title       : CAREER: Spatially Resolved, Continuous Monitoring of Transient Processes Using
               Novel Optical Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0238633

Award Number: 0238633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Sanders ssanders@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,7234,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Intellectual merit

The research plan is centered around two techniques,
              both of which employ a Ti:sapphire laser and new wavelength-scanning
              techniques.  A larger portion of the effort is devoted to two-photon direct
              absorption of xenon.  In this technique, rapidly tunable ultraviolet light is
              used to monitor a xenon absorption feature in much the same way tunable diode
              lasers have been used to monitor water absorption in the near infrared. 
              However, because the two-photon absorption in xenon is a nonlinear process, it
              occurs only where laser irradiance is high.  Thus, in a focused laser beam, the
              process occurs only near the beam focus and not along the entire beam path. 
              This property is exploited to extend standard direct-absorption techniques to
              enable spatial resolution.  Spatial resolution in a line,
plane, or volume are
              accomplished by rapidly scanning the laser focus through space using
              galvanometers.  The technique monitors one property:  xenon number density. 
              However, because xenon is inert and easy to seed in a variety of environments,
              xenon number-density information is much more useful than it might seem on the
              surface.  For instance, whenever pressure is known, gas temperature can be
              calculated from the xenon number density.  In addition, by seeding xenon into
              one of multiple fluids in a mixing experiment, the xenon can be used to track
              that fluid even through chemical reactions that change its composition.  The
              second technique uses new wavelength-scanning approaches to monitor Raman
              scattering spectra.  This technique complements the xenon technique by offering
              more property information (e.g., simultaneous concentrations of multiple
              species) at the cost of lower signal levels.  Applications in liquid and spray
              systems relevant to combustion are described.  Although combustion sensing is
              of primary interest, both techniques are expected to be valuable for sensing in
              other environments as well.

Broader impact

A research and teaching plan
              for the next five years is laid out, designed to build a firm foundation future
              efforts.  The research plan extends new laser wavelength-scanning concepts
              developed by the PI to provide continuous, spatially resolved gas and liquid
              property measurements of an unprecedented nature.  Such data are obtained in
              fundamental and applied systems relevant to combustion, with the goal of
              dramatically improving the understanding of the governing processes.  The
              research inspires the inclusion of active learning techniques into the
              undergraduate thermal-fluid science curriculum.  Balanced by a traditional
              lecture-based format, these techniques are intended to foster creative thinking
              and physical familiarity with course material.  Concept inventories are used to
              guide and assess the active learning exercises.  In addition, undergraduate
              researchers (including students of under-represented groups), a graduate class
              in optical techniques, and outreach activities are integrated with the research
              program.


