Title       : CAREER: Integrated Approach To Superplastic Forming of Advanced Materials:
               Mechanics-Materials-Manufacturing Linkage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238712

Award Number: 0238712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marwan K. Khraisheh khraisheh@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career (CAREER) development plan presents a novel approach
              that integrates mechanics, materials and manufacturing concepts to optimize the
              superplastic forming (SPF) process and advance its industrial utilization.  The
              principal research goals of this project are:  (1) to improve the current
              predictive capabilities of material deformation and failure during SPF and (2)
              to devise optimum forming practices to increase production rate.  To achieve
              the first research goal, accurate multiaxial and microstructure-based
              constitutive models of deformation and failure will be developed and
              incorporated into a general purpose FE code.  The modeling framework will be
              based on large viscoplastic deformation with a microstructure-based overstress
              function, a dynamic anisotropic yield surface, and internal variables.  The
              models will be calibrated and validated using detailed mechanical tests,
              including multiaxial experiments, and advanced microstructural characterization
              techniques in collaboration with a National laboratory.  The second research
              goal will be achieved by developing optimum forming pressure profiles that can
              reduce the forming time and maintain the integrity of the formed part, and by
              refining the initial microstructure of the superplastic sheet using friction
              stir processing (FSP).  The research will also include a detailed post SPF
              analysis, an issue that has been neglected in previous SPF studies.  The
              outcome is a comprehensive methodology, which involves experimental procedures,
              analytical and numerical models that can be used to optimize SPF of various
              superplastic alloys.  The focus of this project will be on commercial magnesium
              alloys because of their unique properties and the recent increased interest in
              Mg alloys, especially from the automotive industries.

The education plan in
              this CAREER project outlines efforts to:  (1) expose young children to the
              exciting possibilities of the engineering profession and inspire their
              imagination and curiosity;  (2) help freshmen engineering students learn more
              about engineering disciplines and help improve retention rate; (3) encourage
              engineering students to be involved in the activities mentioned in 1 and 2, and
              ensure that student involvement includes all facets of the student population
              including female and minority students; and, (4) introduce modern undergraduate
              and graduate courses which meet the new ABET requirements, in particular, the
              need to integrate advances in mechanics and materials into manufacturing.  The
              educational component will have a direct impact on the welfare of the State by
              investing in the youth and strengthening and promoting the only children's
              museum in the State.  The CAREER development program includes a management plan
              to ensure achieving the objectives.  It involves an advisory committee
              consisting of multidisciplinary individuals to offer technical advice,
              facilitate dissemination of the results and ensure exposure of the findings. 
              The success of the research activities will advance the widespread industrial
              utilization of SPF.  This will have a positive impact on society and will lead
              to cheaper, safer and environmentally friendly products.


