Title       : CAREER: Advancing Technological Fluency of Underrepresented Youth and their
               Teachers through Project-Based Learning Opportunities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0238524

Award Number: 0238524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $558827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brigid Barron barronbj@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This five-year research program is designed to advance our understanding of how
              to effectively engage diverse groups of youth in learning core IT concepts in
              ways that motivate them to continue learning in their future education. Basic
              research and design-oriented research will be conducted in three inter-related
              phases.  The first phase will focus on expanding what we know about students'
              access, interest, and experiences with new technologies-with an emphasis on
              identifying barriers to equity and revealing learning resources. Survey and
              interview work will be carried out with a large and diverse group of students
              across socio-economic strata in California's Silicon Valley region to
              investigate their access to, and interest in, various kinds of learning
              opportunities. The research will document how creative learning opportunities
              are distributed across different communities and their effects on student
              interests.  It will also contribute to defining different profiles of student
              fluency and how these are associated with learning ecologies constituted by the
              interweaving contexts of self, family, peer group, school, and community.  The
              second phase of the work will focus on co-developing courses with teachers. A
              core guiding principle of these courses will be a primary focus on the student
              as designer and a learning goal will be to help students understand design as a
              human process in which everyone can be involved.  The course material will
              build fluency in the context of projects in which students design, program, and
              implement information systems that address issues of youth interest. This
              approach will allow students to be authentic contributors of knowledge and
              processes while simultaneously building understanding of the core concepts and
              capabilities outlined in the NRC Fluency report-such as programming,
              information design, and human-computer interaction. In the third phase, the
              teaching and learning processes in these courses will be studied
              systematically, with a particular focus on collaborative design work. A key
              goal of this research is to contribute to theories of collaborative learning.
              Productive collaborative design practices will be identified and the ways that
              such collaborations are often less than productive and can be made more
              productive will be articulated. Learning properties of collaborative technology
              design work beyond cognitive outcomes will be identified for empirical study,
              including motivational, relational, and meta-communicative outcomes. 

Beyond
              the intensive co-development of courses with local teachers, the educational
              component of this project will include the creation of a library of video case
              studies that highlight exemplars of more and less productive small group
              collaborative interaction.  These will be used to help teachers (both
              pre-service and in-service) and novice researchers see ways of engaging
              students in learning that support fluency and increase interest and the ability
              to use and understand technology broadly. The use of video cases will support
              conversations about teaching and learning processes as they provide concrete
              references that can be revisited and reflected on from multiple perspectives. 
              The video cases will be used to improve existing courses and in dissemination
              activities directed at the broader community of information technology teachers
              and researchers.





