Title       : Telecommunications Research and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0238609

Award Number: 0238609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $711500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjory S. Blumenthal mblument@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CSTB would convene an expert committee to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
              telecommunications research and development.  The study would develop a picture
              of telecommunications research in the United States, including areas that are
              and are not  being  emphasized,  the  interplay  between  telecommunications 
              and  neighboring fields  such  as  computer  science  and  electrical 
              engineering,  and  the  relationships between  pre-competitive  research  and 
              standards-setting  efforts.    The  study  would examine changes in the level
              of support, research focus, and research time horizon at the major U.S.
              industrial labs as well as more broadly across the industry, including
              startups.    The study would  also  examine  telecommunications  research 
              within universities,  considering  how  much  is  done,  where,  and  under
              what  conditions. It would  assess  the  implications  of  these  changes  for 
              the  U.S.  telecommunications industry--recognizing  that that industry itself
              is  changing and considering possible future trajectories for the industry--and
              compare the U.S. research model to research initiatives being undertaken in
              other countries (especially Europe and Japan) and bythe European Union. 
              Looking across industry and academia, it would consider future research
              directions, the interplay between telecommunications and computer science, and
              assess whether new institutional arrangements or programs are needed.   

              
The project would culminate in a consensus report recommending ways to
              strengthen the U.S. research base, sustain education and training of future
              telecommunications researchers, and enhance the competitiveness of the U.S.
              telecommunications sector. The  report  would  be  distributed  to  key 
              decision-makers  in  government,  industry, academia; as well as congressional
              staff and the general public.  The report would be made available on the Web as
              well as in hard copy.  The completed report would be briefed to interested
              parties in government, industry, and academia. 
 
The intellectual merit of
              the project and its broader impacts both would flow from its focusing 
              attention  on  an  area  of  critical  national  (and  international) 
              importance. Historically,  telecommunications  R&D  has  been  the  province 
              of  private  industry(with comparatively little effort in academia), notably
              the former Ma Bell and other companies  that were  leaders  in  different 
              telecommunications  segments--actors  that have  suffered  with  recent 
              economic  conditions.    Intellectually,   the  project  would explore and
              characterize telecommunications as a field and a focus for different kinds of
              research.  It will address what it would take to grow a more significant
              academic research capability.  In addition to stimulating research, boosting
              academic interest and activity, the project will have broader impacts by
              helping to sustain and enhance an  arena  that  is  important  to  national 
              security,  economic  competitiveness,  and  the larger base of information
              technology capability and use of which telecommunications is  a  vital part. 
              The technical opportunities it will discuss will be linked to benefits among
              the public and large and specific segments as users of different kinds of
              telecommunications capabilities. 

