Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Transvascular Biotransport Research and Educational
               Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0238905

Award Number: 0238905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. English tenglish@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238905
English
The overall goal of this project is to integrate a biomedical
              engineering research program of vascular biotransport processes with an
              educational program that targets graduate, undergraduate, and underrepresented
              middle school levels of education. To meet this goal, this proposal exploits
              and strengthens a unique collaborative environment between The University of
              Tennessee, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, The University of Tennessee Vascular
              Research Laboratory, and two underrepresented middle schools in the East
              Tennessee area. 

The primary objective of this research is to investigate
              endothelial cell barrier function using synthetic hydrogel scaffolds with
              predefined surface properties and a novel electrical impedance model. The
              intellectual merit of the research component lies in the integration and
              application of concepts from electrical, mechanical, and chemical engineering
              to investigating an important and fundamental problem in vascular biology.
              Using a combination of quantitative modeling techniques, thermodynamically
              engineered hydrogel scaffolds, and electrical measurements, this study examines
              how specific receptor mediated and cytoskeletal interactions control
              endothelial cell barrier function. The central hypothesis of this work is that
              endothelial cell barrier function is regulated by specific cytoskeletal
              elements that control cell-cell and cell-matrix coupling. This study tests this
              hypothesis using a microcontinuum electrical model with cell-cell and
              cell-matrix adhesion dependent impedances and drugs that target specific
              cytoskeletal elements. This model is experimentally and numerically validated
              using biological interventions and a novel tissue engineered endothelial cell
              and hydrogel matrix structure that permits direct control over cell-matrix
              specific binding interactions. The outcome of this research will contribute to
              an understanding of endothelial cell barrier function and cellular-biomaterials
              interactions and impact several areas of cell biology, tissue engineering, and
              pharmacology. 

The overall educational objective is to stimulate efficient
              learning at graduate, undergraduate and pre-college levels of education.
              Curriculum development at both the undergraduate and graduate level compliments
              the proposed research program. As part of the curriculum improvement, a
              Cellular Fields, Forces and Flows graduate course and a senior/graduate level
              Cell and Tissue Biotransport Processes course and laboratory are being
              developed. This proposal targets underprivileged and minority groups at the
              middle school level and supports an existing minority outreach program at The
              University of Tennessee. 

