Title       : CAREER: Bridging the Gap Between Theory and Practice in Teacher Education:
               Guided Interactive Virtual Environments (GIVEs) for Case-Based Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0238385

Award Number: 0238385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $894538             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roxana A. Moreno moreno@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this CAREER proposal is to study how to help science teachers
              prepare to think effectively and apply principles of educational psychology to
              classroom experiences.  The author expects it to contribute to understanding of
              the cognitive processes that support the teacher efforts to solve novel and
              complex problems in the classroom.  The project also has implications for the
              design of educational technology that promote student higher level reasoning
              skills through case studies.   In particular, this project is expected to help
              show ways of meeting the needs of the New Mexico schools with large populations
              of Native American and other minorities.   She would develop virtual
              environments for preparing teachers with case learning so that cognitive skills
              are learned as concrete procedures in the context of everyday life.  The
              virtual environments allow a focus on a few issues at a time thus reducing the
              cognitive load on the teachers.  This study will explore several hypotheses
              about how case-based methods provide higher order thinking skills that help
              students solve problems.  The researcher will collect data from teachers on
              student performance by following three cohorts of students for 3-years each. 
              The cohorts will be pre-service teachers in year 3 of the project and will be
              followed into their classrooms as teachers.  One cohort will serve as a control
              group to the others that will go through the training program developed by the
              investigator.  

Education Plan 

The investigator's career plans are
              directly related to the project outlined in this Career proposal.  The
              investigator is interested in how people think and learn and how to apply that
              knowledge to classrooms.  This project is very closely woven into the
              investigators career plans.  As she noted in an e-mail to L Suter on December
              12, 2002, this project is a "direct reflection of my interest in teaching,
              which stems from my commitment to research how people think and learn."  The
              materials will be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum that she
              teaches and she plans to offer special graduate classes based on the result of
              her research.



