Title       : CAREER: Aging, Tooth Fracture and the Success of Restorative Dentistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238237

Award Number: 0238237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwayne D. Arola darola@engr.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238237
Arola
Dentists generally accept that the revision and replacement of
              failed restorations consumes the majority of their clinical activities. Tooth
              fracture is the most detrimental form of failure and often requires complete
              extraction. The fracture of restored teeth is currently one of the primary
              obstacles to lifelong oral health. Recent studies reported in the US, UK and
              Europe indicate that nearly 50% of the teeth in dentate adults aged 45 years
              and over have been restored. Therefore, in spite of a general decrease in tooth
              decay among the young, dental restorations will be required and necessitate
              repair more often over the next ten years. Older people today expect longer,
              healthier lives and most wish for a functional and aesthetically acceptable
              dentition over this period.

The general hypothesis of the proposed
              investigation is that restored tooth fractures are fostered by a change in the
              mechanical properties of dentin with aging. Dentin is a hydrated, mineralized
              hard tissue that comprises the majority of the tooth by volume. Research
              activities are aimed at characterizing the mechanical behavior of dentin and
              correlating its fracture resistance with age utilizing a hybrid approach. Based
              on preliminary studies, the fracture toughness of dentin is expected to
              decrease with age of the tissue. To establish the significance of aging on
              tooth fracture, double cantilever beam specimens will be prepared from the
              dentin of extracted third molars according to 3 age groups. Monotonic wedge
              loads will be used to initiate and sustain stable crack growth while the
              in-plane displacements are monitored as a function of crack length using moire
              interferometry. Full-field displacements from experiments will be used as the
              benchmark solution for finite element models of the fracture process. Using an
              inverse analysis the mechanics of fracture and their contribution to energy
              dissipation will be obtained precisely from the numerical models. These
              activities will be complemented with a microscopic analysis of the fracture
              surfaces to both identify and quantify the influence of aging on the mechanisms
              of fracture in dentin. 

The research activities are integrated with an
              educational plan that extends the impact of a new outreach program for middle
              school students at the University of Maryland Baltimore County(UMBC). Students
              who wish to further explore their interests in science will continue as
              Research Scholars and engage in biomedical research within the PI's laboratory
              during a 6-week summer program. The educational objectives are to increase
              participation of underrepresented minorities from Maryland's schools in
              dentistry and engineering, and promote oral health and science through
              organized visits from the Research Scholars and their mentors to 7th and 8th 
              grade classrooms in Baltimore's schools. The educational program is supported
              by a partnership between UMBC, the University of Maryland Dental School and the
              Meyerhoff Scholars Program. Undergraduate and graduate students in Mechanical
              Engineering and students from Dentistry will jointly mentor the Research
              Scholars with their investigations. The Meyerhoff Program will provide
              professional development activities and introduce the young Scholars to
              biomedical research in other departments through an undergraduate seminar
              series. 

