Title       : CAREER: A Multi-Level Approach to Malicious Mobile Code Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0238492

Award Number: 0238492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giovanni Vigna vigna@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile code can be defined as executable content that is transferred to
              a
remote environment and executed there automatically.  Attacks from
              malicious
mobile code can be detected by analyzing the information associated
              with the
execution of code and identifying malicious behavior. This analysis
              process is
called intrusion detection while the process of collecting the
              necessary
information is called auditing.

Unfortunately, most systems that
              support code mobility provide no auditing
mechanisms or are able to produce
              only incomplete information about the
activity of mobile code.

To overcome
              these problems, a multi-level approach to malicious mobile code
detection is
              proposed. The approach relies on the instrumentation of the
different
              components of the mobile code execution architecture to gather
complete
              information about the actions of the mobile code. The events
collected at
              different abstraction levels are used as input to multi-stream
intrusion
              detection analysis. The intrusion detection process uses both fusion
and
              correlation techniques to detect attacks and perform proactive
              response
procedures that limit the impact of an attack. In particular, the
              research
focuses on the containment of the spread of worm applications.

The
              results of this research will be used both to retrofit existing systems
and to
              secure future applications. In particular, in the near future mobile
code will
              become a fundamental mechanism for the upgrade and management of
mobile
              devices, as IP connectivity is brought to the millions of cellular
phones in
              use today. The use of multi-level intrusion detection will provide
techniques
              to protect both the infrastructure and the user terminals against
malicious
              mobile code.  


