Title       : Quantum state resolved studies of gas-surface interaction dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0238224

Award Number: 0238224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce A. Guest                          
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Sitz gositz@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Sitz will perform state-to-state experiments involving
              molecular hydrogen and deuterium scattering from reactive transition metal
              surfaces.  The relative importance of translational, rotational, and
              vibrational motion and molecular alignment in determining the outcome of
              scattering events in hydrogen/copper and hydrogen/palladium systems will be
              investigated.  Stimulated Raman scattering will be used to prepare hydrogen
              molecules incident on the surface in selected rotational and vibrational
              states.  Scattered molecules will be detected in a quantum state specific
              manner by multiphotonionization.  By exploiting the simple systems studied
              here, a definitive comparison with theory will be possible.

Fully highly
              resolved measurements provide new insight into surface dynamics.  Experimental
              results of the kind obtained in this project provide critical data for testing
              existing models and theories and help motivate the development of new ones.  It
              is known that the presence of various atoms on a surface can lead to either
              poisoning or promotion of surface reactions, but these effects are not fully
              understood.  The collaboration with theoreticians is also expected to enable a
              predictive understanding of fundamental gas-surface processes that will
              ultimately impact catalytic reaction processes and other technological
              applications.  Students in the PI's laboratory are trained in the use of
              state-of-the-art laser and vacuum technologies.
