Title       : CAREER: Structure and Robustness in Nonlinear Control: Challenges from Fuel Cell
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0238268

Award Number: 0238268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murat Arcak arcakm@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this proposal is to develop systematic design tools
              that exploit, rather
than override, nonlinearities and structural properties
              in feedback systems. Encouraged by our
preliminary results, we address the
              problems of observer design and robustness to unmodeled
dynamics, which are
              crucial for practical applicability of nonlinear control techniques. The
              variety of
dynamic phenomena in nonlinear systems have hampered constructive
              solutions to these problems.
In contrast, we pursue structure-specific designs
              which are tailored to inherent system properties
and nonlinear phenomena. Our
              robust design tools exploit types of unmodeled dynamics and
multivariable
              structures to recover stability and performance achievable with nominal
              designs. Our
observers take advantage of nonlinearities to enhance observer
              convergence and to recover stability
of full state-feedback designs in
              certainty-equivalence implementations.

In collaboration with United
              Technologies Research Center, the PI will apply these design tools
to emerging
              feedback problems in fuel cell power systems. Fuel cell technology is
              particularly suit-
able for United States, because the wide geography makes
              centralized power networks prone to
failure, and the strict environmental
              regulations accentuate the necessity of clean power genera-
tion.A major
              challenge for potential vehicular and portable power applications is the
              high-order,
interconnected, system structure, and severe nonlinearities, which
              arise from tight integration of
system components and wide variations in the
              electric load. Robustness to unmodeled dynamics
is crucial for reliability of
              low-order designs. Nonlinear observers are of great importance
              because
commercially available sensor technologies are not designed to operate
              in a fuel cell environment.
The study of fuel cells will set the stage for
              abstractions and broad design methodologies which will
also impact other
              technologies, such as computer networks, chemical processes, and fluid
              control
problems in aeroengines, where high-order system models and severe
              nonlinearities constitute an
obstacle to efficient and reliable feedback
              designs.

The educational objective of the proposal is to make nonlinear
              concepts accessible to a wider
spectrum of students. The PI will introduce a
              new course for undergraduates, and graduate stu-
dents who wish to study
              nonlinear systems at an introductory level. This course will enhance
              the
appreciation of nonlinear systems among practitioners of the future, and
              attract more students
to our graduate research program. In collaboration with
              the New Visions Program of local school
districts and Rensselaer Polytechnic
              Institute, we will include high-school students in project teams
with our
              undergraduates. Several pedagogical experiments and computer animations,
              detailed in
the proposal, will give them a motivating real-life exposure to
              dynamic phenomena and control
concepts.
