Title       : CAREER: Development of an Integrated Millimeter-wave Fourier Transform
               Spectrometer for Detection and Identification of DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0238967

Award Number: 0238967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicolas Barker barker@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238967
Barker

Recent trends in the proliferation of biological warfare
              agents in addition to the obvious willingness of terrorist organizations to
              attack non-combatants has increased the need for a portable detection and
              identification device. Current methods for detection of biological warfare
              agents use sensors that detect binding of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and
              identification requires prior knowledge of the DNA of interest. Unfortunately,
              these techniques may  not be capable of detecting those biological warfare
              agents that have been genetically altered.  In addition, the search for life on
              other planets would greatly benefit from the development of a device that is
              capable of detecting the presence of DNA without relying on the use of
              biochemical reagents.

Recent investigations at the University of Virginia
              have demonstrated that DNA has
numerous resonant modes in the millimeter and
              submillimeter-wave frequency range (30-3000 GHz). These resonant modes have
              been investigated using Fourier transform spectroscopy and it has been
              discovered that the position and strengths of these vibrational modes are
              sensitive to the specific structure of the DNA. Thus, it is possible through
              the tabulation of the frequency response of relevant DNA sequences to detect
              and identify DNA by spectroscopic measurements in the millimeter and
              submillimeter-wave frequency range.

The primary focus of this CAREER
              proposal is to investigate the possibility of integrating the interferometer of
              a millimeter-wave Fourier-transform spectrometer on a single chip. This will be
              made possible through the application of microelectromechanical system (MEMS)
              devices to the development of a true-time delay phase shifter. Specifically, a
              multibit distributed MEMS transmission line phase shifter will be developed
              from 100-200 GHz and integrated with a set of Lange couplers to form the
              integrated interferometer. This chip will be assembled with a broadband
              frequency source and a detector that are being developed by other researchers
              at the University of Virginia.

The University of Virginia chapter of the
              National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) has an active community outreach
              program called the "Garret Square Program." This program seeks to positively
              impact the community by having students share of themselves and their knowledge
              with the children of Garret Square, a public housing development in downtown
              Charlottesville. Through this program, the students hope to instill self-worth,
              academic excellence, and a sense of community by serving as role models. The
              outreach focus of this CAREER proposal is to develop an interactive multimedia
              demonstration that can be used by the NSBE in the Garret Square Program. The
              demonstration will cover the search for life on other planets and the use of
              MEMS systems such as the integrated Fourier-transform
spectrometer.


