Title       : CAREER: Pathways to in situ Medication: Liposomal Encapsulation, Transport in
               Microchannels and Delivery via Liposomal Membrane Crumpling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0238874

Award Number: 0238874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sahraoui Chaieb sch@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

The main treatments of tumoral diseases such as cancer are
              radiation, which can be damaging to healthy organs or surgery, which can be
              disfiguring.  While with chemotherapy only a small fraction of the administered
              dose reaches the site whilst the rest is distributed throughout the body which
              limits the dosage and prevents the method from achieving its function of
              curing. The objective of the proposed research is to develop and study a system
              whereby cell-like objects (liposomes) are filled with a drug, transported in
              microchannels and are induced, by temperature, to deliver the payload at
              precise locations. The project involves experimental and theoretical work at
              the forefront of research on the behavior of biological materials where solid
              mechanics, fluid mechanics and material sciences meet. This will be a
              cooperative effort with the diagnostic group of the Hospital Products Division
              at Abbott Laboratories.

This problem will necessitate the creation of new
              directions in mechanical sciences to treat various cases of deformation of
              liposomes: Instability-induced deformation of large tubes to create small
              spherical vesicles. Flow induced deformations during the transport of
              drug-laden liposomes and temperature-induced deformations during the delivery
              of the drug. These ideas lay in the coupling of elasticity with hydrodynamics.
              Experimentally we will use fluorescence microscopy to monitor the local state
              of the liposomes and we will use nano-indentation to probe mechanical
              properties of the liposomes. Techniques in microfibration will be developed to
              study the transport of these objects in microchannels.

This research project
              will be integrated with a curriculum being developed at the University of
              Illinois at Urbana-Champaign such as the newly developed graduate program in
              bioengineering and the secondary option of biomechanics newly introduced by the
              PI  in the department of mechanics. The main interest of this course is the
              study of cell and tissue mechanics where biologists are exposed to engineering
              methods and engineering students are exposed to protocols of cell
              biology.




