Title       : Permeation of Penetrants in Nanocomposites: A Test of the Theory of Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a0238979

Award Number: 0238979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Paul drp@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project proposed here will have broad impact on the emerging field of
              polymer nanocomposites since it will determine whether current theories of
              composites are applicable or not for predicting performance as the size of the
              filler particles approach molecular dimensions.  Further, this project will
              provide a vehicle for students at all levels to learn how to answer key
              questions in new technical areas, where all concepts have to be questioned,
              using well-structured research.

As used here, the term nanocomposites refers
              to a polymer matrix containing well-dispersed filler particles (spheres, rods,
              or platelets usually comprised of an inorganic material) where at least one
              dimension is in the range of one to tens of nanometers.  The very high surface
              area of these particles and small distances between them raises the question of
              whether the particles may influence the nature or properties of the polymer
              matrix by interfering with the chain conformation, segmental packing, or the
              force field in which these segments move.  The well-developed mathematical
              theories for predicting performance (stiffness, permeability, etc.) of
              conventional composites assure the properties for each phase are the same as if
              the other phase were not there.  We must question whether the local properties
              of the matrix in nanocomposites are really the same as in the bulk state.  We
              propose to answer this key question by probing these local properties by
              measuring the permeability of various gas and vapor penetrants in well-prepared
              and characterized nanocomposites.  The absolute permeability of any given
              penetrant will depend on the detailed morphology of the composite (i.e., the
              aspect ratio, volume fraction, and arrangement of these particles in the
              matrix).  However, according to composite theory, the ratio of the permeability
              of one penetrant to that of another should be the same in the composite as in
              the pure matrix.  Thus, systematic and accurate measurement of the permeation
              of a wide range of penetrants of varying size becomes a powerful tool for
              exploring the applicability of composite theory to nanocomposites, i.e.,
              whether local properties are perturbed by tiny, high surface area
              nanoparticles.  Further, this work will address issues related to developing
              nanocomposites for applications as barrier materials and as membranes for
              separations and for fuel cells.  The nanoparticles of interest will include the
              aluminosilicate platelets of clays (for barrier materials), spherical particles
              of silica and other materials (for separation membranes), particles that
              conduct protons (for fuel cells,), etc.  The matrices will be either
              crystalline or glassy polymers of varying chain stiffness and interaction with
              the nanoparticles.  The research will identify the materials issues that
              determine when the matrix properties are significantly affected by the filler
              and when they are not.

