Title       : Mechanisms of phloem-mediated RNA traffic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0238412

Award Number: 0238412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Biao Ding   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In a multicellular organism, cells signal each other to coordinate gene
              expression patterns that dictate growth and development. In plants, cytoplasmic
              channels called plasmodesmata form one pathway for cell-cell signaling.
              Furthermore, the vascular tissue phloem forms a network of channels to allow
              signaling between distant cells or organs. Increasing evidence indicates that
              selected RNAs and proteins traffic from cell to cell through plasmodesmata and
              from organ to organ through the phloem. RNA traffic appears to have important
              roles in plant development, physiology, and defense. This project addresses the
              question of how RNA traffic is regulated in a plant, using viroid traffic as a
              highly tractable model system. Viroids are small pathogenic RNAs that infect
              plants. They do not encode proteins and can replicate and move systemically
              within an infected plant. It is likely that viroid RNAs have evolved the
              capacity to utilize pre-existing cellular mechanisms to traffic through
              plasmodesmata and the phloem. This work has three objectives: 1) testing the
              hypothesis that an RNA uses different mechanisms to enter and exit the phloem
              during systemic traffic, 2) identifying the cellular boundary that controls
              phloem exit of an RNA, and 3) identifying the RNA motif(s) that mediates phloem
              exit. Results from this project are expected to yield novel insights about the
              RNA structures and cellular factors that are important for intercellular
              traffic. Such insights may impact studies on how endogenous plant RNAs traffic
              to regulate cellular processes underlying growth and development and how viral
              RNAs traffic systemically to spread infection.
