Title       : CAREER: Ordered Mesoporous Mixed Metal Oxides: An Integrated Research and
               Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0238962

Award Number: 0238962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vadim Guliants vguliant@alpha.che.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This objective of this career development plan is to introduce the concept of
              molecular engineering of complicated mesoporous materials in both research and
              chemical engineering education. In research, it aims at developing
              comprehensive methods for designing  mesoporous multicomponent V-Mo-M-O (M= Nb,
              Te, Sb, etc.) oxides and elucidating the fundamental relationships between the
              molecular structure and catalytic function. Model mesoporous V-Mo-M-O oxides
              will be synthesized via two novel self-assembly approaches employing molecular
              and nanocrystalline building blocks in the presence of mesoscale supramolecular
              surfactant arrays and block copolymers. Various surface chemical probes will be
              employed to elucidate the nature, number, structure and specific activity of
              surface redox, acidic and basic sites present in these model mixed metal oxide
              catalysts. The molecular structure-reactivity/selectivity relationships from
              this research program will be used to assist in the design of improved
              catalysts and the development of fundamental mechanistic models for alkane
              ammoxidation over mixed metal oxide catalysts.

The education program is
              aimed at integrating molecular engineering of advanced materials into
              traditional chemical engineering education and training chemical engineers with
              a strong background in molecular engineering of chemical and biological
              systems. This program includes development of two new courses on molecular
              engineering for undergraduate and graduate students, implementation of a
              molecular engineering research program for undergraduates, and outreach to
              underrepresented groups. The outreach efforts will be directed towards
              improving higher education opportunities for minority and women engineers by
              alerting them to the graduate research opportunities in molecular
              engineering.

