Title       : CAREER: Streamlining Data Communication in Network Servers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0238187

Award Number: 0238187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay Pai vijaypai@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The growth of the Internet has led to rapid developments in network servers for
              services such as web content, streaming media, and networked storage. Network
              servers provide data in many different forms to end-users. Thus their
              input/output (I/O) units are critical to performance. However, there is a
              bottleneck in the communication interfaces between the host CPU and the I/O.
              This causes inefficiencies at both the hardware and software levels. The goal
              of this research is to improve these communication interfaces to allow server
              performance to scale with network links of 10 Gigabits per second and
              beyond.

This approach utilizes network processors and programmable network
              interfaces to streamline data communication in network servers. While modern
              host CPUs have exploited instruction-level parallelism (ILP) and data caches to
              improve performance, tasks such as TCP/IP networking are not known to be well
              suited to these techniques. In contrast, the streaming data and
              connection-level concurrency of TCP/IP maps naturally to the cacheless,
              multithreaded and multiprocessor cores of network processors, motivating the
              offloading of a high-performance TCP/IP network stack to such devices.
              Cooperative computation and storage between the host CPU and the network
              interface also allows for copy-avoidance on network receive and for reducing
              costly interrupts by offloading TCP protocol processing from the host to the
              network interface. The new workloads developed during this research also
              motivate system-level architectural enhancements for both the host processor
              and the network processor.

All software and tools produced through this
              research will be transferred to the community through open-source distribution.
              The results of the research are being introduced into courses targeted at
              freshmen and sophomores to introduce systems-level concepts in computer
              engineering starting from basics such as bits and transistors and culminating
              in micro-architecture and systems topics.

