Title       : CAREER: Challenging the Structure-Function Relationship of Nitrifiers and
               Nitrification in Activated Sludge Using Molecular Biology and Mechanistic
               Modeling Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238858

Award Number: 0238858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Oerther Daniel.Oerther@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0238858   Oerther   The primary research goal of this NSF CAREER proposal is to
              reduce required sludge ages for successful nitrification in activated sludge
              systems. The primary educational goals are to integrate modeling of biological
              treatment systems with existing molecular biology courses taught at the
              University of Cincinnati and to conduct a preconference workshop on molecular
              biology and modeling tools at the Water Environment Federation Technical
              Exposition and Conference (WEFTEC). This research and education plan expands
              the ongoing efforts of the Principal Investigator (PI) to develop and
              demonstrate novel approaches to bridge the gap between engineers and ecologists
              by challenging the hypothesis that, increased diversity among nitrifying
              microorganisms reduces required sludge ages for nitrification in suspended
              growth activated sludge systems with mechanistic models and to transfer these
              technologies to practitioners.
Intellectual Merit. Successfully bridging the
              gap between function-based engineering and structure-based microbiology
              represents a fundamental crosscutting challenge that must be addressed before
              the results of molecular biology tools can be fully integrated with
              environmental engineering practice. Based upon his interdisciplinary education,
              including degrees in the biological sciences (B.A.) as well as environmental
              engineering (B.S., M.S., Ph.D.), the PI is uniquely qualified to meet this
              challenge. The PI's multidisciplinary approach to the optimization of
              nitrification and the integration of state-of-the-art research techniques into
              the undergraduate and graduate curricula fit with the institutional goals of
              the University of Cincinnati and the five-year plan of the Department of Civil
              and Environmental Engineering.
Broader Impacts. The PI has a strong history of
              supporting women and minority researchers in his laboratory through the Women
              In Science and Engineering (WISE) program, Rowe Center for Women in Engineering
              of the College of Engineering at UC. Four of his current seven students are
              women and three are minority. The CLSM described in the proposal will
              dramatically enhance the research and teaching infrastructure of UC by
              providing the first CLSM facility on the main (non-medical) campus. The
              proposed WEFTEC pre-conference workshop represents a first effort to transfer
              molecular biology tools from academia to environmental engineering
              practitioners.

