Title       : CAREER: Nitrogen Assimilation in Marine Algae: Evolution, Physiology, and
               Educational Opportunties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0238426

Award Number: 0238426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $541433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Robertson Debrobertson@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9177,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The assimilation of nitrogen into amino acids is a key process regulating the
              growth and productivity of photosynthetic organisms.  The regulation of
              nitrogen assimilation has been studied extensively in vascular plants and
              cyanobacteria; however, only limited information is available concerning the
              evolution and regulation of these pathways in eukaryotic algae.  The term
              "algae" is used to describe diverse lineages of photosynthetic organisms, many
              of which arose through independent secondary endosymbiotic events (symbioses
              between photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic eukaryotes).  The incorporation
              of symbionts into host cells increased the genetic diversity on which natural
              selection could act and is assumed to have contributed significantly to the
              metabolic diversity observed in extant algal lineages.  The independent
              endosymbiotic origin of photosynthetic lineages further suggests that enzymes
              involved in carbon and nitrogen metabolism may have arisen through different
              evolutionary processes (e.g., gene transfer versus gene duplication) and that
              regulatory pathways, which were established following the endosymbiotic events,
              may differ among lineages.
The enzyme glutamine synthetase (GS) is essential
              for ammonium assimilation and glutamine biosynthesis in all organisms and is
              the enzymatic link between carbon and nitrogen metabolism.  Multiple forms of
              GS are expressed in photosynthetic eukaryotes and the isoenzymes are
              compartmentalized in either the cytosol or chloroplast.  The goals of this
              research program are to (1) expand our knowledge of the evolution of nitrogen
              assimilation in photosynthetic eukaryotes by examining the molecular evolution
              of GS in diverse algae lineages, (2) identify and characterize the
              physiological functions of GS isoenzymes in the diatom Skeletonema costatum,
              and (3) to examine the cellular processes that regulate GS expression in S.
              costatum.  Diatoms are a species-rich group of organisms that contribute
              significantly to oceanic primary productivity and global biogeochemical cycles.
               This research will contribute to our understanding of mechanisms regulating
              nitrogen assimilation in photosynthetic eukaryotes, processes governing algal
              growth and oceanic productivity, and the evolution of metabolic pathways.  The
              work will provide a framework for future studies using emerging genomic and
              bioinformatic tools to understand the complex and interacting pathways coupling
              carbon and nitrogen metabolism in photosynthetic organisms.  
The common
              thread woven throughout this project is that mentored research experiences
              improve knowledge generation and acquisition skills, develop critical thinking
              skills, and increase self-confidence in learners at all levels.  This project
              uses several pedagogical approaches to provide new opportunities for
              undergraduates, graduate students, and science teachers from local public
              schools to participate in research-based learning activities.  As part of Clark
              University's mission to establish partnerships with the Worcester community,
              this project provides summer research opportunities for middle- and high-school
              science teachers. This research alliance provides discipline-based training for
              teachers and a forum for the discussion of effective teaching practices for
              grades K-16.  In addition, the PI will develop a new inquiry-based course in
              physiological ecology that offers investigative and cooperative learning
              experiences to undergraduates who may not have pursed mentored research
              opportunities.  The integrated research and teaching program illustrates the
              PI's commitment to a career aimed at the multi-disciplinary study of algal
              physiology and evolution, to the development of innovative science curricula,
              and to community education.


