Title       : CAREER: Human Dimensions to Marine Resource Utilization in the Solomon Islands:
               Fostering Pacific Island Student Participation in Research and Educational
               Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238539

Award Number: 0238539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shankar Aswani aswani@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238539
Aswani
Customary sea tenure occurs when identifiable groups of people
              have rights to access resources that are in principle excludable, transferable,
              and enforceable. This CAREER project is a five-year study that integrates
              research on customary sea tenure institutions and marine resource utilization
              in New Georgia, Solomon Islands, with a long-term educational program designed
              to include American students of Pacific Island descent in research and
              educational activities. The research focuses on key socio-cultural, economic,
              political, environmental, and historical factors that affect human common
              property regimes. The project will assess the major historical, social,
              cultural, economic, and political conditions of customary sea tenure
              institutions in the region. This will include the historical, social,
              political, economic, demographic, and ecological factors that may allow some
              institutions to succeed and others to fail in terms of environmental
              sustainability, social equity, and institutional endurance. The institutional
              conditions best suited to adapt to contemporary demographic, economic,
              political and social changes will be analyzed. Studying the dynamics of common
              property institutions and the factors that enhance cooperation amongst social
              actors in this case study will advance our understanding of the conditions that
              encourage stakeholders to protect their marine resources. 
The broader impacts
              of this research, aside from advancing the career of a young social scientist,
              will be its value to conservationists and policy makers in the Pacific Region.
              The new knowledge created by the project will to help them understand which
              sea-tenure programs are likely to generate successful management programs and
              which are likely to fail, which will help them to formulate fisheries
              management initiatives like marine protected areas (MPAs). The educational
              component of this research also has broad implications. The involvement of
              Pacific Island students, a group that is often underrepresented in the sciences
              and humanities, will give participants training in qualitative and quantitative
              methods that expand across disciplinary boundaries. This training will be
              invaluable for the participants' future research careers in science, and will
              enhance the participants' environmental awareness and education.

