Title       : CAREER: Development of Advanced MEMS Actuator Technology for Microrobotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0238861

Award Number: 0238861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth Smela smela@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual Merit
This CAREER proposal addresses the development of a new
              actuator technology based on dielectric elastomers for microrobotics, flying
              microdevices, and micromanipulation. This will require the development of new
              fabrication processes.  I shall:

The processing advances will permit us to
              design and fabricate three types of elementary micro- actuation components: 1.
              Out-of-plane actuators, which will also allow the measurement of actuator
              metrics that provide data essential for device modeling. 2. Bending actuators,
              which will be used to realize novel articulated structures with 6
              degree-of-freedom movement. 3. In-plane actuators that can be effectively
              coupled with Si MEMS devices.


Broader Impact
Research: The motivation for
              using dielectric elastomers actuators is that they are tough and compliant and
              have an extraordinarily high efficiency, whereas existing microactuators are
              either too brittle to transmit contact loads or consume too much power to carry
              their own power supplies. Dielectric elastomer actuators also inherently
              function as sensors. The proposed research will therefore make possible the
              realization of robust, autonomous actuators that MEMS devices can use for
              walking, manipulating, and perhaps flying, which will impact diverse
              fields.

Education: I will adopt inquiry-based teaching methods in order to
              improve learning outcomes. Students will formulate their own projects and use
              knowledge gained during the course to accomplish their objectives. These
              projects will expose students to actual research experiences. This approach
              will first be implemented in a 2-part undergraduate MEMS course in which
              students design and fabricate original building blocks of an ant-like, walking
              microdevice. These components will be the actuators, including legs,
              manipulating arms, and chemical-squirting self-defense system. The dielectric
              elastomer research will be utilized in the course, and the students devices
              will advance the research, closely integrating the research and education. A
              broader curriculum development effort will establish a comprehensive MEMS core
              program at UMD. 

