Title       : CAREER: Polarimetry in Remote Sensing, Communications, and Biological Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0238309

Award Number: 0238309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Scott Tyo tyo@eece.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238309
Tyo

Optical polarization is an important phenomenon in many aspects
              of remote sensing, optical communications, and biological sciences. In remote
              sensing, polarization can provide spatially distributed information about
              surface features such as roughness, orientation angle, shape, and material
              composition. Polarization sensitivity in both active and passive sensors can be
              used to help improve image contrast under poor viewing conditions, as commonly
              occurs underwater and in fog. Polarimetric techniques can be incorporated into
              both passive and active systems, and can be employed in any region of the
              electromagnetic spectrum. In the field of optical communications,
              polarization-dependent dispersion is one of the most important limiting factors
              in the performance of today's high data rate systems. When the differential
              group delay between two principal polarization states is larger than the
              inter-symbol time, the pulse dispersion is significant enough to cause high bit
              error rates. In biology, many species of terrestrial and aquatic vertebrates
              and invertebrates have demonstrated polarization sensitivity. This sensitivity
              implies that there is information available in a variety of environments that
              can help us learn more about the behavior of these animals.

This CAREER
              proposal supports the development of an integrated research and
              education
program in the field of optical polarimetry. This award will support
              the enhancement of the PI's Multi-Dimensional Imagery Laboratory at the
              University of New Mexico (UNM) and the creation of several polarization
              instructional modules and tutorials that will be integrated into the
              electromagnetics and optics curricula at UNM. Several research projects will be
              undertaken in the MDIL, including studies to optimize and characterize active
              and passive polarimeter systems, studies to investigate polarization properties
              in scattering media, and the development of imaging and non imaging sensors for
              remote sensing activities. One of these sensors will be designed for use at the
              Albuquerque Aquarium to image the aquatic environmental exhibits to learn more
              about the polarization phenomenology in nature. Finally, the facilities at the
              MDIL will be used to develop a polarization mode dispersion (PMD) emulator for
              optical fiber communications channels, and to study methods to compensate for
              PMD over optical links.

The research and education program proposed here
              will have significant broader impacts.
Much of the research will be performed
              by undergraduate students from UNM, which is a Federally recognized Minority
              Serving Institution with significant populations of Hispanic and Native
              American students. Every effort will be made to recruit from traditionally
              underrepresented groups, which make up approximately half of the undergraduate
              student body in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at UNM. The
              scientific results of the studies that will be conducted under this CAREER
              program will be broadly disseminated through scientific journals and technical
              conferences, and the educational material will be made available through local
              web sites and through the Polarization Technical Group of the International
              Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE). The results of the underwater imager
              experiments will be shared with to the local community with the cooperation of
              the Albuquerque Aquarium and their educational outreach programs.

The
              program will promote the natural integration of teaching and learning through
              mentoring at all stages in the research, and will provide the opportunity to
              integrate current research topics into graduate and undergraduate curricula.
              These activities will benefit the educational and research missions of the
              Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, the School of Engineering, and
              the University of New Mexico, as well as the local community of Albuquerque. 
              At the end of the five year CAREER program, the PI will be well established as
              an academic leader both at the University and in the scientific community as a
              whole.


