Title       : CAREER: Understanding and Supporting the Acquisition of Manufacturing Automation
               System Integration Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0238269

Award Number: 0238269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheng-Jen Hsieh hsieh@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The principal goals of this project are to: (1) understand how automated
              manufacturing system integration expertise develops; (2) develop a web-based
              system - called the System Integration Problem-Solving Environment (SIPSE) -
              that can be used both to monitor the development of system integration skills
              and to teach them; (3) develop a pedagogy for teaching system integration
              concepts and skills that can be used as a basis for developing curricula and
              materials for education in system integration and other similar domains; and
              (4) develop a curriculum for a undergraduate-level course on Automated
              Manufacturing System Integration.  The proposed effort will build upon existing
              cognitive skills acquisition research in investigating how expert engineers
              develop automated manufacturing system integration skills and how to help
              novices develop these skills more efficiently.  The project will integrate
              research and education by (1) involving graduate and undergraduate students in
              data collection and analysis, programming, interface design, and graphics
              design tasks; (2) inviting manufacturing automation students to participate in
              evaluating SIPSE; (3) adding an instructional module to SIPSE; (4) developing
              and evaluating a syllabus and curriculum materials for a new course on
              manufacturing automation system integration; and (5) presenting research
              results and investigating opportunities to make SIPSE available in high school
              and informal education settings.  It will broaden participation of
              underrepresented groups by involving students and faculty from minority and/or
              rurally located institutions in using and evaluating the results of the
              proposed research.  It will enhance the research infrastructure in the area of
              manufacturing automation by making SIPSE available over the Internet for use by
              researchers. Research results will be broadly disseminated in academic journals
              and professional conferences, on the Web, and by making presentations to high
              schools and in informal education settings, such as children's museums.  Direct
              beneficiaries of this effort will include automated manufacturing system end
              users, system integrators, and automation product manufacturers.  The Division
              of Engineering Education & Centers (ENG/EEC) has agreed to co-fund this
              project.

