Title       : CAREER: Mixed-Integer Nonlinear Programming Approaches for Hydrogen Production
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0238663

Award Number: 0238663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward P. Gatzke gatzke@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

As the United States makes the transition to a hydrogen economy,
              various technical challenges must be met. For vehicle fuel cell applications, a
              need exists for efficient production of hydrogen from liquid fuels. Liquid fuel
              reformer methods for hydrogen production must consider thermal interaction,
              startup procedures, and operating condition changes before these systems can
              become a truly viable energy alternative. Efficient operation often requires
              that chemical processing systems work well in different operating conditions
              and/or close to safety limitations. Chemical reaction systems may exhibit
              varied dynamic behavior based on the current operating conditions (nonlinear
              dynamics) and can sometimes switch to qualitatively different modes of
              operation (hybrid dynamics). This project considers nonlinear hybrid dynamic
              systems and with process safety constraints. The proposed methods require
              computational solution of difficult numerical optimization problems involving
              unknown variables that may take either continuous or integer values
              (mixed-integer optimization). Specifically, development and application of
              deterministic mixed-integer nonlinear optimization techniques for nonlinear
              process control applied to hydrogen production systems are considered. 

This
              project also examines integration of research and education in the development
              of research-related educational tools and student programs with student impact
              at both the national and local level. Process control educational software will
              be developed for national dissemination. A cross-disciplinary undergraduate
              process control laboratory will be developed using a collaborative
              research-based environment. Here, enrollment would be encouraged from an
              existing National Science Foundation sponsored undergraduate research
              communication studio and student groups not normally drawn to systems
              engineering careers such as the Society of Women Engineers and National Society
              of Black Engineers. Finally, an outreach program will be started with graduate
              students presenting engineering demonstrations in area high schools. 

Impact
              

Development and application of methods for improved operation of hydrogen
              production systems may have broad societal impact, aiding the transition to a
              hydrogen economy by improving system efficiency and speeding adoption of new
              technologies. In support of improved hydrogen production operation, development
              of novel chemical process control methods for complex nonlinear dynamic systems
              will be considered. Development of these concepts may have lasting effects
              across the chemical industry, in addition to improved hydrogen production
              system operation. Finally, development of improved general purpose
              deterministic mixed integer nonlinear programming solution methods may have
              impact across scientific and engineering disciplines.

