Title       : CAREER: Integrated Fault Tolerance and Real-Time Support for Middleware
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0238381

Award Number: 0238381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Priya Narasimhan priya@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project exploits the CORBA middleware standard as a vehicle for
exploring
              the composition of real-time and fault tolerance for
distributed middleware
              applications.  Although the initial approach
will apply to CORBA, the results
              will be applicable to other
middleware, such as Java.  The primary scientific
              contributions of
this project are the description of the precise trade-offs
              that occur
when both real-time and fault tolerance support are required for
              a
middleware application, along with an architecture and strategies that
can
              be used to resolve these trade-offs. The primary technical
contributions of
              the project are a new set of practices and algorithms
for building real-time
              fault-tolerant systems, and tools for
sanitizing non-determinism in middleware
              applications, with the aim of
meeting both real-time predictability and
              fault-tolerant consistency
requirements.

This project furthers our
              technical understanding of the precise
trade-offs and complex interactions
              between ``-ilities'' such as
real-time and fault tolerance, thereby helping to
              reduce the number of
proprietary brittle systems that continue to be built. 
              The project
has the potential to influence the state of the art and the
state
              of the practice, enabling future COTS-based mission-critical
applications to
              be developed with simultaneous real-time and
fault-tolerant support. 
              Recognizing that applications vary in their
dependability needs, this project
              is unique in that it provides
mechanisms to mix-and-match the different fault
              tolerance mechanisms
in a manner that allows for the customization of the
              system's
perceived dependability.

Through participation in organizations
              such as the Object Management
Group, the results of this project will be made
              available to harden
ongoing and future standards on fault tolerance and
              real-time for
middleware. Elements of this project will be incorporated
              into
curricula in order to expose students to the cross-cutting concerns
              of
both reliability and real-time.  Students who are exposed to not just
one
              ``-ility'', but to the conflicts and trade-offs between multiple
``-ilities'',
              will make better and more discriminating software/system
architects who can be
              entrusted to build the mission-critical systems
of the future.
