Title       : CAREER: Enhancing Conceptual Design Using Multi-Objective, Dynamically Encoded
               Genetic Algorithms to Optimize Structural Toplogy, Geometry, and Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0238654

Award Number: 0238654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Mccabe                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2003    
Expires     : July 31,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Raich araich@civilmail.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports research efforts focused on assisting designers in
              exploring and exploiting design alternatives during conceptual design.  A
              conceptual design system will be developed that can be teamed with designers to
              create, evaluate, and optimize diverse design alternatives.  A design grammar
              for representing complex, large-scale roof system design alternatives will be
              developed in collaboration with professional engineers and implemented using a
              specialized genetic algorithm (GA) that dynamically encodes the design
              variables.  To assist in exploring design alternatives, a GA-based
              multi-objective (MO) method will be developed that obtains the s-Pareto
              frontier within a single trial for designs having different structural
              configurations.  To select the best design from the s-Pareto set, a Kohonen
              neural network will be used to capture the user's design preferences.  This
              research will significantly enhance a designer's ability to design efficient
              and novel structures and will influence the way designers conceptualize the
              design process.  

The CAREER educational activities seek to provide students
              with the skills and experience desired by their future employers.  A new senior
              capstone design course will allow architectural and civil engineering students
              to collaborate on realistic problems defined by professional engineers.  A new
              graduate course in heuristic methods will meet the demand for training
              interdisciplinary engineers to solve complex optimization problems.  In
              addition, experiential learning modules will be added to undergraduate courses.
               The educational activities benefit students by increasing their knowledge of
              design and optimization, strengthening their understanding of structural
              behavior, and better preparing them to become future design innovators.  

              



