Title       : CAREER: Formal Methods for Silicon Complexity in Nanometer VLSI Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0238484

Award Number: 0238484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hai Zhou haizhou@ece.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9215,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The VLSI design productivity crisis, that is, the fact that the number
              of
available transistors grows much faster than the ability to design
              them
meaningfully, has become the greatest threat to the growth of
              semiconductor
industry. Silicon complexity, which refers to the impact of
              previously 
ignorable physical phenomena, is at the center of this crisis.
              Based on our beliefs that
the only effective way to improve productivity is to
              maintain design complexity
at a manageable level, and that formal methods are
              the right techniques for
complexity control, the objective of this research is
              to improve design
productivity by applying formal methods to silicon
              complexity problems such as
inductive/capacitive couplings and process
              variabilities.

The research develops methodology, models, and algorithms to
              handle silicon
complexity through the application of formal methods. By
              treating timing 
analysis as extracting semantics of a circuit, a timing
              analysis system is developed 
that handles both inductive and capacitive
              coupling delay variations. The system
develops and uses a range of inductive
              coupling models with different accuracy
and complexity. Based on that, timing
              macromodels for coupling delays are 
created for library characterization and
              IP specification. Clock scheduling and 
retiming algorithms are developed to
              separate signal switching times for coupling delay
optimization. Signal
              switching time information is also explored in routing and
placement to
              minimize coupling between sensitive wires. For process 
variability,
              statistical models are developed and combined into the timing analysis 
system
              to compute the statistical performance of a circuit, and stochastic
              
optimization is used to optimize the statistical performance. The integrated
              education 
activities aim at two aspects of computer engineering education: 1)
              educating students in
formal methods, especially their applications to
              nanometer VLSI design, thus
bringing needed mathematical rigor into the
              discipline; 2) introducing students
to silicon complexity and its impacts on
              VLSI design so that they are equipped
with necessary background for modern
              high performance VLSI design.



