Title       : CAREER: Processing and Development of a New Ultra-Light High-Strength Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238929

Award Number: 0238929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Afsaneh Rabiei arabiei@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Early Faculty Career (CAREER) development plan will address the increasing
              needs of the aerospace, naval, automotive, medical and other industries for
              advanced materials to provide the lightweight and high strength components.  A
              new high strength ultra-light material will be developed, processed, and
              tested.  This research is divided into three main tasks:  (1) new closed cell
              metallic foam with a uniform cell structure will be processed using preform
              hollow spheres.  This will lead to an improvement of the cyclic lifetime of the
              material.  (2) Fiber reinforced metal matrix preform wires will be embedded
              into the new foam structure with the goal of providing higher strength
              materials.  (3) The new fiber reinforced metallic foam will be mechanically
              tested and its deformation behavior will be mapped.  At this stage if the
              properties of the material need any improvement, the processing techniques will
              be tailored to address those issues.  The results will be presented in a
              variety of conferences and workshops. 

The education plan for this project
              involves four complementary initiatives:  (1) Collaboration with international
              universities to expose the students to international issues.  (2) Course
              development in advanced materials, including metallic foaming presented over
              the Internet for distance learning purposes. (3) Recruiting underrepresented
              and/or female students in local colleges and high schools.  (4) Undergraduate
              students will become involved in this research through an undergraduate
              Independent Research Project course.  Graduate students will be involved in
              coordinating the undergraduate research course and it will contribute to the
              integration of undergraduate and graduate education. The research project will
              work towards developing collaborations, new teaching courses, presentations and
              seminars to strengthen not only the knowledge of the participants, but also the
              broader audiences.  The technical outcome of this work is on producing new
              ultra-light, high-strength materials that eventually will benefit the society
              through great impact on improved fuel economy, energy consumption, safety and
              reduced maintenance of moving structures

