Title       : CAREER: Optical and Phonon Interactions in Wide-Bandgap Nano-Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238845

Award Number: 0238845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leah Bergman lbergman@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project addresses optical properties/interactions and phonon
              dynamics of wide band gap semiconductor nanostructures capable of light
              emission in the UV range utilizing Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy.
              Wide bandgap semiconductors to be investigated include GaN, AlN, and AlGaN
              alloys, as well as ZnO, and SiC. Research issues concerning light emission,
              crystal structure and crystal symmetry characteristics of nano-particles,
              quantum-dots, and random-structured powders will be studied. The approach
              includes the study of properties of individual nanocrystals as well as
              ensembles of particles to explore the basic mechanisms of light emission
              properties such as spectral range and efficiency inherent to a confined
              structure of a given size and shape, as well as the impact of the cluster
              environment. Additionally, energy re-laxation channels which occur via crystal
              vibrational modes--electron-phonon interactions, will be investigated to assess
              the impact of confined phonons on optical characteristics of particles. Year 1
              of the project is focused on investigation of optical and material properties
              of nano-structures of SiC, GaN, AlN, ZnO, to lay the foundation for the study
              of more complicated mixed particle systems in the following years. Years 2 and
              3 will focus on studies concerning the optical properties of particle ensembles
              and clusters and on establishing a novel UV-optical spectroscopy setup for
              remote excitation to enable studies concerning phenomena of light interactions,
              energy transfer, exciton diffusion, and efficiency losses among nano-particles.
              Years 4 and 5 will focus on resonant Raman scattering studies, as well as
              research involving the optical and structural behavior of nanostructures under
              high-pressure, high-temperature conditions. 
%%% 
The project addresses
              fundamental materials science research issues having technological relevance.
              An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and
              the integration of research and education. In tandem with the research program,
              new interdisciplinary curricula will be developed including a new course on
              optical materials and devices and a new undergraduate degree program on the
              Science of Materials. The course curriculum will be designed for upper level
              undergraduate students as well as for graduate students from various science
              disciplines. This program will focus on a broad spectrum of issues related to
              materials science, physics, and the chemistry of materials from the large scale
              to the molecular level. The impact of the proposed research will be to
              contribute towards basic knowledge of the structural and optical
              characteristics of nanocrystallites, a key to engineering viable optical
              devices operating in the UV. The new curricula, together with the active
              promotion of student participation in experimental research, is expected to
              have broad impact on the educational development of students and in the longer
              term contribute to both high technology industry and academia.
*** 

