Title       : CAREER: Micromachined Surface Conduction Tunneling Gas Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0238779

Award Number: 0238779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahalapitiya H. Jayatissa ajayatis@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Within this proposal, a novel gas sensor based on the surface conduction
              tunneling mechanism will be developed to address the above issues of
              semiconductor- based gas sensors.

The proposed gas sensor technology is
              based on the surface conduction tunneling mechanism through the nanogaps in the
              metal oxide semiconductor thin films. Since the proposed sensor measures the
              current, the signal can be amplified to increase the sensitivity. It also
              allows detection of each gas by measuring the tunneling threshold
              voltage.

The education plan focuses on the PI's activities in five key
              areas: (1) mentoring and training of graduate students in a multidisciplinary
              environment to become creative and independent researchers who have the
              background and skills to discover and develop new ideas in the areas of
              nanomaterials and nanotechnology, (2) encouragement and support for
              undergraduate and high school students research participation, (3) recruitment
              and retention of high school students, minorities and women in engineering
              education through a high school outreach program, (4) enhancement of the
              Materials Engineering curriculum by the addition of a new graduate course and a
              short course, and (5) development of research activities at Western Michigan
              University by collaboration, team work, and diversity. 

This research plan
              is designed to get technical/laboratory assistance from regional universities,
              government laboratories (i.e. Argonne National Laboratory), and international
              institutions in Japan and Denmark at the initial stage. The PI also intends to
              reach out to the regional automobile industries for future academic and
              industrial partnerships.

