Title       : SBIR Phase II: Novel Ultrasensitive Gas Chromatography (GC) Detector with Highly
               Specific Response to Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a0238545

Award Number: 0238545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Very bvery@dakotatechnologies.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dakota Technologies, Inc.
	      2201A 12th Street North
	      Fargo, ND  581021808    701/237-4908

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 9150,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance
              commercialization of an aromatic-specific laser ionization detector (ArSLID). 
              The photoionization detectors (PIDs) that are widely used as gas chromatography
              (GC) detectors and hand-held organic vapor analyzers form a natural basis of
              comparison for the ArSLID concept.  The ArSLID uses a high repetition rate
              pulsed laser instead of a vacuum ultraviolet lamp to create molecular ions. 
              The prototype ArSLID built and tested in Phase I is approximately 10-times more
              sensitive, has ten-times shorter response time, and is several orders of
              magnitude more selective toward aromatic hydrocarbons than any commercially
              available PID.  The linear dynamic range is at least 5 orders-of-magnitude. 
              The ArSLID is also immune from interferences by water vapor or oxygen.  
              Technical improvements planned for Phase II include improving the resolution by
              4 bits and correction for variations in the laser pulse repetition frequency. 
              Features will be added to facilitate easy integration of the ArSLID with
              existing GCs.  Another focus of Phase II will be applications development to
              show the versatility and value of ArSLID.  The Phase I work, which emphasized
              GC detection, will be expanded to HPLC detection, which opens up tremendous
              opportunities in the Life Sciences.  
 

The aromatic-specific detector will
              find a wide range of applications as the detector for gas chromatography, high
              performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), general vapor monitoring, and
              specialized environmental techniques.  Of these, the HPLC detector has the
              greatest commercial potential as a highly sensitive, low cost alternative the
              liquid chromatography-mass spectrometer.

  

