Title       : CAREER: Optical Sensors for the Detection of Vapor Phase Explosives Using
               Molecularly Imprinted Sol-Gel Materials: Integration of Research and Learning
               Using Forensic Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0238808

Award Number: 0238808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Edmiston pedmiston@acs.wooster.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Wooster
	      
	      Wooster, OH  44691    216/263-2000

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to Professor Paul Edmiston of the College of Wooster,
              supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program, focuses on the
              development of molecularly imprinted optical sensors to selectively detect gas
              and solution phase high-explosives. Professor Edmiston and his undergraduate
              students will use a hybrid covalent/non-covalent molecular imprinting strategy
              to prepare binding sites in porous sol-gel materials. Binding by analytes such
              as trinitrotoluene (TNT) to these materials will be detected by a change in
              fluorescence or absorbance of solvatochromic optical probes directly attached
              to sites adjacent to the imprinted binding pockets.  These imprinted sol-gel
              materials will be deposited as thin films on integrated optical waveguides to
              provide fast response times without a loss in sensitivity.  Imprinted sol-gels
              will also be used to construct solid-phase microextraction devices for field
              sampling applications that will be compatible with existing HPLC and GC/MS
              technologies.  The forensic science aspect of the research will be a central
              feature of educational and outreach activities to non-science major
              undergraduates and pre-college students.  New laboratory experiences for
              non-science majors will be developed that allow these students to be involved
              in the process of scientific research. College of Wooster chemistry students
              will be integral to outreach activities targeting inner-city Cleveland and
              rural high school students.

The long term goal of this project is develop
              simple, inexpensive, but highly sensitive sensing technologies to quickly
              detect explosives such as TNT.  The presence of explosives will be observed by
              optical means.  The obvious forensic applications of the project will be used
              as a focal point to expose non-science majors to chemical research.  In
              combination with these activities, an outreach program for high school students
              (already in its beginning stages) will be expanded that allows undergraduate
              chemistry majors to interact with the participants by demonstrating modern
              analytical techniques used in forensics and chemical research.

