Title       : CAREER: Fundamentals of Multicomponent Diffusion in Multiphase Alloys - Advances
               in Phenomenological Descriptions and Experimental Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0238356

Award Number: 0238356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393677             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongho Sohn ysohn@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to advance the understanding of multicomponent diffusion in
              multiphase alloys through development of phenomenological expressions,
              analytical methods and experimental techniques. The goal is to study
              multicomponent systems of current interest, namely Ni-Pt-Al and Fe-Ni-Al for
              high temperature coatings and structural applications. Based on innovative
              transformation of phenomenological expressions, accurate and efficient
              analytical methods to determine multicomponent diffusion coefficient will be
              developed. Evolution of diffusion structures involving stability of interphase
              boundaries and multiphase-layer formation will be examined and analyzed
              quantitatively by obtaining accurate experimental data using advanced
              characterization techniques. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be
              educated about diffusion in multicomponent-multiphase alloys through an
              integration of fundamental laboratory research and course revision with
              "hands-on" laboratories. These research and educational activities are designed
              to harvest materials scientists and engineers with exceptional knowledge and
              competence in diffusion in solids, while advancing the science of diffusion in
              multicomponent-multiphase alloys.

Sequentially designed laboratory modules
              will be implemented for a course entitled "Diffusion in Solids." The project
              aims to disseminate the basic understanding of diffusion and its importance in
              materials science for public at large, particularly for K-12 teachers and
              students as well as blind and visually impaired children, with assistance from
              the Orlando Science Center (OSC) and the Center for Independence Technology and
              Education (CITE). Undergraduate and graduate students involved in laboratory
              research will actively participate in these rewarding activities, and have a
              chance to mentor and interact with K-12 students including those handicapped.

