Title       : CAREER: Using Portfolios to Promote Knowledge Integration in Engineering
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0238392

Award Number: 0238392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $532503             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Turns jturns@engr.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The central idea of the proposed work is to explore portfolio creation as a
              means of promoting (and studying) knowledge integration by engineering
              students. The portfolio activities will build on existing strengths of the
              engineering curriculum by providing students with opportunities to reflect on
              their accomplishments, see and articulate connections between engineering and
              their accomplishments, and develop more integrated conceptual structures
              associated with engineering. Three objectives are to (1) document the nature of
              engineering students' conceptual structures in their engineering discipline,
              with specific attention to how integrated the conceptual structures are, (2)
              use what is known about portfolios in education to develop an intervention that
              makes it possible for engineering students to document and refine their
              conceptual structures in engineering, and (3) identify the learning affordances
              and cognitive challenges associated with the intervention.  The work will be
              accomplished through a longitudinal study and a series of classroom studies. In
              the longitudinal study, two student cohorts will be set up in which each
              student will develop one portfolio per year of participation.  Longitudinal
              study participants will construct portfolios as part of participation in an
              extracurricular program. In the classroom studies, the effects of portfolio
              construction will be explored in the context of individual courses. 

The
              education plan builds on the portfolio and knowledge integration emphases of
              the work.  The plan includes commitments to: a) continue using portfolio
              assignments in the PI's courses, b) support portfolio development by faculty
              and students interested in portfolios, c) provide mentoring/research
              experiences for undergraduates, and d) create teaching modules that build on
              the portfolios.

In terms of the broader impacts of the project
              underrepresented minorities will be over-sampled from the available student
              populations. The portfolios will represent a unique and useful information
              source for employers, students, and others with interest in engineering
              education. Also, the impact of the work will be on the engineering graduates
              who are better prepared to contribute to the engineering profession.

The
              Division of Engineering Education & Centers (ENG/EEC) has agreed to co-fund
              this project. 

