Title       : CAREER: Modeling and Optimizing User-Centric Mixed-Initiative Spoken Dialog
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0238514

Award Number: 0238514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shrikanth Narayanan shri@sipi.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Conversational interfaces hold the promise of providing natural, easy, and
              universal access to information.  This project targets two specific problems in
              conversational engineering under a unifying stochastic modeling framework: (1)
              dialog interaction modeling (2) user modeling in spoken dialog. These problems
              are related: user models are essential in designing optimal dialog strategies,
              while discourse state information is essential for user behavior modeling.
              Conversational participants -- humans or machines -- are modeled as stochastic
              dynamical systems, interacting with one another over a noisy communication
              channel. Noise in the channel may be due to errors in machine speech
              recognition, language understanding, or other machine/user communication
              errors. Algorithms based on mathematical game theory and robust design are
              formulated for derivation of optimal mixed-initiative dialog control
              strategies. The approach to modeling user behavior is data-driven with an
              emphasis on behavior under error conditions and on the inclusion of automatic
              emotion tracking. Again, a unified statistical framework provides a way for
              integrating multiple sources of information (e.g., acoustic, lexical, nonverbal
              and discourse) based on information-theoretic principles. The research
              development will be based on annotated spoken language corpora from real
              human-machine dialogs from a variety of real application domains including air
              travel and call center applications and an immersive training system for
              military/security applications being developed at the University of Southern
              California (USC).

The educational component creates a new curriculum in
              spoken language processing: a two-semester graduate sequence, developed for
              simultaneous offering both on campus and on USC ``Distance Education Network"
              will target basic speech processing through the latest advances in speech
              recognition, speech synthesis, and spoken dialog. The courses are  relevant to
              a wide range of programs, in addition to core electrical engineering, including
              computational linguistics, intelligent systems in computer science, integrated
              media and creative technologies,  phonetics, and psychology.  In addition, a
              unique interdisciplinary undergraduate course with a theme on human versus
              machine processing of spoken language will be developed and implemented. The
              research and education components are tightly integrated, with courses
              featuring the latest research results through demonstrations and hands-on
              projects, with an emphasis on `learning by doing'.  Likewise, research serves
              as an effective vehicle for education in terms of enabling the training of both
              undergraduate and doctoral students. 

This project in spoken language
              engineering is unique in terms of its scope and societal relevance, spanning
              both fundamental and applied aspects of spoken language research, including an
              industry perspective, and creating synergies with other activities within the
              university in multimedia, natural language processing, and agent technology. It
              will serve as a vehicle to promote cross-disciplinary graduate and
              undergraduate research and education. 

