Title       : CAREER: Polynuclear Lanthanide-Oxo/Hydroxo Clusters - Design, Preparation, and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0238790

Award Number: 0238790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiping Zheng zhiping@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,7202,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              program supports research by Professor Zhiping Zheng at the University of
              Arizona to design and synthesize a novel class of polynuclear lanthanide
              complexes, to study the properties of these substances, and to explore their
              biomedical and advanced technological applications.

The primary goal is to
              develop a fundamental understanding of lanthanide coordination chemistry under
              physiological or higher pH conditions with a variety of ligands, including
              those that are biologically relevant.  These efforts are aimed at producing a
              variety of unprecedented lanthanide clusters featuring highly bridging oxo and
              hydroxo groups and at elucidating the factors governing the formation of these
              novel substances.  The potential applications to be explored include contrast
              agents for biomedical imaging, luminescent materials for liquid crystal
              displays, and magnetooptical data storage.  The broad scope and modular nature
              of the work involves cross-disciplinary collaborations and provides diverse
              opportunities for training of students at all levels.  

In line with the
              proposed research, educational activities are proposed aimed at establishing a
              well-defined program in Materials Chemistry integrated into the undergraduate
              or graduate curricula at the University of Arizona.  The ultimate goal is to
              produce scientists who are capable of designing, synthesizing, characterizing,
              and testing new materials to meet the challenging demand for
              advanced-performance materials in the next century.  This educational program
              will also serve as a vehicle to disseminate chemical science to the general
              public. 

