Title       : CAREER: Biological Micro- and Nanotechnology Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0238625

Award Number: 0238625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James M. Lee                            
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shuichi Takayama takayama@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposed research is to develop micro- and
              nanotechnologies that will enable precise engineering of cellular environments
              and allow correlation of subcellular signaling with cellular function. Genomics
              has greatly advanced our knowledge concerning how biological systems are
              programmed. This "software", however, is embedded in the "hardware" of a cell,
              which interacts with its environment to compute its specific outputs such as
              growth, differentiation, or death. The micro- and nanotechnology developed in
              this project will enable control over configuration of the cellular hardware
              such as receptor clustering and cell shape. The technology will then be used to
              study how different hardware configurations affect subcellular signaling and
              cell function. Specifically, multiple laminar flow technology will be used to
              stimulate subcellular microdomains with growth factors and soft lithographic
              three-dimensional protein nanopatterning technology will be developed to
              perform nanoscale extracellular matrix engineering. The two technologies will
              provide, with subcellular resolution, control of cross-talk between growth
              factor signals and adhesive signals. This type of knowledge is specifically
              relevant to understanding physiological processes such as embryonic development
              and wound healing as well as pathological states such as fibrosis and cancer.
              The research will be tightly coupled with the education and training of a work
              force that can translate these scientific and engineering discoveries into
              tangible social and economic improvements. A major component of the educational
              program is a Biological Micro- and Nanotechnology course that will seamlessly
              integrate micro- and nanotechnology with cell biology and provide both
              theoretical training and hands-on laboratory experiences to students.
