Title       : CAREER: Investigation of Disease-Resistance Proteins in Flowering Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0238311

Award Number: 0238311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $698619             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimmen Sjolander kimmen@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this CAREER award proposal is threefold: (1) teaching and training
              in computational biology at the undergraduate and graduate levels; (2)
              continued development of computational methods for problems in molecular
              biology, and (3) new investigation, using these tools, into disease resistance
              proteins and pathways, and their effector molecules in bacteria, viruses and
              fungi.  The team will apply new algorithms and software to the analysis and
              elucidation of key determinants of innate immunity in flowering plants, to
              predict structure, function, pathway and complex involvement, and so on, for
              these important protein families.  Biologist collaborators will investigate
              these predictions experimentally, providing critical feedback.  

Since
              plants cannot move to escape pathogen attack, they have developed sophisticated
              strategies and defense mechanisms. Many of these strategies have 
corollaries
              in insects and other animals, including human. Because of this, research into
              plant disease resistance can be expected to produce insights that are relevant
              not only for genetic engineering of new strains of plants with improved disease
              resistance (and corresponding increased crop production, and reduction of world
              hunger), but also to improve our understanding of innate immunity in all
              eukaryotic organisms, and produce medical and pharmaceutical advances important
              for human health. The biologists will provide critical feedback, direction, and
              experimental validation of predictions of protein function and structure.   
              Software and database technologies will be developed to enable the
              high-throughput classification and inclusion of new plant and pathogen proteins
              as they are discovered. This synergistic collaboration is designed to combine
              both hypothesis-driven and hypothesis-generating approaches and the different
              domain expertise and background knowledge contained in the two groups into a
              unified understanding of these important protein families and pathways.

