Title       : CAREER: Biomimetic Self-Assembling Hydrogels for Delivery for Bioactive
               Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0238917

Award Number: 0238917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alyssa Panitch alyssa.panitch@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238917
Panitch
This work focuses on the synthesis and characterization of
              biomimetic, self-assembling hydrogels that are useful for delivery of bioactive
              compounds. These hydrogels will be unique in several respects: they are
              physical gels with the consistency of ointment that can be polymerized in situ
              or spread onto an area; drug release from the gels is dependant on the affinity
              of the drug for the gel; the affinity of the drug for the gel can be tailored;
              and the dissolution of the gel can be controlled based on the affinity of the
              constituents for one another. It is hypothesized that physical gels formed by
              combining peptide-modified poly(ethylene glycol) star polymers (PEG stars) and
              sulfated polysaccharides can be tailored to control both dissolution of the gel
              and release of bioactive components. It is further hypothesized that these gels
              will release bioactive components on a physiologically-relevant time scale. To
              verify these hypotheses, gels will be made with 4-arm and 8-arm PEG stars and
              heparin, chondroitin sulfate or dextran sulfate. The gels will be complemented
              with four distinct polysaccharide-binding peptides, and the release of the
              peptides will be studied. Finally, the bioactivity and physiological
              application of the gel will be tested for the case of vasorelaxation. 

The
              overall goal of the project is to develop a new class of hydrogel release
              systems. These release systems can be polymerized in situ, are soft and pliable
              and can be used in clinical situations where ointment-like materials with
              controlled release characteristics are necessary. The first target application
              is a gel that promotes vasodilation in an in vitro saphenous vein model. The
              proposed work lends itself to future work in controlled release from both
              physical gels and covalent gels; biologically- based and synthetic molecules
              can be tailored to release via similar schemes. In addition, the scaffolds can
              be used as artificial extracellular matrices, which are capable of sequestering
              factors, releasing factors and sustaining cell growth and survival. 

The
              educational component consists of curriculum development at ASU as well as
              outreach to Scottsdale Community College.  A survey course of Molecular,
              Cellular and Tissue Engineering will be developed. This class will serve
              several purposes: the opportunity for graduate students to become involved in
              course development and in teaching, the exposure of community college students
              to bioengineering and the creation of laboratory opportunities for
              undergraduate students from Scottsdale Community College. 

