Title       : CAREER: Sub-Angstrom Amplitude Atomic Force Microscopy: From Dissipation Imaging
               to Atomic Manipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0238943

Award Number: 0238943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bellave S. Shivaram                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Hoffmann hoffmann@physics.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Common Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) Techniques suffer from a number of
              fundamental difficulties limiting their usefulness in quantifying nanoscale
              interactions. The goal of this CAREER project at Wayne State University is to
              apply a novel AFM technique based on fiber interferometry and off-resonance,
              ultra-small amplitude operation to study important questions of the
              nanomechanics of individual atoms and molecules on surfaces. This includes the
              manipulation of single atoms and molecules, atomic scale energy dissipation,
              atomic bonding as a function of controlled tip and surface chemistry, atomic
              relaxation, and the relationship between AFM and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
              (STM) imaging. These questions, while of a fundamental nature, are crucial for
              the rational development of future atomic/molecular scale nanosystems. Combined
              with this study is an integrated outreach program targeting parents of school
              age children with a series of lectures and demonstrations designed to
              illustrate the excitement of scientific research and raise awareness of
              scientific careers as fulfilling career choices for their children. This
              outreach program will be conducted in collaboration with local schools and two
              local science museums. 

The future of Nanotechnology lies in the controlled
              manipulation of single atoms and molecules. This lofty goal can only be
              achieved if we gain solid knowledge of the mechanics of single atoms and
              molecules. This CAREER project at Wayne State University is designed to use a
              novel instrument, a "Sub-Angstrom Amplitude Atomic Force Microscope", to
              measure forces while manipulating single atoms and molecules, and to conduct
              complementary and important experiments on the 'nanomechanics' of single atoms.
              These studies will provide crucial knowledge necessary for the design of future
              nanometer scale devices. Research will involve graduate and undergraduate
              students at Wayne State University. In addition, the project includes a
              significant outreach component whereby parents of local school students are
              provided with an insight into the excitement of scientific research, the
              stimulating life of a university researcher, and the latest findings in Physics
              and Nanotechnology. This program, provided through local schools and two local
              science museums, is designed to raise awareness of scientific careers as
              fulfilling career choices, and to enlighten the participants about the
              importance of fundamental and applied science in our society.

