Title       : CAREER: Computer-Aided Design and Discovery of Novel Nanoporous Materials
               Through Ab Initio-Based Molecular Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0238989

Award Number: 0238989
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: KENDALL T. THOMSON   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,7237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kendall K. Thomson
Purdue University

"CAREER: Computer-Aided Design and
              Discovery of Novel Nanoporous Materials Through Ab Initio-Based Molecular
              Simulation"

The search for novel nanoporous materials is an exciting and
              active field of research. However, despite intensive investigation, discovery
              of novel nano-structured frameworks remains a mainly heuristic exercise. A key
              component in synthesizing many of these materials is the use of organic
              templating molecules that act as structure directing agents in the
              self-assembly of particular frameworks. What is needed is a means of (1)
              determining a priori which template molecules will synthesize which frameworks
              and (2) identifying what specific frameworks are possible that have not yet
              been discovered. The objective of this research is the development of a suite
              of computer tools to assist in the discovery and synthesis of novel nano-porous
              materials, and to initially apply these methods towards the discovery of novel
              titnaosilicate frameworks for gas separations and ion transport materials in
              fuel cell technology.

The proposed program suite will combine two general
              algorithms: (1) framework-template matching, in which Monte-Carlo like moves
              are used to computationally "grow" template molecules within given frameworks,
              and (2) automated framework search, in which stochastic search methods combined
              with genetic algorithms are used to  computationally search for feasible
              crystalline frameworks. In order for a molecular
modeling approach to work, a
              proper accounting of interaction potential energy is required. For this a novel
              tight-binding prescription for silicate-based frameworks has been developed
              that is at least two orders of magnitude faster than ab initio dynamics, yet
              provides an accurate representation of oxide bonding properties.  The method
              provides a fast and accurate means of incorporating full structural relaxation
              into the above
algorithms, providing more realistic framework/template
              interactions and structural stability determination than previous
              methods.

The method will initially be applied to the synthesis of
              titanosilicate frameworks of the ETS-4 and ETS-10 class, for which viable
              templates have not been identified. ETS-4 has thermal contraction properties
              that are currently exploited in gas separation technology. Suitable templates,
              if identified, could potentially alter the faulting behavior of these materials
              by directing the inter-growth of specific polytypes. This could result in
              materials with (1) novel contraction properties and (2) enhanced ion transport
              behavior, particularly applicable to fuel cell membrane technology. Further,
              novel titanosilicate frameworks with similar features to ETS-4 will be
              systematically sought.

This proposed work will also address the challenge of
              bringing the molecular simulation knowledge base to the chemical engineering
              curriculum through the following activities: (1) development of theory and
              application based molecular simulation courses for the chemical engineering
              graduate curriculum, and (2) incorporation of a primarily application based,
              molecular simulation course in the undergraduate chemical engineering
              curriculum. The objective is to familiarize the chemical engineer with the
              utility and application of molecular simulation methods such they can
              communicate with experts in the field, identify situations where molecular
              simulation may be useful, and apply the techniques to problems in chemical
              engineering. In addition to molecular simulation competence the chemical
              engineer should be proficient in general modeling.
The ability to competently
              analyze an engineering problem, formulate a working model, and extract useful
              information is key to effective problem solving capabilities, and suitable
              mathematical packages such as Mathematica can be useful teaching tools.
              Consequently, a web-based learning package will be developed that will
              emphasize the fundamentals of model building with workable Mathematica
              exercises and solutions that
span the undergraduate curriculum. The goal is to
              integrate chemical engineering problems with modern mathematical computing
              tools that raise the technological standards of chemical engineering
              education.

The impact of this development plan is expected to be broad and
              far reaching and will potentially effect every field where materials synthesis
              is required, including: catalysis, separations, sensor technology, fuel cell
              technology, nano-structured thermo-electronic materials, and nano-scale
              electric devices. The tight-binding prescription in itself represents a step
              forward in molecular simulation of zeolites and related ionic oxide materials,
              and will impact the zeolite/simulation community particularly in the areas of
              transport, adsorption, self-assembly and nucleation science, and zeolite
              isomorphic substitution chemistry. At the same time, by combining the discovery
              of new materials with the educational impact of incorporating simulation
              methods in the classroom, these proposed research and education activities
              offer an integrated program that serves the greater academic community through
              aggressive outreach and undergraduate enlightenment.


