Title       : CAREER: Efficient Network Design and Routing Algorithms for Logistics and
               Communications Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0238815

Award Number: 0238815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  5006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ozlem Ergun oergun@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
              research project is to develop state-of-the-art fast solution methodologies
              that generate high quality solutions for complex problems in designing and
              managing logistics and communications networks.  Real-world communications and
              logistics problems are large-scale, time sensitive, and coupled with side
              constraints that further contribute to the hardness of underlying mathematical
              structures.  The specific tasks that will be undertaken for achieving the goal
              of this project include:  understanding the applications in detail, analyzing
              the underlying mathematical structures, and evaluating the various solution
              approaches through computational testing. A logistics network rarely functions
              as planned due to external factors such as unscheduled delays or dynamically
              changing customer demand. The main thrust of the proposal is a study on
              techniques for augmenting a given solution in order to incorporate a disruption
              to a large-scale system. In the literature, these types of problems are usually
              solved by extracting a subset of the problem through preprocessing and then
              re-solving this smaller problem. This research, proposes to develop techniques
              that consider a large part of the problem by designing auxiliary networks
              together with fast augmentation algorithms that find near optimal solutions in
              almost real-time. Also, two important network design and routing problems
              related to: (i) identifying synergies in a collaborative logistics network, and
              (ii) routing multiple packets on partially disjoint paths over a communications
              network, will be studied as collaborative research projects.  

With the
              advancement of globalization and new technologies in telecommunications, not
              only does the importance of solving network problems keep growing but also this
              task is becoming harder to accomplish efficiently.  For example, global trade
              has created logistics networks that span several continents, and the
              possibility of real-time multi-media communications introduced network problems
              that need to be solved in less than a second. To face this challenge, it is
              necessary to employ fast approximation (heuristic) algorithms that try to find
              good solutions rather than identify an optimal one. This research plan proposes
              (i) to study fast heuristic techniques for generating close to optimal
              solutions for large-scale and time-sensitive logistics and communications
              network applications that are implementable in practice and (ii) to further the
              theoretical understanding of problems arising from these applications.
