Title       : CAREER: High Quality and Efficient Rendering of Discrete Primitives for
               Interactive Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0238486

Award Number: 0238486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Baoquan Chen baoquan@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Over the past decades, most of the previous graphics and visualization systems
              are polygon based. However, with the advent of scientific simulations and
              advanced biomedical and industrial acquisition devices, more and more objects
              of unprecedented size are produced with discrete samples as natural
              representations. In this proposal, the PI will generalize image resampling
              theory to describe the fundamental resampling problem of graphics rendering.
              Guided by this theory, practical approaches to performing high quality and
              efficient resampling will be designed and further applied to the rendering of
              various discrete objects, including 2D image warping, volume rendering, and
              point-based rendering. The developed theory will also used to guide the design
              of new point-based representation, so that discrete primitives as well as
              polygons can be rendered in a unified rendering system.  

The newly designed
              algorithms will be validated and disseminated through application to mainly two
              real-world applications that the PI has already been collaborating on. The
              volume rendering algorithms will be used to visualize large simulations, in
              areas such as aerodynamics, astrophysics, and chemical contamination
              dispersion. The point-based modeling and rendering algorithms will be used to
              build point-based models from modern laser range scans and ultimately provide
              an interactive system for digital architecture design.  This validation and
              dissemination are achieved by pursuing a vigorous education plan, undertaking a
              number of complementary initiatives: (1) developing new graduate and
              undergraduate courses at the University of Minnesota; (2) developing
              educational software for teaching;  and (3) other activities including
              organizing workshops and tutorials. 

Intellectual Merits: The algorithms
              coherently designed using the resampling theory represent improved rendering
              techniques for scientific visualization systems by delivering higher quality
              and better efficiency. The proposed research is well built upon the PI's solid
              knowledge and extensive experience with image and volume resampling and
              antialiasing, as well as accelerated  volume and polygon rendering. 

Broader
              Impacts: The proposed career development plan will not only advance the
              state-of-the-art of scientific visualization and computer graphics, but also
              make significant contributions to many other research fields which are
              facilitated by advanced scientific visualization, besides the ones being used
              for methodology validation and dissemination during the course of this project.
              Possibilities in these fields will likely open, stimulating even more
              applications of the technology than originally conceived. 


