Title       : CAREER: Molecular-Scale Interactions Between Microbes and Surfaces in the
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0238627

Award Number: 0238627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri A. Camesano terric@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0238627   Camesano   Protection of drinking water from pathogenic contamination
              represents a growing concern since 50% of the population in the U.S. relies on
              groundwater for drinking water, and as few as 10-12 colony forming units (CFUs)
              of some strains of Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae can cause infection.
              The objectives of the proposed work are to characterize the surfaces of
              pathogenic and non-pathogenic microorganisms at the single-molecule level, and
              to relate the physical and chemical properties of these biopolymers to
              bacterial adhesion to "clean" and organic-coated surfaces. Our single-molecule
              approaches to studying iopolymer-mediated bacterial adhesion allow us to
              uncouple the complex physicochemical phenomena causing bacterial adhesion.  The
              results of our work will be instrumental to modelers trying to predict the
              spread of pathogens in the environment (through intentional or accidental
              releases), to practitioners developing treatment technologies for drinking and
              wastewater, for the development of bio-barrier containment systems for
              subsurface microorganisms, and for all industries or problems that involve
              biofilms, from marine biofouling to clinical treatment of patients.
The
              objectives of the educational program are to promote creativity and enhance
              learning through a continuum of experiences aimed at the pre-college through
              the graduate level.  Students must gain an appreciation for the excitement of
              scientific research, and then learn to read and interpret scientific
              literature, design, perform, and analyze experiments, and communicate their
              findings. This is most successful when students are challenged to solve
              real-life environmental engineering problems by applying fundamental principles
              of engineering and science as well as novel technologies. Toward this end, I
              propose i) outreach activities through the form of summer camps for high-school
              aged female and minority students, which will create excitement about bacterial
              adhesion research through exposure to lab experiments and contact with more
              senior-level students and faculty, ii) mentored research experiences for
              first-year undergrads in a bacterial adhesion lab, iii) international research
              experiences for upper-level undergraduates at a chemical engineering school in
              France, iv) opportunities for graduate students to mentor undergraduate
              projects, v) improved  undergraduate and graduate courses by introducing more
              problem-solving, laboratories, and real-world problems into to the
              curriculum.

