Title       : CAREER: Ru and Cu Amido Complexes: Aryl Coupling, C-H Activation and C-N
               Multiple Bond Metathesis Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0238167

Award Number: 0238167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Gunnoe brent_gunnoe@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Dr. T. Brent Gunnoe of North Carolina State University to
              exploit low valent ruthenium and copper amido complexes to break and form bonds
              in transformations involving C-H and C-N bonds.  For example, biaryl moieties
              are prevalent in an array of important compounds including natural products
              (e.g., terpenes, lignanes, flavonoids, coumarins, tannins and various
              alkaloids) as well as compounds for nonlinear optics, helical polymers, liquid
              crystals, ligands for asymmetric catalysis and for use in redox reactions.  The
              leading methods for preparation of biaryl linkages involve cross coupling
              between aryl halogen and organometallic aryl species; however, such reactions
              often suffer from the requirement of multi-step syntheses of aryl halide and
              aryl organometallic reagents, and, in some cases, the use of organometallic
              aryl compounds results in the stoichiometric production of toxic byproducts. 
              The proposed chemistry seeks to study the details of ruthenium and
              copper-mediated C-C coupling reactions that proceed via cleavage of C-H bonds. 
              Oxidation of well-defined ruthenium and copper amido complexes promotes such
              reactions, and both detailed mechanistic studies and possible extension to
              catalytic sequences will be pursued.  In addition, the synthesis of polymers
              that contain heteroatomic functionality is of current interest due to the
              ability to control macroscopic properties.  Ruthenium amido complexes have been
              used to cleave C-N multiple bonds, and the proposed chemistry will explore
              these reactions in detail including possible extension to polymerization
              methodologies.     

The teaching plan describes a range of activities in
              both undergraduate and graduate instruction including revision of the
              departmental curriculum and upper level courses, working toward increased
              research opportunities for undergraduates, and integration of a program into
              the graduate curriculum that: (1) incorporates a graduate student-based
              outreach program to schools (grades 6th - 8th) whose populations are comprised
              primarily of groups that are underrepresented in the sciences (2) exposes
              graduate students to current topics of research ethics and (3) provides
              graduate students with a guided teaching experience.

The proposed chemistry
              seeks to exploit the reactivity of metal complexes for the construction of
              small organic molecules that form the foundation for many useful products.  The
              teaching plan involves both undergraduate and graduate instruction including
              revision of the departmental curriculum and upper level courses, increasing
              research opportunities for undergraduates and outreach to local schools.

