Title       : CAREER: Representation of Natural Auditory Scenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0238351

Award Number: 0238351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Lewicki lewicki@cnbc.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award.  Its goal is to
              develop a multidisciplinary research and educational program for investigating
              the underlying theoretical and computational principles of how biological
              systems represent the natural environment. Biological sensory systems have
              evolved to survive in a sensory environment that is complex and dynamic, and
              even the simplest organisms can perform remarkable feats of signal processing.
              The motivation of the program is to advance our scientific understanding of
              biological sensory systems and to improve our design of artificial sensory
              systems.

The general aim of this research program is to gain theoretical
              insight into auditory sensory codes and processing using information theoretic
              models that have thus-far been applied primarily to vision. A further aim is to
              extend these theories to address some of their important limitations and deal
              with computational problems specific to audition. The research projects are
              designed (1) to determine if efficient coding of natural sounds predicts
              response properties and population characteristics of auditory nerve fibers;
              (2) to determine how different sounds classes, such as speech or music,
              influence the properties of the theoretically optimal code; (3) to determine if
              efficient coding theory capture non-stationary acoustic structures using a
              spike timing code; and (4) to extend the theoretical framework to incorporate
              gain control and noise level in order to account for important non-linear
              properties of auditory sensory coding.  

If successful, this research will
              provide a fundamental theoretical understanding of the nature of the auditory
              code and its relation to the acoustic environment. This project aims to offer
              insights into the organization of the population of auditory nerve tuning and
              phase-locking properties, the acoustic cues for auditory stream segmentation,
              the neural representation of sounds such as musical notes and speech phonemes,
              and the role of feedback via the outer hair cells. These advances will also
              have impact beyond the auditory system and many of these results will also have
              application to theories of visual sensory coding. The results of this research
              will provide deeper insights into the information theoretic principles of
              sensory coding, and ultimately will contribute to the creation of functional
              and robust artificial sensory systems.  

This CAREER award recognizes and
              supports the early career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is
              likely to become an academic leader of the twenty-first century.  The broader
              impacts of this project include development of interdisciplinary curriculum
              uniting computer science, neuroscience, and cognitive psychology.  A new course
              will teach advanced undergraduates and graduates advanced aspects of
              perception, scene analysis, and recognition in both the visual and auditory
              modalities, concentrating on aspects that are essential for interacting with
              natural, complex environments.  The scientific results of the research will
              contribute to improved computer technology capable of better recognizing sounds
              from the natural environment.

