Title       : CAREER: Coordinated Control from Deformable Virtual Structures with Dynamic
               Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0238461

Award Number: 0238461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Masayoshi Tomizuka                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristi A. Morgansen morgansen@aa.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The use of multiple vehicles for the achievement of a joint task
produces an
              operational setting with greater flexibility, robustness
and coverage for a
              lower cost than is possible with single vehicles or
stationary sensing
              networks.  When the operational environment for
such vehicles is complex,
              dynamic or contains operational hazards,
individual vehicles must have the
              ability to respond quickly and with
a high level of maneuverability.  The
              focus of the work in this
project is the development and implementation of
              control theoretic
methods for coordination of groups of agile vehicles coupled
              through
communication and operating in dynamic environments.  The need
              for
development of these methods arises when traditional design
methodologies
              fail due to the operation of autonomous systems in the
presence of a strong
              coupling between dynamic information flow and
underlying system dynamics.  The
              work will be primarily driven by
challenges arising in the coordinated control
              of agile underwater
vehicles, however, the results will also have high impact
              for tasks
such as vision-based reconnaissance with aircraft in hazardous
              urban
environments. 

The particular combination of agility, dynamic
              communication and
operational uncertainty requires that the communication
              and
coordination elements of coordinated control be considered jointly
rather
              than independently.  The objectives of this project are (1)
develop a
              deformable virtual structures approach to cooperative
control which
              simultaneously captures the constraints imposed by
limited communication and
              by vehicle constraints, and (2) develop
dynamic communication structures that
              are sufficient to guarantee
stability and coherence of the virtual structure. 
              The group of
vehicles is treated as a virtual, deformable body which is
              effectively
underactuated due to velocity and motion constraints on
              the
constituent vehicles and the physical constraints necessary to
maintain
              communication between the vehicles. The constituent vehicles
then become shape
              actuators for the evolution and motion planning for 
this new class of virtual
              mechanical systems with lumped, dynamic mass
properties.  The communication
              structure of the vehicles is assumed to
be dynamic with the transmission
              connections treated as control
variables.  Construction of communication
              patterns is addressed via
periodic sequences chosen using geometric and graph
              theoretic tools.
The governing equations for the resulting virtual structure
              then
describe an underactuated mechanical system with both discrete
              time
actuation and oscillatory dynamics.  Analysis and construction
              of
feedback control for such systems is addressed by developing a new
notion
              of averaging and state feedback.  

Research targeted to applications and
              implementation in underwater
autonomous vehicles provides a captivating venue
              for education at all
levels.  The issues arising in such settings have broad
              theoretical
implications as well as the appeal of hands-on experience. 
              To
strengthen and broaden interaction between control theory and fields
such
              as biology and computer science, undergraduate courses in control
theory will
              be redesigned to make the tools of control theory
material accessible to
              students with non-traditional engineering
backgrounds.  Additional graduate
              courses will also be developed that
provide not only a rigorous theoretical
              background in individual
elements of control theory or communications but that
              also provide 
tools for developing interdisciplinary methods and application
              of
those methods.  Closely integrated with the research and
              educational
components of the project are mentoring and outreach activities
              based
around the construction of an interactive web site.  This
              component
involves not only undergraduate and graduate students as
              developers,
but K-12 students and educators as active users and participants
              in
the research lab.  The site will contain scientific information about
the
              different components of autonomous vehicle design and control as
well as
              interactive tools for exploring application of control and
communication
              methodologies to lab vehicles. 

