Title       : CAREER: Mechanics of the Physical-Biological Interface: Mechanotransduction of
               Endothelial Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0238910

Award Number: 0238910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Butler pjb28@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238910
Butler
Blood forced through arteries by the pumping action of the
              heart exerts shear stresses on the endothelial cells (ECs) that line the
              arteries. ECs respond to shear stress by producing substances that affect blood
              vessel diameter, blood coagulation, the adhesion of white blood cells to the
              vessel wall, and the leakiness of the artery wall to water, proteins and
              cholesterol. Therefore,studies of EC-sensitivity to shear stress will lead to
              an understanding of how ECs signal the blood vessel to control blood flow,
              immune responses, and the delivery of nutrients to the tissues. In certain
              cases, shear stress can cause ECs to become dysfunctional, a situation which
              leads to hypertension, atherosclerosis and other vascular diseases.
              

Methodologies used to study EC-sensitivity to shear stress range from
              studies in animals, tissues, cells, cell components to molecules.  Molecules
              (lipids and proteins)responsible for detecting force reside in specialized
              structures in the EC-membrane and these structures have unique physical
              characteristics (their lipid components exist in a liquid-ordered (gel)phase). 
              A molecule's activity is regulated, in part, by the dynamics of molecules
              around it. Therefore, the proposed research seeks to measure the effects of
              fluid force on the dynamics of molecules located in these specialized
              structures. 

To measure the dynamics (e.g. rotation rate, lateral diffusion)
              of single molecules in membrane subdomains, the PI proposes to combine (i)
              polarized laser light delivered at very short, controlled pulses, (ii) the
              preference of certain fluorescent lipid-like molecules for specialized domains
              in the cell membrane, and (iii) the use of optics and fast-response light
              detection. The PI will combine powerful spectroscopic and microscopy tools to
              investigate molecular dynamics in subcellular membrane domains in single cells
              subjected to shear stress. 

The PI hypothesizes that shear stress may
              perturb lipids in membrane microdomains, which, in turn, alters the dynamics of
              membrane bound proteins important in mechanotransduction. To test this
              hypothesis the PI proposes to (i) measure the effects of shear stress and
              membrane modifications on the signaling through three classes of membrane
              receptors: peripheral membrane proteins (G-proteins), cytoskeleton-linked
              integral membrane proteins (integrins) and non-cytoskeleton-linked integral
              membrane proteins (receptor tyrosine kinase, flk-1),(ii)to measure the effects
              of shear stress and membrane modification on the rotational and lateral
              dynamics of these molecules using novel fluorescent probes, and (iii)to measure
              the spatio-temporal aspects of the effects of shear stress on membrane phase
              sub-domains in endothelial cells. A central feature of this proposal is to
              integrate these scientific aims with educational aims to incorporate physical,
              applied, life, and clinical sciences and Bioethics in the education and
              training of undergraduate and graduate students. As part of a detailed plan to
              integrate research and education, the PI will act as co-director and
              educational director in a Penn State Summer Institute (PSSI)for Biomaterials
              and Bionanotechnology that is jointly funded by NIH and NSF. 

