Title       : CAREER: Artificial Learning Control Systems for Performance Critical
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238993

Award Number: 0238993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric N. Johnson eric.johnson@ae.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of human-like (or better) intelligent control, and systems that combine
              the best elements of human operators and machines to achieve a more capable
              whole, is held by many researchers. Controllers with intermediate levels of
              intelligence and adaptability (between current systems and human-like control)
              are significant for at least two reasons: (1) They are a stepping-stone to the
              more capable systems envisioned; and (2) They have important practical uses in
              their own right, as part of semi-intelligent systems or utilized as an element
              of more capable human/machine systems.

This project will depart from
              previous important and useful artificial neural network (NN) adaptive control
              methods, based on a dynamic inverse or feedback linearization controller and a
              neural network trained online. This class of adaptive control has recently been
              extended by the principal investigator to include plants that are not feedback
              linearizable (even approximately). These methods have distinct advantages for
              performance critical applications (i.e., those where safety, economic
              pressures, or other factors imply that the probability of system failure must
              be minimized), because of rapid response to new uncertainties and important
              theoretical stability results. A new approach will be taken, which retains the
              advantages described above, but utilizes untapped potential of NN adaptive
              controllers to enable the system to learn the plant over all state and control
              space for which information is available, including information given a priori,
              recorded data, and current state. It will explore this idea of simultaneous
              online training and training on recorded past data within other adaptive
              control frameworks. The development of these approaches is hoped to lead to
              many important new applications of performance critical controllers,
              applications that generally required a human "touch" to achieve acceptable
              performance (and also require stability and robustness guarantees), examples
              include: aspects of factory automation (those where uncertainty is not
              negligible), ground vehicle control, construction equipment, integrated
              avionics, spacecraft docking, and flight control. This predicted impact is
              based on providing an important element of what humans can do as controllers:
              become highly proficient at controlling a plant over a large segment of state
              and control space, yet also able to respond to a sudden change in plant
              dynamics.

