Title       : Murid Rodent Phylogenetics Using Multiple Nuclear Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0238837

Award Number: 0238837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald M. Adkins radkins1@utmem.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott J. Steppan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      62 S. Dunlap
	      Memphis, TN  38163    901/448-5541

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ronald Adkins at the University of Tennessee to
              work in collaboration with Dr. Scott Steppan of Florida State University to
              study the evolutionary relationships of the largest family of mammals (Muridae)
              which includes the common mouse and rat.  Although Muridae includes one fourth
              of all mammals and has immense importance to agriculture, disease, and
              biomedical research, the relationships among these species distributed
              throughout the world are extremely unclear.  Drs. Adkins and Steppan are
              sequencing DNA from several genes from a large number of species in this group.
               Based on computer analysis of the patterns of mutation among the species, the
              evolutionary tree of Muridae will be reconstructed.
	The laboratory mouse and
              rat are the premier research models for human disease and will soon have their
              entire genomes sequenced.  Additionally, serious diseases, such as plague and
              hantavirus, are spread by parasites harbored by some members of Muridae.  Rats,
              mice and their relatives are also major agricultural consumers and under
              certain conditions can account for over half of the plant material eaten by
              herbivores.  Significantly, the worldwide distribution of Muridae grants them a
              unique role in understanding the climatological, geological, and ecological
              changes that have shaped the world.  Having the evolutionary tree of these
              species will clarify the large-scale genomic changes that distinguish rodents
              from other mammals (including humans) and will greatly facilitate our
              understanding of their roles as biomedical models, disease vectors, engines of
              ecological change, and will allow us to reconstruct the history of this group
              in the context of ancient geological and climatological events. 

