Title       : CARRER: Empirical Methods for Machine Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0238406

Award Number: 0238406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: I.Dan Melamed melamed@cs.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research supported by this five-year continuing award will attempt to
              improve the quality and reliability of automatic ("machine") translation
              between human languages.  Although automatic translation services abound on the
              Web, they are more often a source of entertainment than a source of useful
              information.  Real advances in this technology can promote communication and
              understanding between people from different cultures, and grease the wheels of
              international commerce.

The main vehicle for this research will be a new
              formalism called Structured Models of Translational Equivalence (SMoTEs). 
              SMoTEs express the translational equivalence relation between the linguistic
              structures of two or more languages.  SMoTEs combine the best of the
              rationalist and empiricist approaches to building machine translation systems. 
              They are induced from real data, for broad coverage, for graceful degradation,
              and for rapid adaptation to new domains.  Yet, unlike existing statistical
              translation models, SMoTEs explicitly represent the structures hidden in
              linguistic data.  By modeling linguistic structure, SMoTEs can capture
              important linguistic generalizations that enable them to make more accurate
              predictions in a wider variety of contexts.  SMoTEs are based on a new class of
              formal grammars, which is a multidimensional generalization of some
              well-understood existing classes of grammars.  The connection between the
              formal foundations of SMoTEs and the formal foundations of much previous
              research lays the groundwork for adopting many current and future monolingual
              techniques, such as parsing and grammar factoring, in the service of
              multilingual applications.  Thus, SMoTEs have the potential to become a
              catalyst for rapid progress in machine translation.

Long-term progress in
              machine translation will depend on future generations of language researchers
              and engineers.  For this purpose, an ambitious educational program will
              complement the research supported by this award.  The centerpiece of this
              program will be several new courses in language engineering at NYU's Department
              of Computer Science.  Other educational goals include the creation of a machine
              translation research group, and expanded community outreach through the New
              York City NLP Forum.

