Title       : CAREER: Connecting Structural Order to Thermodynamic and Kinetic Properties of
               Aqueous Solutions: A Research and Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0238772

Award Number: 0238772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Errington jerring@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jeffrey R. Errington
SUNY Buffalo

"Connecting Structural Order to
              Thermodynamic and Kinetic Properties of Aqueous Solutions: A Research and
              Education Program."

A research project dedicated to gaining a fundamental
              understanding of the relationship between
the macroscopic thermodynamic and
              kinetic properties of aqueous solutions and their underlying microscopic
              structure is described. In addition, several initiatives to enhance
              undergraduate and graduate education in the field of molecular modeling as well
              as programs to promote science and engineering in the local and global
              community are presented.

The behavior of water and aqueous mixtures plays a
              key role in biology, chemistry, physics, and
the design of many chemical and
              biological processes. In aqueous systems, directional interactions (hydrogen
              bonds) combine with short-range repulsions to determine the relative
              orientation of neighboring molecules as well as their instantaneous separation.
              These seemingly simple underlying interactions result in macroscopic behavior
              that is complex and poorly understood. The objective of this investigation is
              to provide a deeper understanding of the connection between the macroscopic
              behavior and microscopic interactions in aqueous systems. A further
              understanding of this connection will be beneficial from both a scientific and
              industrial standpoint.

Within this proposal, a novel formalism for
              interrogating the behavior of aqueous systems is introduced. The new approach
              addresses two limitations of previous studies. First, the concept of
              quantifying structural order is utilized to bring quantitative rigor to the
              characterization of structural properties. This route is opposed to the
              examination of mainly phenomenological indicators of solution structure that
              has been employed in earlier studies. Second, a novel technique for calculating
              thermodynamic properties of solvation, based on transition matrix Monte Carlo
              concepts, is presented. The new method addresses many of the deficiencies of
              existing methods and provides a means for calculating thermodynamic properties
              that were previously intractable. 

The goal of the proposed study is to
              obtain a more complete understanding of three classes of solutes in water:
              ions, carbohydrates, and amino acids. Each of the selected systems exhibits
              unique behavior and presents distinct challenges for investigation. The
              proposal calls for the examination of individual solutes as well as mixtures of
              solutes in aqueous solution. The three systems selected enjoy both scientific
              and industrial relevance. Ionic solutions play a key role in geology and their
              role in corrosion is important to the auto industry. Carbohydrates are an
              important energy source for plants and animals and are used extensively in the
              development of pharmaceuticals. Amino acids are the subunits of proteins, and
              as such are of fundamental importance to metabolic processes as well as to the
              development of biotechnologies. 

On the education front, recognizing that
              nanotechnologies and other applications where a molecular-level approach is
              employed are emerging fields for employment of chemical engineers, a proposal
              for curriculum development, which features courses on molecular modeling at
              both the undergraduate and graduate level, is presented. In addition, an
              outreach program for the PI and a plan for the PI to organize of an outreach
              program for undergraduate students is described. The goals of these initiatives
              are to promote science in the local community, excite students about science
              and mathematics at a young age, and to improve the retention rate of sophomore
              and junior undergraduates. Finally, a plan to develop a web-based microscopic
              learning center is presented. The objective of this initiative is to provide
              the global community with modules that describe scientific phenomena from a
              microscopic perspective. From the proposed web site, teachers from all over the
              world will be able to download material for use in their courses.

