Title       : Management of Precursors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0238991

Award Number: 0238991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Proctor P. Reid preid@nae.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Many accidents result from a series of events, "an accident chain", with events
              occurring in just the right, or more aptly, just the wrong way.  The events
              that precede and lead up to the accident are termed "precursors," and they
              represent a rich source of information to project extreme events, assess risk
              exposure, and determine appropriate risk mitigation measures.
Because
              precursor events can be used to understand and mitigate future risk exposure,
              industries have developed analytical techniques and management approaches for
              detecting, modeling, and acting on precursor signals.  These industry methods
              have been developed largely in isolation from each other and pollination of
              methods across industries has been limited.  
This study will provide a
              platform for sharing accident precursor methodologies across industries, and
              will scope future research directions and challenges in precursor management. 
              The study, to be conducted by a committee of experts from the risk management
              and engineering communities, will analyze precursor methodologies in the
              airline, chemical, health care and nuclear industries, among others.  These
              industries face the common challenge of mitigating against low-probability,
              high-impact events, yet are dissimilar enough such that approaches have evolved
              with limited cross-industry sharing. 

The study will include a review of the
              literature, expert testimony, two workshops, committee deliberations and other
              fact-finding activities.  The study will culminate in a National Academy of
              Engineering consensus report that incorporates committee findings and workshop
              proceedings. The report will:
1.	Present a framework for understanding
              precursor events in the context accident sequences.  This framework will have
              cross-industry applicability and be consistent with current industry practices.
                
2.	Highlight research findings in modeling precursors and present future
              research directions and challenges.
3.	Examine the success of mandatory and
              voluntary reporting systems in capturing precursor data.  The report will
              present the factors, policies, and methods that can affect the performance of
              these systems.
4.	Present the successes and challenges of designing warning
              systems for the automated detection and diagnosis of precursor events.  
The
              report will provide industry practitioners, researchers in risk management and
              safety science, policy makers, and public-sector agencies with guidance on
              using precursors for risk mitigation.  It is envisioned that the report will
              benefit a broad range of industries and disciplines in mitigating against
              events for which there may be little, if any, direct experience.   


