Title       : SBIR Phase II: Visualizing Arbitrary Basis Functions for Advanced Engineering
               Analysis and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0238964

Award Number: 0238964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Schroeder will.schroeder@kitware.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kitware Inc
	      469 Clifton Corporate Parkway
	      Clifton Park, NY  12065    518/371-3971

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project will create
              general-purpose software tools for visualizing the results of advanced
              numerical simulation. Simulation techniques, which make up a large part of the
              multi-billion dollar CAD/CAM/CAE market, are widely used to design and build
              the majority of products manufactured today. Visualization plays an important
              role in this process by transforming simulation results into images which
              designers, engineers, and scientists can use to understand and communicate
              about their products. Recent advances in numerical simulation provide an
              opportunity for methods based on higher-order basis functions.  These functions
              better model curved geometry and are more accurate than conventional techniques
              employing linear approximation functions. The use of this technology is limited
              by a lack of general-purpose visualization software tools for higher-order
              methods. Providing these tools will accelerate the adoption of this technology
              into the marketplace resulting in software that will produce superior product
              designs, in shorter time, and at lower cost. An adaptive tessellation process
              that converts higher-order basis into linear graphics primitives and preserves
              the visual accuracy of the solution, while maintaining interactive graphics
              performance, is proposed.

This technology will be licensed and add-on
              adaptors will be offered that will enable vendors to easily and efficiently
              interface their systems to this technology.

