Title       : CAREER: High-End Computing in Environmental Engineering With Application to
               Subsurface Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0238623

Award Number: 0238623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gnanamanikam Mahinthakumar gmkumar@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0238623   Mahinthakumar   Accurate characterization of the subsurface is an
              important element in the development of reliable and efficient groundwater
              management practices. Accurate and reliable estimation of hydraulic
              conductivity distribution, contaminant distribution, and/or contaminant source
              release history is necessary for problems such as estimating groundwater
              yields, design of efficient cleanup strategies, and identifying responsible
              parties in a contamination incident. This requires solution of an inverse
              problem because direct measurement of detailed subsurface properties is not
              feasible. Inverse problems are difficult to solve and are computationally
              demanding. This multidisciplinary CAREER proposal will investigate novel
              computational strategies for the efficient solution of large-scale inverse
              problems in subsurface characterization.
A major focus of this career proposal
              is to investigate the use of hybrid genetic algorithm - local search (GA-LS)
              approaches and parallel computing for subsurface characterization inverse
              problems by developing a flexible prototype test environment.
The proposed
              development will target parallel supercomputers as well as emerging computing
              environments such as the computational grid.  Several new ideas will be
              explored in this proposal to improve the efficiency and flexibility of the
              approach. The computational approach will be rigorously tested and validated
              using a number of subsurface characterization problems including case studies,
              published field results, and application to field problems in North Carolina
              through collaboration with North Carolina
Department of Environment and
              Natural Resources (NCDENR). The testing and validation activities will lead to
              a greater understanding of using hybrid GA-LS algorithms for a wide range of
              subsurface characterization problems and may lead to further improvements of
              the approaches.
Currently there are no concerted efforts in bringing
              computational science content into environmental engineering education. The
              educational activities will focus on bridging the gap between environmental
              engineering and computational science by integrating several components of the
              proposed research into existing and new courses. Research activities in inverse
              modeling, subsurface characterization, GA-LS algorithms, and parallel computing
              will be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses. One of these
              courses, an entry-level graduate course, will be targeted for the NCSU Distance
              Education Program. An interactive training module will be developed to
              introduce different inverse modeling approach to students and practitioners.
              Easy access to this module will be provided via the web for educators and
              practitioners throughout the nation. Introduction of computational science
              education to minority environmental engineering students will be pursued
              through collaboration with North Carolina A&T State University. These
              educational activities will impact computational science education among
              environmental engineering students and practitioners. The collaborations with
              NCDENR will result in the transfer of knowledge to practitioners and policy
              makers in North Carolina. These activities are expected to foster long-term
              relationships between the PI and NCDENR in research and educational activities
              beyond the proposal period. In addition to publications and professional
              presentations, a conscious effort will be made to quickly disseminate teaching
              materials, research methodologies and findings, and software through a project
              web page.

