Title       : CAREER: Characterization of Plant RNase P and Examination of its Utility as a
               Functional Genomics Tool
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0238233

Award Number: 0238233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $746713             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Gopalan gopalan.5@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1154,1187,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ribonuclease P (RNase P) is a ubiquitous and essential ribonucleoprotein (RNP)
              involved in tRNA biogenesis.  Bacterial RNase P consists of a catalytic RNA
              subunit and a protein cofactor.  While the RNA subunits of most archaeal and
              all eukaryal RNase P contain several of the critical and conserved secondary
              structural elements present in their bacterial counterpart, they are not
              catalytically active in vitro in the absence of their multiple protein
              subunits, whose number varies from four to ten depending on the source.  Since
              both the RNA and protein subunits are essential for function in vivo in all
              organisms, RNase P serves as a paradigm for understanding how proteins modulate
              RNA function. Moreover, the variations in the functional assignment and
              composition of subunits in the three domains of life provide a unique
              opportunity to evaluate if RNase P represents an early RNA enzyme progressing
              through evolutionary stages to an RNA-protein enzyme in which proteins have
              usurped most of the functions originally carried out by the RNA.  Proteins
              could have also been recruited to facilitate subcellular targeting and
              spatio-temporal control of RNase P expression.  Any insight in this regard
              would provide some vindication of the provocative RNA world hypothesis. The
              long-term goal of this research is to use plant RNase P as a model system for
              understanding the complex subunit make-up of eukaryal RNase P in a
              multi-cellular organism and also employ this knowledge to exploit plant RNase P
              for targeted degradation of endogenous mRNAs, an application that would
              facilitate discovery of gene-function relationships. This project will help
              build a network of academic collaborations and strengthen the infrastructure
              for research at a land grant institution. The dual aims of fostering learning
              and advancing discovery in biochemistry, plant molecular biology and
              biotechnology will continue to be accomplished by innovatively integrating
              state of the art multi-dimensional research training and education for
              undergraduates, graduates, and postdoctoral scholars.	
