Title       : CAREER: Optical Spectroscopy and Imaging for Understanding the Interrelation of
               Molecular and Ultrastructural Changes in Neoplastic Cells and Early Cancer
               Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0238903

Award Number: 0238903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vadim Backman v-backman@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238903
Backman
Under this CAREER award, the advances of optical spectroscopy
              and imaging will be bridged to those of molecular biology to investigate the
              dynamics of the alterations of the organization of epithelial cells undergoing
              precancerous and early cancerous transformations. A novel spectroscopic imaging
              technique that utilizes light elastically scattered by living epithelial cells
              and enables quantitative characterization of the cell and tissue micro- and
              nano-architecture without tissue processing will be developed. This technique
              will be applied to correlate the ultrastructural and morphological changes in
              the living epithelial cells with specific molecular events associated with the
              development of neoplasia, to establish how the cell organization and molecular
              events are interrelated and affect the development of cancer, and to evaluate
              the usefulness of these findings for the purposes of the detection and
              diagnosis of precancerous and early cancerous transformations in the colon. In
              these studies, experimental model of colon carcinogenesis (azoxymethane-treated
              rats) and human tissues will be utilized. To enable the development of the
              light scattering spectroscopic imaging, realistic analytical and numerical
              models of light scattering by inhomogeneous tissue structures will be
              developed, and the origins of light scattering signatures in the living
              epithelial cells will be identified. One of the long-term outcomes of this
              project would be the development of a novel optical technique to risk-stratify
              patients for colon neoplasia and to non-invasively diagnose colon and,
              potentially, other types of cancer. 

The objective of the educational plan
              is to integrate the traditional engineering and physical aspects of the medical
              imaging curriculum with these of the contemporary biology and medicine. To
              achieve this goal, an innovative component of the medical imaging curriculum
              will be developed. This component will consist of three new integrative
              interdisciplinary courses: Optical Imaging and Microscopy, Advanced Physical
              Optics, and Clinical Experience in Medical Imaging. The curriculum will bridge
              the physical and engineering principles with the biological and clinical
              applications of optical imaging and other imaging modalities. Furthermore,
              students will learn how the medical imaging is used in clinical practice by
              rotating through various clinical sub-specialties where medical imaging is
              extensively used. 

