Title       : CAREER: Synthetic Models of Nitrile Hydratase to Elucidate Electronic and Second
               Coordination Sphere Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0238137

Award Number: 0238137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig A. Grapperhaus grapperhaus@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Prof. Craig A. Grapperhaus at the University of Louisville
              to evaluate the potential roles of sulfur site oxygenation in the enzyme
              nitrile hydratase.  This enzyme catalyzes the hydration of nitriles to amides
              by using iron in a non-redox role.  A series of complexes that: (1) serve as an
              effective structural and electronic mimic of the active site, (2) contain two
              thiolate sulfurs cis to the substrate binding site that are reactive with
              oxygen, and (3) are easily modified with respect to the exogenous, sixth ligand
              and incorporation of second-coordination sphere functionalities on the ligand
              framework will be developed.  If successful, this study will not only further
              the understanding of nitrile hydratase leading to the design of functional
              mimics, but will also serve the fundamental goal of developing and
              understanding sulfur-site reactivity and its ramifications on the properties
              and reactivity of a coordinated metal.  

The educational goals are focused
              on increasing undergraduate research participation as a means to increase
              student retention, graduation rates, and interest in graduate school in this
              traditionally under-performing region.  This approach focuses on four key
              components:  a formal Undergraduate Research Mentor Program to address local
              concerns, a regional, annual undergraduate research  symposium, the involvement
              of undergraduate students in the proposed research and outreach to regional
              undergraduate institutions through site visits each semester. 

This research
              focuses on the design of metal complexes to understand sulfur-site reactivity
              in an important enzyme.  This will aid the development of functional models for
              the industrially and environmentally important conversion of nitriles to
              amides.  The project will also increase the participation of undergraduates in
              research as a way to increase student interest in science.

