Title       : CAREER: Methanosarcina Acetivorans as a Model to Elucidate the Mechanism of DNA
               Replication in the Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0238451

Award Number: 0238451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac Cann icann@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1156,1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Life on the planet Earth is divided into three domains: Archaea, Bacteria, and
              Eukarya. Each of the three lineages is propagated through transfer of genetic
              material by DNA replication, a complex interplay of many proteins acting in
              concert to duplicate the genome. While significant progress has been made in
              the elucidation of the mechanisms involved in the replication of bacterial and
              eukaryotic genomes, the current understanding of genome replication in the
              archaea is rudimentary. Several genes encoding eukaryotic-like proteins known
              to be essential at the replication fork have been identified in all archaeal
              genomes sequenced to date. A few of the proteins have been shown to possess
              predicted biochemical activities in vitro. However, the direct evidence for the
              role of these proteins in archaeal cells is missing due to lack of reliable
              genetic manipulation systems for the hyperthermophiles currently used as models
              to study archaeal DNA
replication. This career project will use Methanosarcina
              acetivorans, an archeaon with a proven genetic manipulation system and a
              completely sequenced genome, as a model to decipher the archaeal DNA
              replication mechanism. Genetic methods will be used to identify genomic DNA
              fragments capable of autonomous replication in M. acetivorans to determine the
              archaeal origin/s of replication. The genes coding for the predicted proteins
              involved in (a) origin recognition, (b) loading of the replicative DNA helicase
              (c) the switch from origin recognition to initiation of DNA synthesis, (d)
              elongation and (e) processing of Okazaki fragments will be disrupted in the
              genome to determine whether they are essential for cell viability. These
              experiments, together with in vitro biochemical characterization of each
              protein under study, aside from enhancing the understanding of genome
              replication in the third major domain of life, will provide a simpler model in
              the quest to completely unravel the complex eukaryotic DNA replication
              machinery. The project will provide training for a diversity of graduate and
              undergraduate students, and minority high school students during summer, in (a)
              the use of computers to predict protein function, (b) gene cloning and
              manipulation, (c) protein purification and (d) biochemical characterization all
              aimed at assigning function to genes. The project thus aims at preparing
              students to tackle one of the inevitable challenges of the post-genomics era:
              assignment of function to the ubiquitous hypothetical and conserved proteins in
              known genome sequences. In addition, the content of the research serves as the
              teaching material for the microbial functional genomics component of ANSCI 199
              (Discovering the Genome) taught to undergraduate students every spring
              semester.

