Title       : CAREER: Fundamental Performance Limits of Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0238271

Award Number: 0238271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio Servetto servetto@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent times much has been said about how, once deployed, networks
of
              devices with wireless communication capabilities will affect the way
we work,
              learn, interact, organize, get entertained, fight wars, and
recover from
              disasters.  This interest in wireless networks has led to
a fair amount of
              research activity in the areas of mobile and ad-hoc
networking, addressing
              both systems and theory issues.  However, not
much research work has been done
              on fundamental information theoretic
concepts related to wireless *sensor*
              networks, i.e., networks of tiny,
low power, unreliable devices equipped with
              very limited sensing and
communication capabilities, and embedded in the
              environment.  This
project is primarily about the study of fundamental
              performance limits
for large-scale wireless sensor networks.  Specifically,
              there are
three problems, deeply intertwined with each other, and very
              relevant
in practice, on which we concentrate our efforts:

  - Source
              Coding problems, dealing with the design and performance
analysis of codes and
              signal processing algorithms for the random fields
generated by sensor
              nodes.

  - Routing problems, dealing with design and performance analysis
              of
protocols and signal processing algorithms for moving sensor data
              *within*
the network.

  - Reachback Communication problems, dealing with
              the design and
performance analysis of codes and signal processing algorithms
              for moving
sensor data *out* of the network.

The solution to problems of
              source coding, routing, and reachback
communication in sensor networks
              requires a "marriage" of networking
and communication theoretic concepts. 
              This presents an interesting
opportunity for innovation in education, since
              networking is typically
regarded as a "pure CS" topic, whereas communication
              theory is typically
regarded as a "pure EE" topic.  All of my educational and
              outreach
activities (undergraduate and graduate course development, lab
              development,
undergraduate textbook development, service to community) are
              designed
around the general goal of providing a solid theoretical basis to
              our
students in networking and communications, as well as the more
              specific
goal of highlighting the interplay between these concepts in the
              context
of wireless sensor networks.

