Title       : CAREER: An Unified Approach to Mobile Robot Localization and Navigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0238185

Award Number: 0238185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sooyong Lee slee@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates design and implement a framework for autonomous
              multiple mobile robots localization/navigation in a dynamic, partially known
              environment.  The framework will integrate autonomous cooperative localization
              and navigation capabilities.

In particular, autonomous cooperative
              sensor-based navigation capabilities will be explored, which integrate;
              extrapolated artificial potential field based path planning; consecutive
              sensing based localization methods with the aid of techniques for computing
              uncertainty regions; robust, safe techniques for distributive control suitable
              for dynamic, partially known environments that facilitate efficient, on-line
              adjustment and re-planning in the presence of unknown or moving
              obstacles.

The mobile robots have variety of sensors and controllers to
              inform or take action in response to the environment.  The ability to
              reconfigure sensors dynamically between data collection operations enables
              planning of sensing strategies. Each sensory action will improve knowledge of
              the environment; hence, each sensory action can be chosen utilizing a larger
              knowledge base than was available for previous actions. An immediate benefit
              from this work will be a direct use in sensor based control of mechanical
              systems.   The approach will be a breakthrough in practical machine design and
              implementation.

The proposed cooperative, distributive, robust, and
              inexpensive multiple mobile robots will be used to many potential applications
              ranging from maintenance and repair of mechanical machinery, to clean up
              operations for accidents, to search and rescue operations, or to assisting the
              disabled or elderly around the home.

The project's education component
              focuses on developing new interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate courses
              with an emphasis on robotics and mechatronics and involving undergraduate
              students in research.  It also includes helping high school students understand
              technical concepts and principles, and providing students with a real-world
              engineering challenge offering students an academic experience that encourages
              abstract thought, self-directed learning, and decision-making through TexasBEST
              robot competition program.

