Title       : CAREER: The Listening Machine - Sound Source Organization for Multimedia
               Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0238301

Award Number: 0238301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $558414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Ellis dpwe@ee.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a 5-year continuing award.  The goal of the Listening Machine project is
              to develop techniques that can analyze everyday sonic environments into objects
              and events similar to those perceived by human listeners.  Rather than viewing
              an audio file as an opaque, undifferentiated dataset, we want to be able to
              treat it as a combination of sound-source objects with more or less specific
              characteristics - for instance, the voice of a particular person plus
              background hum plus door closing followed by footsteps, etc.  The kinds of
              recognition analyses to be developed by the PI will make possible rapid
              browsing of recordings, by segmenting and summarizing them in terms of the
              sounds of the objects contained - discussion with multiple people, ride inside
              a vehicle, outside on the street etc.  Analyzing such recordings in terms of
              separate objects is particularly challenging, because the sounds almost always
              overlap and interfere.  It is not adequate simply to train a recognizer on the
              sound of, say, a telephone ringing, because that sound changes completely when
              it is heard against a background of music on the radio.  Instead, the PI will
              adapt and develop emerging techniques from speech recognition that classify
              signals based on partial observations, simultaneously recognizing subsets of
              the time-frequency information and inferring a segmentation into regions
              dominated by different sound sources, to maximize the probability that the
              explanation matches the observations.  The techniques to be devised will
              support a new range of applications in which machines can stand in for human
              listeners, including new ways to search online multimedia content, interactive
              robots with a human-like awareness of their environments, and prosthetic
              devices for the hearing impaired.  The educational contributions of the project
              will center around a Laboratory for Recognition and Organization of Speech and
              Audio (LabROSA), which the PI will establish with a unique focus on intelligent
              analysis of general audio.   In addition to supporting students working within
              the group, research results will feed into course- and project-based
              educational activities in the form of new topic content and new tools and
              demonstrations.   The immediacy of audio illustrations developed as part of
              this work will make these ideal demos for Columbia University's outreach to
              local high school students through periodic Engineering Open Houses.
