Title       : CAREER: Study of E-waste Environmental Hazards and Treatment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238765

Award Number: 0238765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yadong Li yadong.li@jsums.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1440,9150,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0238765   Li   The rapidly growing electronic waste (E-waste) stream consisting
              of such items as obsolete computers, TVs, printers, and cell phones has raised
              an unprecedented challenge for environmental protection. E-waste already
              constitutes 2-5% of the municipal solid waste (MSW) in the U.S., and its volume
              is increasing three times faster than the MSW stream. Most components in the
              E-waste stream contain toxic substances including heavy metals and halogenated
              organics. Currently, the majority of E-waste is either stored in homes and
              offices waiting for disposal or dumped in landfills without proper treatment.
              This poses potential hazards to human health and the environment. The
              objectives of this project are to quantify the leaching potential of the
              toxicants from the popular components in the E-waste stream and to develop a
              high-pressure compaction pretreatment method for reducing their leaching
              toxicity.  Extensive experimental study, theoretical analysis and modeling will
              be included. Integration of education and research activity is emphasized in
              this project.
The implementation of this project will result in significant
              new knowledge and data on the potential hazards of E-waste. The experimental
              methods, models, and theories developed through this project will be valuable
              for researchers and legislators to understand the mechanism of E-waste
              pollution and to develop environmentally-sound E-waste management systems This
              project will provide an excellent education and training opportunity for
              students of all levels from K-12 to graduate and will greatly enhance the
              engineering education at one of the nation's largest historically black
              colleges and universities (HBCUs) Jackson State University (JSU).  JSU is also
              an EPSCoR institution designated by NSF.  The majority of JSU students are
              African Americans who are underrepresented, especially in engineering education
              and practice. The School of Engineering at JSU was just launched in fall 2000
              and currently has only two departments. This project will help strengthen the
              newborn engineering program at JSU and attract minority students to participate
              in engineering education. The new environmental labs will be enhanced and the
              engineering courses will be enriched by integrating the research and teaching
              and by incorporating the findings of this project in the syllabi and lectures.
              The dissemination of the findings of this project will raise the awareness of
              the public and promote environmentally conscious practices in handling E-waste
              to benefit society at large.

