Title       : CAREER: Novel Conductive Oxide Coatings on Metallic Inteconnect for Intermediate
               Temperature SOFC Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0238113

Award Number: 0238113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiahong Zhu jzhu@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims at addressing the critical issues related to metallic
              interconnects for intermediate-temperature solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC)
              application. With the current trends in reducing the SOFC operation
              temperatures to the range of 500-800 degrees C, ferritic steels are promoted as
              the candidate materials for the intermediate-temperature SOFC interconnect due
              to their low cost and ease of manufacture. However, under long-term stack
              operation, the increase of contact resistance due to the formation of surface
              oxide layer(s) and Cr migration to other cell components from the interconnects
              pose serious issues for these otherwise promising materials. Novel conductive
              spinel phases are investigated in this proposal as potential coatings to
              mitigate the current limitations of ferritic steels. Electrical conduction
              mechanism in substituted spinel phases will be assessed through systematic
              study of defect structure and electrical conductivity in these oxides. Spinel
              coatings with optimized composition will be fabricated, via sol-gel processing
              to form the coatings on commercial ferritic steels. Another objective is to
              explore alloy design to develop new-generation ferritic alloys capable of
              forming the desired spinel layer upon proper thermal treatment. The research is
              also directed to enhance the undergraduate/graduate curricula by familiarizing
              the students with processing and characterization of both bulk materials and
              thin films/coatings. 

Spinel phases exhibit a wide range of electrical
              conductivity, ranging from insulating/semiconducting to
              metal-like/superconducting. This research will provide insights into defect
              structure and conduction mechanism in spinel phases, by combining various
              techniques and approaches, such as thermogravimetric analysis, electrical
              conductivity and Seebeck coefficient measurements, neutron scattering,
              synchrotron X-ray scattering, and the associated modeling efforts. The
              methodology developed will be directly applicable to a number of other
              important electron-conducting ceramics. In addition to the intended SOFC
              interconnect application, the developed sol-gel spinel coatings and
              new-generation ferritic alloys may also find wide applications in other
              demanding, hostile environments. The integrated educational activities will be
              aimed at exposing the high school students and teachers in the Upper-Cumberland
              region of Tennessee by organizing a weeklong summer materials camp each year,
              to the proposed fuel cell research activities and state-of-the-art material
              research facilities at Tennessee Technological University (TTU) and national
              laboratories.

