Title       : Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0238131

Award Number: 0238131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $652501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjory S. Blumenthal mblument@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CSTB will convene an expert committee to conduct a comprehensive assessment of 
              wireless  technology  and  application  trends  and  their  implications  for 
              spectrum  management  and  policy.    The committee will seek  broad  input 
              and  produce  a  report  with  consensus  findings  and  recommendations.   
              This project will be grounded in technical expertise but examine the interplay
              among technical, economic, and policy issues.    

The committee will deliver
              a  final  report  18  months  from  its  first  meeting  that  would provide
              analysis, conclusions, and recommendations based on input gathered  during the
              study and committee expertise and deliberations.  The final report will be
              subject to NRC review procedures and would be prepared in sufficient quantity
              to ensure its distribution to the sponsors and other relevant parties in
              accordance with NRC policy.  The report will be made available to the public
              without restriction.  It will be posted on the World Wide  Web  as  well  as 
              distributed  in  printed  form.   Briefings to key people in government,
              industry, academia and the nonprofit sector are anticipated.  

The
              intellectual merit of the project will flow from its examination of an arena
              for  research--wireless  communications--that  is  poised  for  growth.    It 
              will  characterize  trends and illuminate opportunities for new R&D activity. 
              Because the project will  relate  technical  possibilities  to  economic 
              concerns  and  legal/regulatory  options,  it  will also speak to opportunities
              for social science research.  The broader impacts of  the  project  will  also 
              derive  from  its  interdisciplinary  character.    The  project  will 
              leverage  the  technical  insight  of  the  committee  and  its  analysis  to 
              improve  the  quality of policy analysis in the wireless arena (spectrum
              management and related  policy), which will affect the public.s ability to
              benefit from wireless innovations and  economic  competitiveness  associated 
              with  production  and  uses  of  wireless  technologies.  

 

