Title       : CAREER: DNA Binding Ligands and the Helix-Coil Transition of Single DNA
               Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0238190

Award Number: 0238190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $568205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Williams mark@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1144,1164,1187,1248,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project combines research and education in the design and use of
              optical tweezers instruments and in the study of the biophysics of DNA. Optical
              tweezers instruments will be used to measure the forces required to extend
              single DNA molecules beyond their natural contour length in the presence of DNA
              binding ligands. Three major systems will be examined to elucidate the
              mechanism by which ligands that bind preferentially to single-stranded DNA
              alter the helix-coil transition of double-stranded DNA molecules. The DNA
              helix-coil transition at low pH will first be examined. Since the proton is the
              simplest charged single-stranded DNA binding ligand, a study of the effect of
              pH on DNA overstretching will provide a firm basis for understanding more
              complex ligands. It has been shown that HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein functions by
              altering the DNA helix-coil transition. To determine the entropic or enthalpic
              nature of this altered cooperativity, this work will examine the temperature
              dependence of this effect for wild-type and mutant proteins. Bacteriophage T4
              Gene 32 protein (gp32) is a DNA binding protein essential for DNA replication,
              recombination, and repair. Measurements of the dependence of DNA
              helix-destabilization by this protein on temperature, ionic strength, and
              protein concentration will be used to elucidate the nature of gp32's
              interactions with DNA.

By studying force-induced melting of single DNA
              molecules in the presence of DNA binding ligands, single molecule manipulation
              techniques will be established as a quantitative tool for elucidating the role
              of DNA binding proteins in biological processes such as retroviral reverse
              transcription and DNA replication. This work will have a strong educational
              impact by training students in an entirely new interdisciplinary area.
              Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in an exciting new field at
              the interface of physics, chemistry, and biology. It will also have a strong
              scientific impact by developing a new technique for studying important
              biological interactions. The PI will also lead the development of a new
              Advanced Physics Lab class that will train advanced undergraduate physics
              majors at Northeastern University to design and build physics experiments,
              including the construction of single beam optical tweezers instrument. 

This
              project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
              Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
              and the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.


