Title       : CAREER: Spectroscopic/Computational Insights into the Biosynthesis and
               Reactivity of Adenosylcobalamin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0238530

Award Number: 0238530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $890765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Brunold brunold@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1144,1164,1968,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The B12 cofactor adenosylcobalamin has long fascinated chemists with its
              unparalleled structural complexity and unusual reactivity in biological
              systems, involving homolytic cleavage of the organometallic Co-C bond. The
              goals of this CAREER project are to develop molecular-level understanding of
              the mechanism by which the adenosyltransferase from Salmonella enterica
              catalyzes the Co-C bond formation and to explore the mechanism by which the
              adenosylcobalamin -dependent isomerase methylmalonyl-CoA mutase from
              Proprionibacterium shermanii accelerates the rate of homolytic Co-C bond
              cleavage by 12 orders of magnitude without significantly enhancing undesired
              Co-C bond heterolysis. These goals will be accomplished by using a combination
              of spectroscopic methods (electronic absorption, circular dichroism, magnetic
              circular dichroism, resonance Raman, and electron paramagnetic resonance) and
              computational techniques (density functional theory and combined quantum
              mechanics/molecular mechanics approaches) to study free and enzyme-bound
              adenosylcobalamin and derivatives thereof. The educational plan is to develop
              and implement a series of interactive projects aimed at guiding student
              exploration of key chemical concepts in symmetry, bonding, and inorganic
              electronic spectroscopy. The Kolb model, a well-researched student-centered
              teaching model, will serve as the framework for incorporating both
              spectroscopic data collection and Mathcad-based interactive projects into
              graduate and upper-level undergraduate classrooms. 

Research in the
              interdisciplinary field of bioinorganic spectroscopy readily facilitates the
              development of a collaborative learning environment, in which students with
              diverse backgrounds share and communicate their individual expertise. The
              linking of research to applied chemistry provides a template for students
              attempting to bridge the gap between classroom and laboratory settings. Through
              integration of research-oriented problems into the classroom, new techniques
              and exercises engendering student involvement in the teaching process will be
              developed. Together, the research and educational projects outlined in this
              project would foster the breadth of experience, depth of knowledge, and
              communication skills crucial to the development of young scientists.  This
              project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
              Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
              and the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program in the
              Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.

