Title       : CAREER: Numerical Simulations of Transitional and Turbulent Hypersonic Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2003      
File        : a0238390

Award Number: 0238390
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria P. Martin pmartin@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0238390
M. MARTIN
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY

The proposed research
              is focused on developing a basic understanding of hypersonic transitional and
              turbulent flows.  Previous turbulence models for hypersonic applications have
              been calibrated using direct numerical simulation data of incompressible flows
              or perfect gas wind tunnel data. Thus, the models that are used today do not
              represent the effects of high compressibility and temperature levels.
              Accordingly, this research will provide solutions for (1) improving our
              understanding of the fundamental physical mechanisms of transitional and
              turbulent hypersonic flows; (2) providing an accurate and detailed database of
              the flows of interest; and (3) using the gained understanding and database to
              develop physically-based scaling laws for the accurate prediction of these
              flows. 
The proposed configurations include transitional and turbulent
              boundary layers with and without adverse pressure gradient, as well as flow
              around axisymmetric and elliptical cross-section cones. The effects of
              free-stream disturbance, Mach number, and wall-temperature conditions will be
              studied for non-reacting and reacting conditions.  A key feature of the
              simulations is the validation against experimental data at the exact same
              conditions. This research will have significant impact on a large number of
              technologically important applications related to hypersonic flight within and
              out of our atmosphere.
Concurrently, education activities will address
              important and challenging engineering problems while fostering a dynamic
              learning environment.  The goals of the education and outreach plan include:
              (1) integrating research and education via a modular scientific computing, data
              analysis, and database software infrastructure; (2) organizing outreach
              activities for talented students of under-represented groups in K-12,
              undergraduate and graduate levels; and (3) maintaining and building upon a
              current curriculum.  A key planned activity is the integration of a
              computational infrastructure to solve and analyze fluid flow problems into the
              classroom and into the scientific community. Undergraduate and graduate
              students will use the infrastructure as part of their course materials.  Other
              education and outreach activities include a summer course in hypersonic flight
              to promising high-school students from lower-income families. This will provide
              an opportunity for the students to participate in the academic and cultural
              life of Princeton University. In collaboration with the Prince-ton University
              Preparatory Program, twenty students will be selected from schools in the
              Trenton, Ewing and Princeton areas.  For a period of three years these students
              will enroll in a week-long course sequence in hypersonic flight. In addition,
              summer internships will be offered to two students of under-represented
              groups.

