Title       : CAREER: Rapid Production of Plastic Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0238033

Award Number: 0238033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donggang Yao yao@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) plan seeks to develop new
              technology for molding high-aspect-ratio microstructures and conduct
              fundamental research in microstructures and fundamental research in
              micromolding.  A rapid thermal response molding process has been developed to
              increase productivity in molding low-stress products.  The technology can be
              adapted to micromolding to solve the premature freezing problem while
              maintaining short cycle times.  Molding results of high-aspect-ration
              microstructures will be used to validate an approach for simulating the filling
              process of polymer melts in microcavities.  The key research and education
              activities include:  (1) Integrating the rapid thermal response technology with
              thermoplastic micromolding processes, i.e., microinjection molding and hot
              embossing.  (2) Characterizing the microscale viscosity of polymer melts and
              the size effect in microscale.  (3) Simulating the filing process of polymer
              melts in microcavities.  (4) Developing a graduate and undergraduate course in
              polymer microfabrication and enhancing several existing courses in materials
              processing and manufacturing.  (5) Developing an integrated research and
              education laboratory in polymer microfabrication with involvement of both
              undergraduate and graduate students.

The key impacts of this project
              include:  (1) The technology for rapid production of high-aspect-ratio
              microstructures that will impact significantly in the fast growing
              telecommunication and biomedical industries.  (2) The capability in
              characterizing and modeling microscale polymeric flows that will provide a
              fundamental understanding of polymer microfabrication.  (3) The integrated
              research and education program will provide educational opportunities for
              students to work on leading edge research projects in polymer
              microfabrication.

