Title       : CAREER: Solid Freeform Fabrication of Heterogeneous Multifunctional Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0238788

Award Number: 0238788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suman Das sumandas@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
               award is to create a next-generation solid freeform fabrication (SFF)
              technique that will enable the construction of a broad variety of heterogeneous
              multifunctional devices. The approach will focus on concurrently developing new
              techniques for patterned powder deposition and laser materials processing that
              will together enable the layer-by-layer construction of such devices. Powder
              deposition techniques will be based on experimental correlations of powder flow
              through miniature hoppers and on the physics of granular multiphase flow. 
              Laser processing techniques for sintering or melting patterned powders will be
              developed on an experimental workstation, aided by numerical models to simulate
              transport phenomena in heterogeneous powder compositions. The educational goal
              is to prepare the next generation of mechanical engineers with knowledge of
              SFF, computational design synthesis, and internet-enabled electronic
              collaboration methods. SFF and electronic collaboration methods will be
              introduced into a core undergraduate course. A new graduate course on SFF
              including a future international design competition and special focus journal
              issue will be developed. Finally, a multidisciplinary seminar series on
              multifunctional materials design and synthesis will be introduced.

If
              successful, the primary impact of this research will be a next-generation
              heterogeneous SFF method. A consequential impact is the ability to fabricate
              novel, multifunctional devices that will have great potential social,
              commercial, and military value, notably bioimplants for surgical
              reconstruction, engineered tissue scaffolds and drug delivery, and devices for
              energy storage, production or conversion. Complementary long-term scientific
              and technical impacts will include: 1) novel scientific approaches to
              synthesizing structures with tailored material compositions and properties from
              the macro- to nano-scale; and 2) integration of digital design and digital
              fabrication, enabling realization of complex designs derived from physics-based
              computational optimization in materials of choice.
