Title       : CAREER: Molecular Systems Bioengineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0238617

Award Number: 0238617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James M. Lee                            
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Roth cmroth@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of the proposed research is to develop tools of Molecular
              Systems Bioengineering (MSB) and apply them to understand and control gene
              regulatory events involved in hepatocyte (primary liver cell) differentiation. 
              In the first stage of the project, individual binding sites on the albumin gene
              promoter will be assessed for liver-enriched transcription factor binding
              affinity and their ability to effect transcription of the albumin gene.  In
              particular, context-dependent effects such as cooperativity and competition
              among binding sites will be evaluated quantitatively.  Second, a molecular
              systems model will be developed to describe the gene network of regulatory
              interactions among liver-enriched transcription factor genes and corresponding
              proteins.  Information on cooperativity and competition will be obtained from
              the experiments in the first stage, and the effect of genetic perturbations
              will be simulated.  In the third stage, perturbations predicted to be fruitful
              will be effected using antisense oligonucleotides.  Genes predicted to be most
              inhibitory to albumin transcription will be inhibited and the effects evaluated
              at the level of the gene target, albumin production and complementary
              hepatocyte differentiated functions.  Concurrently, initiatives will be
              undertaken to create an educational path in Molecular Systems Bioengineering at
              Rutgers University.  An undergraduate track in MSB will be developed in the
              Department of Biomedical Engineering, and interactive tutorials will be
              developed in the undergraduate core classes, which will be refined for use as
              translational materials in introducing high school student and Rutgers freshmen
              to opportunities in MSB.

