Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Parallax Barrier Technique for Autostereoscopic Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0238857

Award Number: 0238857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse B. Eichenlaub jbe@dti3d.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dimension Technologies Inc
	      315 Mount Read Boulevard
	      Rochester, NY  146111911    716/436-3530

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is designed to
              leverage the success in polarized strip development. It will also advance two
              configurations for 2D and 3D capable auto stereoscopic display products, and
              initiate customer evaluation of these products. Specific objectives of the
              project include: completion of the technical developments necessary to produce
              2D/3D products using the proprietary Strip Polarizer Parallax Barrier (SPPB)
              technique for flat panel displays; collaboration with a target customer to
              design and develop a market specific product; initiation of a
              pilot-manufacturing run to produce prototypes for initial market feedback;
              qualification of the initial prototypes in terms of performance, quality,
              manufacturability and acceptance; and continuation of research efforts needed
              to produce full resolution 2D/3D products. A successful Phase II program will
              advance the technology to prototype and initiate market feedback in target
              applications. Phase II prototypes will embody the majority of the technology
              needed to produce the full resolution products and will serve to firm up
              manufacturing processes while establishing initial market demand in those
              segments where natural upgrades to full resolution will increase market
              penetration.

The direct commercial potential of the projects lies in
              autostereoscopic products that will be manufactured using the proposed
              technology. Such display products will find widespread use in scientific and
              medical visualization applications, CAD, industrial inspection, and remote
              vision applications. Consumer based applications may include electronic
              commerce and computer gaming. 

