Title       : SBIR Phase II: Software Tools for Authoring American Sign Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0238882

Award Number: 0238882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Roush dannyr@vcom3d.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VCOM3D, Inc.
	      3452 Lake Lynda Drive
	      Orlando, FL  328170000    407/737-7310

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0108000   Software Development                    
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1545,9102,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
              fully functioning prototype software tool that will allow educators,
              interpreters,  and linguists skilled in American Sign Language (ASL), but not
              in computer 3-D animation, to create fully grammatical synthesized ASL.  This
              technology will provide language access for Deaf individuals to Internet web
              pages and CD-ROM based media.  This project builds upon the P.I.'s commercial
              Sign Smith products, which were developed, in part, under an earlier NSF SBIR
              grant.  The current technology allows users to generate unique sentences
              composed of signs that are in citation, or non-inflected form and to add facial
              expressions.  The resulting sign and sentence structure approximates English
              grammar and therefore represents a transliteration, also known as Signed
              English.  Although Signed English does provide some access to digital media,
              the absence of many elements of ASL grammar limits the use of the technology by
              the larger segment of the Deaf population who require grammatical ASL for
              access.  These tools will enable the user to dynamically compose and inflect
              ASL signs from parameterized components using several spatial frames of
              reference.  These sign types include pronouns, indicating and locative verbs,
              and classifier predicates.

The final commercial product will be a new
              integrated tool within the P.I.'s commercial Sign Smith Studio Authoring Tool. 
              This tool will allow educators and multimedia developers to create engaging,
              grammatically correct, ASL animations for language access to digital
              information on Web Pages and in CD-ROM titles.  The software interface not only
              allows authors to spatially inflect signs, but also it can be used to create
              signs as well.  This capability opens opportunities for quickly building
              libraries of technical and scientific terms to be used in educational and
              scientific curricula.  It also affords the potential to create libraries of
              foreign sign languages, therefore making it possible for the product to enter
              international markets.  Content can be viewed using a proprietary licensed
              software Player.  This product will increase access of Deaf and Hard of Hearing
              children and adults to digitally based information and promote inclusive
              education and employment approaches which accords with the language and intent
              of the New Freedom Initiative, recent amendments to Section 508 of the
              Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Section
              255 of the Telecommunications Act.  Not only does this technology have a viable
              commercial market, it also has broad societal benefits for Deaf and Hard of
              Hearing individuals in America and beyond.

