Title       : Computer-Based Laboratory Exercises And Research Experience In Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9352801

Award Number: 9352801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43677              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark A. Lindgren lindgren@ac.grin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9352801  Lindgren    Over the next three years the biology department will
              implement  a new curriculum designed to introduce students to the process  of
              science more effectively. Courses will be shifted from  content-based teaching
              to inquiry-based teaching, placing less  emphasis on "the facts of biology" and
              more emphasis on "doing  biology." The goal of this project is to increase both
              the  quantity and the quality of laboratory experiences available to  students
              in animal physiology, introductory biology, and  advanced research. This will
              require the purchase of eight (8)  physiological workstations. Each workstation
              will include a  Macintosh IIsi computer, MacLab hardware and software, a 
              printer, and miscellaneous physiological transducers and  amplifiers. Students
              in Animal Physiology will use the  workstations extensively to study a variety
              of physiological  processes, such as nerve conduction, muscle contraction, and 
              heart function. The workstations will not only increase the  pedagogical
              effectiveness of individual laboratory exercises,  but will also make it
              practical to introduce a significant  component of independent research into
              this course. Students in  the introductory course, Structure and Function of
              Organisms,  will use the workstations primarily to study human physiology.  As
              with the animal physiology course, the workstations will  allow students to
              investigate a wide variety of questions  through "hands on" experimentation.
              Finally, the workstations  will be used to increase opportunities for students
              to  participate in advanced research projects in neurophysiology.  The MacLab
              system was selected on the basis of my past  experience using other data
              acquisition systems and on the  basis of a pilot test of MacLab by a student
              doing an  independent research project at Grinnell this past summer.  MacLab is
              ideal for use in both introductory courses and  advanced courses because it is
              easy to operate but also  possesses extensive capabilities for data
              acquisition,  analysis,  and presentation.  ***y
