Title       : Mathematica Laboratory Projects for Calculus and Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9352868

Award Number: 9352868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77871              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Barker barker@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Knapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9269,
Abstract    :
              The project directors are designing and constructing Mathematica               
              computer laboratory notebooks for calculus and applied mathematics.            
              This builds on Bowdoin College's three years of experience as the              
              Mathematica laboratory development site for Project CALC, the                  
              calculus reform program from Duke University. The primary focus of             
              the development efforts is on applications from other disciplines              
              which are new to the calculus and applied mathematics curriculum.              
              The calculus laboratory development effort has multivariable                   
              calculus as a primary emphasis. The materials produced are being               
              disseminated, and instructors using the laboratories are being                 
              supplied with training and ongoing support.                                    
              Dissemination of the laboratories and support of instructors using             
              the materials is being accomplished by (1) a three-day summer                  
              faculty workshop entitled "Laboratory Instruction with                         
              Mathematica," (2) a dissemination network which includes                       
              distribution of Mathematica notebooks via FTP and disk mailings,               
              (3) publications, and (4) presentations and workshops at regional              
              and national meetings.                                                         
              This project is adding Mathematica laboratory notebooks to the                 
              collection of materials currently available for revitalized courses            
              in calculus and applied mathematics. These notebooks are                       
              distinguished by their complete development of topics under study,             
              their focus on models from other disciplines, and their use of                 
              graphics routines to develop geometric understanding. Aggressive               
              dissemination of the notebooks is encouraging the adoption of                  
              Mathematica into calculus and applied mathematics courses,                     
              providing students with a research-level tool which can be carried             
              on to other courses in mathematics, the sciences, and economics.
