Title       : Seeing Through Symmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9352670

Award Number: 9352670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57154              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence I. Gould LGOULD@HARTFORD  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Buckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Hartford
	      200 Bloomfield Avenue
	      West Hartford, CT  06117    860/768-4635

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Symmetry is utilized as a fundamental paradigm in a                            
              multidisciplinary course whose purpose is to guide humanities                  
              students to both comprehend and become excited about the                       
              scientific world. Through sensory-rich examples of symmetry in                 
              a domain they know, these students are then stimulated to                      
              journey across this bridge into the realm of science.The course                
              begins by illustrating pleasing patterns in the sciences and in                
              the arts; this leads to a general definition of symmetry. We                   
              then characterize symmetry using elementary mathematical                       
              notions. Next we go on to see examples of symmetry in art and                  
              in mathematics as well as in poetry and in music. Then we                      
              display the existence of symmetry in physics, chemistry,                       
              biology, and cosmology. A brief excursion into asymmetry ends                  
              the course.Students are able to explicitly develop their                       
              quantitative abilities and analogical thinking by using                        
              concepts of symmetry both as a method within a discipline and                  
              as a bridge between disciplines. They develop these abilities,                 
              in part, through the medium of a highly graphical laboratory                   
              experience that utilizes computers for understanding many                      
              facets of symmetry and for generating their own patterns                       
              through the use of exploratory-based software packages. Written                
              and oral communication are emphasized through classroom                        
              discussions, exams, laboratory discussions and reports, and                    
              through a term project. The multimedia course is taught in an                  
              assembled lecture-discussion setting, and the labs are an                      
              opportunity for students to engage in collaborative learning.                  
              A term project requires each student to choose a topic from one                
              of the science-based categories discussed in the course. Every                 
              student will submit an essay explaining his or her project as                  
              well as demonstrating the project to the class. Occasional                     
              guest lectures and a trip to a science museum are planned to                   
              promote further enjoyment of the course.
