Title       : Image Processing And Computer Vision Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1993     
File        : a9352332

Award Number: 9352332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38038              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian Cheung   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stelios D. Himonas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York Institute of Tech
	      Wheatley Road
	      Old Westbury, NY  11568    516/686-7516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Digital image processing is a rapidly evolving field with                      
              growing applications in science and engineering, such as high-                 
              definition television (HDTV).  Many of the theories and                        
              concepts pertinent to image processing are within the scope of                 
              understanding by  undergraduate students who learn them in                     
              prior courses. The introduction of image processing to the                     
              undergraduate curriculum facilitates the understanding of many                 
              important, yet abstract, techniques students acquire in signal                 
              processing, communication theory, and random variables courses.                
              Moreover, this provides them with an excellent preparation for                 
              advanced study in  related fields. Experiments based on image                  
              processing are an integral part of the course and the                          
              establishment of an image processing laboratory  enables                       
              students to carry out experiments that supplement lecture                      
              materials. These experiments cover a wide range of practical                   
              applications that extend from the acquisition of an image to                   
              the edge detection of a noisy image. The conduct of these                      
              experiments necessitates a high-speed computer equipped with a                 
              frame grabber, a video camera and a high-resolution monitor.                   
              For educational purposes, an image-processing laboratory manual                
              and an integrated software package capable of implementing all                 
              proposed experiments are planned.
