Title       : Interdisciplinary Applications of Flourescence Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9352652

Award Number: 9352652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12176              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome L. Mullin jmullin@mailbox.une.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephan I. Zeeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New England
	      11 Hills Beach Road
	      Biddeford, ME  040059526    207/283-0171

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
                  This project will enhance undergraduate laboratory                         
              experiences for students at the University of New England by                   
              incorporating fluorescence spectroscopy into several courses                   
              and research experiences offered for Chemistry, Biology, Marine                
              Biology and Environmental Science students within the Division                 
              of Life Sciences. The analytical applications of fluorescence                  
              are growing dramatically because of its sensitivity and                        
              applicability to problems of environmental and clinical                        
              importance and will be exploited in Quantitative Analysis,                     
              Instrumental Methods, Biochemistry/Cell Biology and Marine                     
              Biology/Oceanography laboratories. Examples of analyses to be                  
              performed include the determination of pharmaceutical                          
              components, pollutants in natural waters, chlorophyll in plant                 
              materials and fluorescent markers for monitoring phytoplankton                 
              and water mass migration. The technique's increasing use in                    
              Biochemistry and Cell Biology will be illustrated in, among                    
              other applications, probing intracellular ion transport                        
              mechanisms. More fundamental applications will be introduced in                
              General Chemistry and explored in detail in Instrumental                       
              Methods and Physical Chemistry. Fluorescence immunoassay will                  
              become a component of the Immunology lab. Fluorescence will                    
              also be used extensively for undergraduate research. The                       
              multidisciplinary use of the proposed instrument will foster                   
              increased cooperative interactions between Chemistry and                       
              Biology faculty and impress upon students the increasingly                     
              interdisciplinary nature of modern science. The instruments                    
              will also be used by University of Southern Maine students in                  
              Instrumental Methods and Physical Chemistry courses.
