Title       : Development of a Simulation Laboratory for Chemical Engineering Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9352500

Award Number: 9352500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97251              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Kofke kofke@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl R. Lund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott L. Diamond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johannes M. Nitsche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Triantafillos J. Mountziaris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will demonstrate the feasibility of a Chemical                    
              Engineering Simulation Laboratory (CESL) as a tool for                         
              instruction of chemical engineering concepts. The CESL is                      
              designed to instill an intuitive feel for the operation of                     
              chemical processing equipment, an understanding that is                        
              ordinarily obtained by chemical engineers only after several                   
              years of on-the-job experience. Simulation can complement                      
              traditional classroom and laboratory experiences by providing                  
              the students with realistic exposure to processes and phenomena                
              that are too expensive, large, time-consuming, or dangerous to                 
              examine otherwise.                                                             
              This project will develop three "process" modules.  The first                  
              shall characerize the draining of a tank.  This simple, but                    
              interesting problem, will allow concentraing on the general                    
              problme of module development.  The other two modules will be                  
              selected buased upon experience with the first but will are                    
              expected to involve several process units (e.g., pumpts, heat                  
              exchangers, reators).  One will be appropriate for use in                      
              steaty-state operation, and the other in unsteady-state                        
              oepration.  In addition to these three process modules, the                    
              project will develop a high-level "control" program that                       
              governs the way the process modules are used.  The control                     
              program will allow the modules to be run in any of three modes                 
              (Laboratory, Steady, or Unsteady operation).  Flexibility in                   
              the design of the control program will allow for the                           
              incorporation of additional modules in the future.                             
              The seven faculty co-investigators will work closely with                      
              industrial consultants, student assistants, the computer                       
              vendor, and graphics programming experts to develop the                        
              simulation modules.  The modules will be introduced into two                   
              undergraduate courses (Unit Operations in the fall and Kinetics                
              in the spring).  Assessment will be made of pedagogic impact of                
              the modules via parallel control groups to compare quantitative                
              metrics and exit interviews to capture student impressions.                    
              Plans are in place disseminate the present the project results                 
              at annual meetings of the AIChE and ASEE.  The developed                       
              software and documentation will be distributed to chemical                     
              engineering departments across the nation via an ftp server on                 
              the Internet.
