Title       : Virtual Control-Laboratory For Multidisciplinary EngineeringEducation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9352523

Award Number: 9352523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar D. Crisalle crisalle@che.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haniph A. Latchman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9352523  Crisalle  The development and implementation of a Virtual Control Lab
              (VCL)  for teaching the design and analysis of control systems is  conducted by
              this project. This educational software is supported  on personal-computer
              platforms and uses object-oriented programming  to produce virtual devices
              representing physical systems, control  instrumentation, and data acquisition
              and display devices. The  objective of the VCL is to give students the
              possibility of  exploring with alternative operational scenarios: they can 
              experiment with the effect of changing different control  parameters, operating
              the system under different regimes, and  trying out alterative control
              configurations. As a pedagogical tool  the VCL permits the development of
              practical experience using a  convincingly realistic environment. A major
              appeal of the VCL is  that it accomplishes teaching goals that would be
              difficult to  attain using physical experimental systems that often respond 
              slowly to actuations, and which may be expensive to operate and  maintain. 
              Since the entire spectrum of control applications in all  relevant engineering
              disciplines are essentially amenable to the  same analysis and design
              strategies, VCL is designed as a  multidisciplinary tool. In this project the
              VCL is used to teach  control technology to both chemical and electrical
              engineering  undergraduates. One representative system from each of these 
              disciplines is modeled as a virtual device; however, both systems  share the
              same control structures and display devices. The contents  of relevant courses
              will be modified to incorporate experiments  done with the VCL. Subsequently,
              the VCL will be used to carry out  control experiments on physical systems. ln
              these applications the  virtual system is deactivated, however, the controller
              and display  devices remain unaltered and the students can then make use of 
              previous experience gained from experimentation with the virtual  system.  ***
