Title       : A Staircase Plan for Observational Astronomy Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1993      
File        : a9352030

Award Number: 9352030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32395              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Barker x422  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wheaton College
	      26 East Main Street
	      Norton, MA  027660930    508/286-8239

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              9352030                                                         Barker  As
              Robert Ballard (the discoverer of the Titanic) has said,  "Science is a contact
              sport," but it was not until recently  that the technology has become available
              to give introductory  students a genuine exposure to the "contact sport" of 
              astronomy. In Step 1 of the program, students in all  introductory courses
              (including those without laboratories) use  Macintosh microcomputers running
              the Voyager planetarium  program to control 10" telescopes to observe objects 
              independently of the instructor. Although they are asked to  observe a common
              core of objects that are central to the course  they are taking, they also
              study objects that they select  themselves and so are introduced to both the
              excitement and  frustration of the contact sport of astronomy. In Step 2, 
              students taking the laboratory Cosmology course build on this  experience by
              using CCD cameras attached to the telescopes and  interfaced to the
              microcomputers to do imaging and photometry.  By the end of the course, they
              can be experienced enough to  carry out two-week self-designed research
              projects such as  monitoring variable stars and looking for supernovae and so
              are  active participants in the contact sport of astronomy. In Step  3,
              students taking Observational Astronomy carry out extensive  self-designed
              research projects such as determining light  curves of supernovae, doing
              photometry of fast-moving  asteroidal objects, monitoring active galaxies, and
              observing  variable stars. In Step 4, students in upper-level courses  continue
              with these projects, some of which will be  publishable. In Step 5, Astronomy
              majors and minors doing  Individual Research are able to do much more
              sophisticated  theses than was previously possible. Equipment tests and a 
              successful pilot program have been carried out to demonstrate  the feasibility
              of much of this project.  This is the first  project to use Voyager to control
              a computerized telescope, a  technology that has s ignificant potential for
              astronomy  education nationally.  ***
