Title       : MP/PPD: Using Adaptive Computer Technology in Science, Mathematics, and
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9452860

Award Number: 9452860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Gilbert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc for Higher Educ
	      One Dupont Circle Suite 360
	      Washington, DC  200361110    202/293-6440

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452860  Gilbert  The primary focus of this project is dissemination of the best
               and most current information on making post-secondary education  in the fields
              of science, engineering and mathematics (SEM) more  accessible to SEM faculty
              and to students with disabilities.   Students with disabilities may have
              difficulty completing certain  SEM course-work tasks independently, (e.g.,
              reading, writing or   manipulating laboratory instruments).  Modern
              computer-based  technology can provide the needed assistance in many of these 
              situations.  Students and faculty need to learn about the  existence and
              potential of this technology.  The American  Association for Higher Education
              and Project EASI (Equal Access  to Software and Information) propose to conduct
              an information  dissemination  project to increase the knowledge-base of these 
              groups thereby increasing inclusion and participation of students  with
              disabilities in SEM studies.  These students often face  obstacles to SEM
              studies caused by inaccessible buildings,  computers, laboratmries, information
              resources, and negative  attitudes of administrators and faculty regarding
              their abilities  and potential  in SEM studies.  Project EASI has spent the
              last  six years working to help institutions of higher learning  overcome
              physical and attitudinal barriers that exist for  students, faculty, and staff
              with disabilities.  Unfortunately,  despite recent reports and task forces,
              insufficient work has  been done to distribute the growing amount of research
              and  information about how adaptive computer technology can help  students with
              disabilities who want to study and work in the  fields of SEM.  This project
              will take the best available  information about the application of adaptive
              technology in SEM  and distribute it to a widely decentralized education
              audience  through four kinds of dissemination:  electronic, brief print 
              publications, videos, and live presentations.  The goal of these  efforts is to
              promote the rapid dissemination of innovat ive  intervention strategies that
              will increase the participation of  students with disabilities in SEM
              educational and career  tracks.***
