Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Doctoral Traineeships in
               Environmentally Conscious Chemical Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9452654

Award Number: 9452654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Kirwan djk@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Gainer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Giorgio Carta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M.Douglas LeVan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                National and global environmental effects of manufacturing  operations require
              the development of alternative, environmentally  benign technologies.  Although
              this is true in essentially all  industrial sectors, one of the greatest needs
              is in chemical  manufacturing.  This industrial sector is prominent in the
              American  economy, having consistently maintained a positive trade balance.  
              In order to preserve the dominance and global competitiveness of  this
              industry, however, it is recognized that the development and  implementation of
              waste-free environmentally benign processes are  needed.  Such environmentally
              conscious processing alternatives can  only result from the development of
              innovative technologies and  through the education and training of scientists
              and engineers who  can integrate technological advances and environmental 
              considerations with the goal of economic development.    Five doctoral
              traineeships in Environmentally Conscious Chemical  Manufacturing (ECCM) are
              requested in this proposal.  The training  program will be based on coursework
              and research leasing to the  conception of innovative technologies capable of
              reducing the  harmful environmental impact of chemical process operations. 
              This  training program emphasized pollution prevention, not waste  treatment or
              environmental restoration.  A diverse group of  students will be recruited for
              the proposed traineeships through  programs which can be effective in bringing
              women and minorities to  this critical area.
