Title       : Multimedia, Ergonomics, Design and Interface Activities (Media) Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9452162

Award Number: 9452162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47974              (Estimated)
Investigator: M Ali MA04@ACADEMIA.SWT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              C J. Hwang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Durrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Arndt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Slomka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452162  Ali                                                       Until
              recently programming has been a sequential, linguistic and  abstract
              undertaking. However, the development of visual, object  oriented languages and
              Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) used in  conjunction with video and audio
              displays has vastly increased the  range of programming techniques and
              information types to be used  and mastered by computer science students. This
              project seeks to  improve the present undergraduate laboratory experience in
              computer  science through the establishment and use of the Multimedia, 
              Ergonomics, Design and Interface Activities (MEDIA) Lab for  exercises
              associated with eight existing undergraduate courses at  Southwest Texas State
              University. These new laboratory exercises  require equipment that is not
              available to the Department of  Computer Science, although the department has
              made substantial  investments in microcomputers to augment the existing
              campus-wide  mainframe network. The MEDIA Lab provides hands-on, open and
              closed  laboratory experiences in the use, design, development and  production
              of multimedia GUIs. The MEDIA Lab also provides students  a solid foundation of
              experience with the ergonomics (or human  factors) associated with the use of
              various GUI techniques and  devices. The MEDIA Lab functions in conjunction
              with the Computers  in Society Laboratory, CS1308 Lab, to train computer
              science majors  and minors as well as students enrolled in the departmental
              service  course. The MEDIA Lab allows students to experiment with multimedia 
              information and interfaces and to actually produce multimedia  products for
              dissemination. The MEDIA Lab should serve as a model  for the development of
              multimedia GUI training facilities,  materials and techniques in other computer
              science departments that  seek to prepare students to design applications that
              accommodate  the wide range of abilities and disabilities present in American 
              society.
