Title       : Collaborative Learining in the General Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1994       
File        : a9452022

Award Number: 9452022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39537              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy K. Kerner nkerner@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl F. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Dershimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Penner-Hahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452022  Kerner  The primary goal of our introductory chemistry laboratory is to
               allow the students to experience how chemical principles are  derived from
              data and engage the students in scientific processes  and ways of thinking. Our
              approach has been to develop "discovery"  based experiments in which students
              explore a wide range of  parameter space with little advance guidance from the
              instructor as  to the expected outcome. Our emphasis is on qualitative
              reasoning,  which we have found is particularly fostered when students work in 
              collaborative groups with data management handled by computer.  Different
              groups of students investigate the same properties (e.g.,  reactivity,
              solubility, etc) for a different and specific set of  reagents. The discovery
              of trends is facilitated by presenting  students with multi-instances of the
              same phenomenon. A networked  computer system (CoLABnet) pools and summarizes
              the largely  qualitative data for all of the varying group investigated 
              reagents. Student groups are assigned specific questions to answer  which
              require them to utilize and/or organize the summarized data  using commercial
              graphing software. Groups present their findings  during post-lab discussion.
              Preliminary tests have shown that  computer can significantly improve the
              effectiveness of the course.  Computer production of a class data base shifts
              the focus from data  collation and organization to data analysis and
              interpretation. The  use of computers permits data pooling on a scale that
              would be  otherwise impossible. The model emphasizes the uncertainty inherent 
              in science and the importance of statistical variance. The present  computers
              are limited to several rooms and do not allow multi-  tasking (students can
              either enter data to the network or plot data  using commercial software, but
              not both). Funds are requested to  purchase computers capable of multi-tasking
              for all of the  laboratory rooms.
