Title       : Equipment for Physiology Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9452343

Award Number: 9452343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Morgan BIMORGAN@CUVM.CIS.ECU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452343  Morgan  Funds are requested to develop a unique laboratory facility in 
              support of undergraduate research into a range of topics related to  animal
              physiology. In contrast to traditional physiology  laboratories where students
              perform a series of prescribed  exercises, this facility will support
              "project-laboratories" in  which small groups of students initiate, carry out,
              and present the  results of a research project of their own design. I propose
              to  make computers an integral part of our physiology teaching  laboratories at
              all stages of data acquisition and analysis, not  just when analyzing data
              obtained using traditional and now largely  outdated physiological instruments
              (e.g., oscilloscopes).  Specifically, I wish to develop a computerized facility
              that will  enable students to develop research skills in physiology in three 
              key areas. (1) The first is a computerized facility for addressing  questions
              relevant to energy metabolism and respiratory gas  exchange. Equipment
              requested includes O2 and CO2 analyzers, an  oxygen meter and electrode, and
              computer data collecting and  analysis software and hardware. (2) The second is
              a computerized  facility for addressing questions relevant to animal motion 
              (locomotion and feeding behavior). Equipment requested includes a  stereozoom
              microscope, a video camera and monitor, a video  recorder, and computer. (3)
              The third is a computerized facility  for addressing physiological questions
              relevant to nepve and muscle  function. Equipment requested includes
              physiological transducers,  a preamplifier, and computer data collecting and
              analysis software  and hardware. Development of technologically sophisticated 
              laboratory facilities such the ones proposed above is integral to  departmental
              efforts to enhance the quality of undergraduate  education at East Carolina
              University.
