Title       : Innovation in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum through Integration of
               FT-NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1995 
File        : a9452027

Award Number: 9452027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicky H. Bevilacqua vbevilac@kennesaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia G. Brittain  (Principal Investigator former)
              Al M. Panu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leon L. Combs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia H. Reggio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452027  Brittain  Modern NMR principles and practice are being integrated into
              both  lower- and upper-level courses in the chemistry curriculum. The 
              innovations in the lecture and laboratory affect not only the  department's
              chemistry majors, but also students enrolled in the  biology and
              pre-professional programs.  The department is  networking a 200 MHz Fourier
              transform NMR spectrometer with  broadband and variable temperature
              capabilities to personal  computers located in a novel
              laboratory/computer-workstation  environment in a newly designed science
              building to permit  real-time spectral processing and discussion.  The
              curricular  changes begin in the sophomore organic chemistry sequence: NMR 
              spectroscopy is being introduced early in the first course, and  lecture
              discussions of isomerism, nomenclature, reactions and  reaction mechanisms are
              illustrated with broadband-decoupled 13C  spectra and 13C DEPT spectra.  1H-NMR
              is integrated with 13C through  HETCOR spectroscopy.  In the organic
              laboratory, the opportunity  for students to generate 13C and DEPT or HETCOR
              spectra of their  products complements the use of these spectra in lecture. 
              The  instrument also is used to illustrate phenomena such as rotational 
              isomerism and stereo- and regioselectivity in organic reactions.   In the
              junior year, students enrolled in Inorganic Chemistry  synthesize a ligand and
              create a new complex, then utilize variable  temperature NMR to slow the
              fast-exchange dynamics of reversible  complexation and determine a complex
              dissociation constant.  Senior  students in the biochemistry sequence obtain
              and interpret COSY and  NOESY spectra of neuropeptides, determining peptide
              secondary  structural features in various chemical environments.  In physical 
              chemistry, these students utilize NMR to observe the effect of  solvent on
              molecular conformation and perform a thermodynamic  analysis of the
              conformational change.  The instrument receives  additional usage in directed
              studies (undergraduate research)  cou rses; research projects in inorganic,
              physical, and biochemistry  are available.
