Title       : Collaborative Learning with Technology in Entry-Level Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9452421

Award Number: 9452421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28732              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte J. Chell chellcl@carthage.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Snavely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erlan E. Wheeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carthage College
	      2001 Alford Drive
	      Kenosha, WI  531401929    414/551-8500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452421  Chell                                                     The faculty
              in the Department of Mathematics at Carthage College  are enhancing the
              instruction in two entry-level mathematics  offerings with the addition of a
              collaborative learning/Macintosh  laboratory.  Classes in the Calculus I-II
              sequence and the general  education Applied Mathematics course are held in the
              laboratory so  that combined approaches to solving mathematical problems may be
               used. The course materials call for simultaneously incorporating 
              collaborative methods, applying them to reality-based problems, and  using
              technological means for solution. The lab is available to  student use outside
              of the classtime for working on assigned team  projects.  The Applied
              Mathematics course uses the Annenberg  project For All Practical Purposes text.
              The laboratory facilities  allow the addition of: a statistics package and
              analysis of large  data sets, team projects which use technology to analyze the
               results of students' own data collections, a geometry and a drawing  package
              to create and analyze symmetry and repeated patterns, and  a spreadsheet for
              the conjecture and analysis of growth functions.  In addition to the syllabus
              additions, the collaboration experience  gives students the opportunity to take
              ownership of their  mathematics through group discussion and debate.  The
              Calculus  courses are enhanced by the natural incorporation of symbolic 
              computing as a daily activity of the students in the course. The  collaboration
              experience has the same goals as in the Applied  Mathematics course and, in
              addition, it allows students to learn  the syntax of the technology more
              efficiently than by individual  pursuit. Team projects follow the form of
              several successful pilot  projects, including: designing a space capsule with
              certain  flotation properties; finding the effect of putting a spin on a 
              volleyball serve; determining schedules of dosages for medicine;  and analyzing
              the movement of recording tape over a tape hea d.  The  laboratory/classroom is
              designed with careful attention to the  learning process.
