Title       : Analytical Instrumentation for an Environmental Studies Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1994    
File        : a9452371

Award Number: 9452371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian W. Moores bmoores@rmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Randolph-Macon College
	      
	      Ashland, VA  23005    804/798-8372

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Randolph-Macon College has obtained instrumentation that supports  laboratory
              instruction and student research in a new undergraduate  interdisciplinary
              program in environmental studies, and also in a  well-established and
              well-respected undergraduate program in  chemistry. Specifically, we have
              obtained a capillary gas  chromatograph equipped with a mass-spectrometric
              detector. The  goals of this project include: putting the laboratory component
              of  the new environmental studies major on a firm foundation, providing  an
              interesting and scientifically rigorous laboratory experience  for
              general-education non science majors, and enriching the  laboratory curriculum
              for chemistry majors and minors. Another goal  is to establish a connection
              with regional secondary-school  teachers. A specific objective is the
              incorporation of  project-oriented environmental chemistry experiments in the 
              introductory environmental studies laboratory course and in the  organic
              chemistry course, as well as in the advanced chemistry  laboratory course
              sequence. Inclusion of project-oriented  experiments has been shown to enhance
              student interest in  laboratory curricula, and to prepare students better for
              the  environmental and/or chemical workplace or graduate program. A  further
              objective is to provide well-motivated senior environmental  studies or
              chemistry majors an opportunity to carry out original  research on a senior
              project in water pollution and air pollution.  A third objective is to
              introduce sophisticated analytical instru-  mentation to non science majors
              interested in environmental or  forensic science. We are not aware of the use
              of GC/MS with  lower-level science or non science majors (below the organic 
              chemistry course); our target audience includes not only  environmental studies
              and chemistry majors and minors, but also non  science students who take these
              lab courses as a terminal  experience.
