Title       : Spatio-temporal Analysis of Ecological and Physical Systems at Landscape to
               Regional Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9452810

Award Number: 9452810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Logan A. Norris norrisla@ccmail.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia A. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Walstad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Jon Kimerling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The proposal requests support for five graduate research  traineeships for up
              to five years in the emerging field of "Spatio-  temporal Analysis of
              Ecological and Physical Systems at Landscape  to Regional Scales."  This field
              focuses explicitly on space and  time as relevant variables for explaining the
              behavior of  biological and physical components of hydrologic sciences, and 
              forestry.  The proposed training program addresses three targeted  GRT
              disciplinary areas:  Environmental Biology (Ecological Studies  and Long-term
              Projects): Hydrology: and Environmental Physical and  Mathematical Science and
              Engineering.  It involves a core  curriculum and five disciplinary emphasis
              areas:  forest ecology,  hydrology, spatial analysis/modelling, remote sensing
              , and  geographic information systems (GIS).  The training program  integrates
              fourteen faculty in the Department s of Geosciences,  forest science and Forest
              Resources in (1) graduate training, (2)  funded research, (3) established
              connections with government and  industry, and (4) existing institutional
              capacity relevant for  research in the field, especially involving large-are,
              long-terms  datasets, GIS and remote sensing technology, and spatial analysis 
              techniques.  The proposed program uses existing institutional  connections to
              enhance recruitment, context- and contact-building  opportunities, dissertation
              improvement funding, and career  opportunities for graduates.  A special
              program is proposed to  increase participation of underrepresented groups in
              this field.
