Title       : An Open Systems Computing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9452567

Award Number: 9452567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20106              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Modesitt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kiumi Akingbehin  (Principal Investigator former)
              David H. Yoon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Y. Tsui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Maxim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce S. Elenbogen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452567  Akingbehin                                                Open Systems
              are computing systems which are based on  nonproprietary multivendor
              components. As computing installations  of all types (large and small) move
              away from single-vendor  proprietary architectures to more and more open
              architectures, U.S.  colleges and universities are increasingly faced with the 
              responsibility of introducing open systems concepts into the  undergraduate
              curriculum. Most colleges and universities today lag  behind in introducing
              these concepts in a coordinated and conscious  manner. Academic laboratories
              today are still largely configured  using single-vendor homogeneous computing
              systems. The increasing  popularity of computing networks which support
              multivendor  configurations (e.g. Novell Netware) is a first step in the right 
              direction and is also evidence of the inevitable eminence of open  systems
              computing.  This development of an open systems computing  laboratory is based
              on the three most popular computing platforms  today in the PC to Workstation
              range; namely IBM/PC, Macintosh, and  Sun/UNIX. Supporting equipment include a
              postscript printer, a  Novell network, a tape mass storage, and appropriate
              software and  interfaces. The number of platforms is kept to three to reduce 
              complexity, make the problem tractable, and still illustrate  important open
              systems concepts. The laboratory serves as the  vehicle for developing and
              offering a three credit-hour elective  course titled Open Systems Computing.
              The course will fully utilize  the laboratory and will provide hands-on
              training in the three  important open systems concepts of multiple-platform 
              interconnectivity, interoperability, and extensibility. In addition  to the
              development of the new course, several undergraduate  computing courses
              including Computer Architecture, Operating  Systems, Computer Networks, Systems
              Programming, Systems  Integration, and Computer Interfacing are directly
              enhanced by the  laboratory.
