Title       : Integration of Computational Chemistry into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1994       
File        : a9452373

Award Number: 9452373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14342              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Mueller paulm@tiger.hsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampden-Sydney College
	      
	      Hampden Sydney, VA  23943    804/223-4381

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452373  Mueller                              Molecular orbital and molecular
              mechanics calculations are fast  becoming routine tools of the practicing
              chemist. Furthermore,  these methods when combined with high quality computer
              graphics,  which allow students to manipulate and rotate structures, can 
              provide insights into many concepts of structure and bonding. This  proposal
              requests support for the purchase of a network of four  Silicon Graphics Indy
              workstations equipped with the software  package Spartan. The use of these
              workstations and program will be  implemented in both lecture and laboratory in
              the sophomore organic  chemistry courses. Building on this foundation, we will
              use the  workstations for student projects in Advanced Lab courses and in 
              Physical and Medicinal chemistry courses. Because SGI has developed  a GUI that
              will allow students to operate the system without  knowledge of UNIX and
              because Spartan has graphical features that  will allow students to easily
              perform calculations and manipulate  3D structural and orbital representations,
              we believe that this  program is appropriate for sophomore organic students.
              Since the  relationship between structure and reactivity are covered through 
              the topics of frontier molecular orbital theory, stereochemistry, 
              conformational effects, and steric strain in organic chemistry,  this course
              provides an ideal entry point. Students will receive  supervised and structured
              training on the use of these instruments  in fall term organic. Having become
              familiar while sophomores with  the operation of the program running on the
              workstation,  upperclassmen will be encouraged to use these tools for more 
              sophisticated applications in advanced level laboratory and lecture  courses.
