Title       : Short-time Optical Processes of Coherent Molecular States in Condensed Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1995     
File        : a9422958

Award Number: 9422958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Cina   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Jeffrey A. Cina at the Department of Chemistry of the   University of
              Chicago is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program at NSF for theoretical research which   interprets and
              predicts phenomena associated with time-resolved optical   excitations.  Work
              is being carried out on several different topics, all   involving matter in the
              condensed phase. A major theme of this work is   the study of coherently
              organized states of matter. One kind of coherence   involves spatially
              localized states where, for example, left handed and   right handed geometries,
              or conformations, are distinguished; other kinds   of coherences involve the
              vibrational motions of the nuclei. Another   major theme of the work is the
              study of solvent effects on the   excitations of molecules in solution.  
              Ultra-short pulses of laser light provide a powerful means to place   matter
              into unusual states, far from thermal equilibrium. These states   may have
              unusual chemical or material properties quite different from   those of
              condensed matter in its more normal states. The work under this   grant
              involves theoretical studies which explore the properties of these   unusual
              states as well as how they may be prepared and how they may be   detected. The
              work is being carried out in close and direct contact with   people who are
              making related experimental studies. In this way, the   understanding coming
              from the theoretical work is being applied, in the   near term, to the analysis
              and interpretation of experimental data.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
