Title       : Signalling versus Screening: The Power of Forward Induction in Sequential
               Bargaining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9422563

Award Number: 9422563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45135              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Deneckere rjdeneck@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9422563  Raymond Deneckere    One of the most enduring puzzles in economics
              is why real world bargaining is characterized by so many apparent
              inefficiencies such as strikes, work slowdowns, and failures to reach
              agreements on contractural terms when it is known that both parties can benefit
              from an agreement.  In such situations at least one of the parties must be
              uncertain about either its gains from trade and/or its opponent's gains from
              trade.  We know this must be so because of Rubinstein's pioneering
              demonstration that when the gains to both parties from trading is common
              knowledge, then the unique bargaining equilibrium has the two parties agreeing
              immediately.  Unfortunately, game theory has been unable to extend Rubinstein's
              uniqueness result to the case where the parties have incomplete information
              without making unrealistic assumptions about the ability of the bargainers to
              communicate with each other or imposing ad hoc restrictions on the equilibrium.
               This project will examine the conditions under which one very plausible
              restriction on the bargaining equilibrium-- that it satisfy Kohlberg and
              Merten's forward induction requirement-- is sufficiently strong so as to
              eliminate all bargaining equilibria but one.  Such a result would uncover a
              fundamental link between rational bargaining delay and private information and
              move game theory forward in explaining the bargaining outcomes we actually
              observe.    Preliminary work by the principal investigators concerning the case
              there the buyers are better informed than the sellers indicate that a key
              variable is the rate at which the players discount the future.  When the
              discount rate is low, the bargaining equilibrium is semi-pooling and trade
              occurs in exactly three rounds.  When the discount rate is high, all buyer
              types pool by making frivolous offers until the seller's beliefs cross a
              threshold, at which point the buyers make a serious offer that is then always
              accepted by the seller.
