Title       : Collusion in Exchange Networks: An Experimental Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9422883

Award Number: 9422883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip Bonacich bonacich@soc.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of collusion in exchange networks.  A series of laboratory
              experiments, using a variety of networks of exchange and communication, will
              test hypotheses about the positions in social networks most likely to develop
              coalitions with each other, and the shapes of networks most conducive to
              coalition formation.  This research springs from the theoretical work of
              Richard Emerson, who proposed that power in exchange networks tends to
              equalize.  Those initially with less power have strategies available to
              increase their power, among which is the possibility of forming countervailing
              coalitions.  Individuals with less initial power can increase their power by
              forming a single bargaining unit.  The designs of previous experiments have
              precluded this possibility by preventing non-bargaining subjects from
              communicating with each other.  The present research project suggests a model
              predicting which positions will form coalitions in exchange networks, and a
              series of experiments will test the model.  The model is an advance over
              Emerson's in two respects.  First, it implies that coalitions may form between
              weak positions that do not share a common trading partner, and it predicts that
              coalitions may form between classes of positions that are quite remotely
              connected in the network.  Emerson's model was limited to weak positions that
              shared a common trading partner.  Second, it describes a new incentive for
              forming coalitions: the reduction of uncertainty in unstable networks.  Unlike
              coalitions of the weak, these are coalitions between exchange partners.  %%%  
              This project is fundamental research on the ways that coalitions may affect the
              power of individuals in social networks of various shapes, and thus it
              addresses crucial questions in theories of social capital.  The work is
              connected to emerging new theories of latent classes that can be tested in the
              laboratory and then extended to help explain degrees of inequality in actual
              communities.  The structure of social networks may turn out  to be a major
              factor shaping the rewards individuals receive in social exchanges, quite apart
              from the effect of their skills or other previously recognized attributes of
              human capital.
