Title       : Physical Mechanisms Contributing to Climate Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9422512

Award Number: 9422512
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald E. Newell renewell@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   ATM-9422512  Newell, Reginald  Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
              Title: Physical Mechanisms Contributing to Climate Variability    This project
              seeks to understand how changes in processes involving water in its various
              forms influence changes in the climate system.  Through evaporation  at the
              ocean surface solar energy is converted into latent heat then transported as
              such within the atmosphere.  When the water vapor condenses and precipitation 
              occurs the latent heat is released in to the atmosphere.  While the water vapor
              is being transported in the atmosphere it undergoes radiative cooling in the
              infrared  as well as absorbing solar radiation in the near infrared Water vapor
              therefore plays a major role in the energy budget of the atmosphere.  It has
              been found  that water vapor is transported from one place to another in the
              atmosphere in the form of relatively long (10,000-12,000 km) relatively thin
              (~400-500km wide)  filaments which may be termed atmospheric rivers.  These
              filaments are often entrained into low pressure systems with the result that
              the low pressure systems  deepen.  One of the main objectives of this work is
              to understand from detailed grid point data provided by the European Center for
              Medium-range Weather  Forecasts (ECMWF) how the rivers form, how they influence
              cyclone development, how their paths vary from year to year, how the injection
              of energy they  bring to middle latitudes influences waves patterns there and
              how they are modified during interannual, interdecadal and ice-age changes.  It
              has been found  that rivers are important components of rapidly developing
              cyclones termed "bombs."  The interaction of these two phenomena will be
              studied.  The river brings  a pulse of latent heat into the cyclone system. 
              When more details about the river phenomena are understood a numerical model of
              it will be constructed.  Several  new data sets from satellites will be
              collected that may help in defining the positions of rivers over the globe. 
              These includ e satellites that measure column water  vapor contents like SSM/I,
              GPS/MET and ERs-1 and 2 as well as satellites that measure rainfall patterns
              over the ocean.  Such patterns show evidence of water  vapor flux convergence
              and may be treated as indicators of the leading edges of rivers.  Standard
              rainfall data may be used to monitor the leading edges over  land masses.  One
              interpretation of floods is that rivers which normally produce water vapor flux
              convergence occasionally, in certain regions, are channelled  into preferred
              paths during a flood regime.  To use this concept the climatology of river
              patterns must be described from as long a data set as possible.  Five  years of
              ECMWF data is proposed to be used for this purpose; the work may be carried
              back in time (~15 years) once the reanalyzed data sets are available.   This
              approach will be applied to two recent examples of floods; the Mississippi
              flood of summer 1993 and the Hong-Kong-South China flood of summer 1994.   The
              latter produced 1-2 meters of rain in about three week, by far the largest
              amount since records began in 1884.    If it turns out that floods are related
              to river positions in this manner then it is obviously necessary to find out
              what controls these positions.  Patterns of cold  fronts and divergent wind
              components in the lower atmosphere, association with El Nino, relationships
              with potential vorticity patterns and upper troposphere  water vapor all will
              be studied.    Climate fluctuations are being studied from data sets on surface
              ocean wind, temperature and relative humidity obtained from ships report.  The
              reports are used  to estimate the flux of energy between the atmosphere and the
              ocean.  The seasonal and non-seasonal modes of variation of sea-air energy
              exchange are being  related to sea surface temperature and free air
              temperature, non-seasonal anomalies in an effort to understand why there is a
              strong linkage between these  fluctuations.  As the main ocean-atmosphere
              energy transfer term is latent heat and  the main heating rate for the free
              troposphere is latent heat liberation, the  river concept is useful because it
              connects these two regions.  If the rainfall patterns due to rivers can be
              isolated, empirical orthogonal function analysis can  be used to study seasonal
              and non-seasonal changes in the convergent and divergent regions and related to
              those already discussed as atmospheric modes.  There  exist a number of
              temperature limits in the climate system and work is under way to find the
              physical mechanisms that control these limits.  Cloud and moisture  data are
              also being studied in conjunction with a radiative transfer program as the
              limits appear to involve a number of physical factors.    This research is
              important because it seeks to improve understanding of major processes that
              affect climate variability and change.
