Title       : Institutional Responses to Market Imperfections in the Supply of Credible
               Medical Effort and Health Insurance in Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9422768

Award Number: 9422768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Leonard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422768  Leonard    Without an adequate framework the market for medical
              services in  Africa is inhibited, privatization can not fully develop, and 
              patients and clinicians are unable to consummate relations that  would benefit
              them both.  The African state has a determining  influence on these
              institutional structures.  This research  investigation explores how the
              existing institutions surrounding  African medical practice do and could work
              and the political  dynamics of their change.    A model is developed of the
              demand for "credible medical effort"  which is based on the value of future
              working potential.   Incentive aligning contracts between the patient and the 
              clinician are shown to achieve a superior solution to 'classical'  markets in
              this unobservable good.  The introduction of an  institution which can collect
              'hostages' of value to the  clinician in a renegotiation-proof manner also is
              shown to be  able to achieve a yet superior solution.  Theoretical 
              investigation on the necessary characteristics of such  institutions identifies
              a range of possible alternatives.    The project's model of the economic costs
              of illness allows  examination of the role of emergency and long run credit as
              well  as insurance in the purchase of health care.  The role of the  extended
              family in the willingness to pay for health care is  tested.  Traditionally
              viewed as an insurance scheme, it is  hypothesized that the extended family may
              function as a source of  emergency credit.  This potential distinction has
              direct policy  implications.    Given these two economic tests, research is
              proposed at three  sites.  The structure and success of clinics in Tanzania,
              which  are operated on a franchise basis, will be investigated.  It is 
              hypothesized, first, that the franchising observed is indeed an  economic
              institution designed to provide credible medical effort,  and, secondly, that
              patients exhibit patterns of use which are  consistent with their awareness of
              an willingness to pay for its  provision.  Hou sehold surveys in Cameroon and
              Ethiopia will be  administered to investigate both the awareness and
              willingness to  pay for credible medical effort and the role of the extended 
              family in the ability to pay for health care.  At all three sites  the politics
              of institutional change and the issue of what  institutional structures are
              consistent with the managerial  capabilities of the African state will be
              explored.  ***
