Title       : Collaborative Research on Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Urban Homicide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9422272

Award Number: 9422272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol W. Kohfeld C1929@UMSLVMA.UMSL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Rosenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422272  Kohfeld  The overall objective of this research is to explain both
              long- and short-run changes in the temporal and spatial distribution of
              homicide in St. Louis over the period 1960-1994.  Two hypotheses frame the
              specific aims of the project:  the diffusion hypothesis, which accounts for
              variability in homicide on the basis of interpersonal processes that directly
              link homicide events to one another, and the independent-generation hypothesis,
               which accounts for variation in homicide in terms of changes in
              social-ecological conditions.  Individual homicide events are coded in detail
              from police records for the 35-year period of study to provide a highly
              differentiated classification of homicide events.  These events are aggregated
              for selected time intervals, for varying spatial units, and for varying
              homicide types.  The analytic strategy is to conduct repeated cross-sectional
              analyses over systematically varied units of time and space for homicide events
              classified according to characteristics of victims and offenders (race, gender,
              age) and incidents (gun. drug, gang, victim-offender relationship).  An
              innovative feature is the use of geographic information system software as a
              fundamental component of the measurement of both homicide events and other
              measures used in prediction..  The analyses are carried our with statistical
              models appropriate for the highly skewed distributions of events such as
              homicide.  The completed data set will include more than 5.000 homicides that
              have occurred in St. Louis since 1960, data from the census years 1950-1990,
              and data from other sources designed to measure related behavioral processes. 
              The research will produce a comprehensive account of the spatial and temporal
              structure of urban homicide that can advance scientific understanding of a
              serious national problem.  %%%  This is a study of the distribution of homicide
              in St. Louis over the period 1960-1994.  It examines that distribution over
              both time and space to test two differing hypotheses  advanced to explain the
              distribution and occurrence of murders.  The diffusion hypothesis explains
              homicide as the result of interpersonal behaviors that directly link one
              homicide with another.  The independent-generation hypothesis explains homicide
              as the result of changes in socioeconomic conditions.  To investigate the
              hypotheses, this study will code the characteristics of St. Louis homicides in
              great detail and then aggregate homicide and their characteristics across
              various periods of time and units of space.  The analysis of these aggregated
              homicide patterns will involve repeated cross-sectional analyses for the most
              salient characteristics of the homicides, characteristics such as traits of
              victims and offenders (e.g., race, gender, age) and of the homicide incident
              (e.g., whether the incident involves guns, drugs, gangs, or certain
              victim-offender relationships).  Geographic information software will play an
              important role in organizing, displaying, manipulating, and analyzing the
              homicide data.  The analysis will be based on more than 5,000 homicides.  The
              data set to be produced will include the data on the 5,000 homicides plus
              geographically- and temporally-organized data from censuses and other sources
              relevant to measuring behavioral processes related to explaining homicide.  The
              statistical analyses will be tailored for skewed distributions such as those
              characterizing homicide data.  The research results will provide a
              comprehensive account of the structure or urban homicide that will advance
              scientific understanding of this serious national problem.  ****
