Title       : Social Processes in Exchange Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9422974

Award Number: 9422974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Markovsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Lovaglia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of social processes in exchange networks.  It extends a program
              of theory-based investigations on power and social exchange into other
              fundamental sociological and social psychological processes: status,
              distributive justice, and legitimacy.  The foundation for this research,
              Network Exchange Theory has been tested chiefly within a specialized type of
              experimental exchange setting in which agents linked in networks negotiate over
              pools of resources under various conditions that govern transactions.  This new
              research will broaden the scope of Network Exchange Theory by developing and
              testing exchange settings more akin to those found in society.  To this end,
              the researchers will adapt their experimental paradigm to permit valued
              resources to enter the exchange system at different network locations, and to
              move through the network as exchanges transpire.  Agents in the network thus
              engage in true exchanges of one type of resource for another, rather than the
              simpler single-resource pool-divisions of previous experiments.  After
              calibrating the new setting and running tests with different network
              structures, the researchers will integrate the social processes.  Status,
              distributive justice, and legitimacy are all predicted to have specific,
              independent effects on resource distribution in exchange networks.  These occur
              through their influence on negotiation tactics and evaluations of exchange
              outcomes, and are modeled by the theory.      %%%     This set of experiments
              is fundamental scientific research on social capital, the capacity to gain
              resources that an individual may have on the basis of position in a social
              network and of socially-ascribed status.  Thus it is a contribution to the
              fundamental knowledge base concerning human capital, testing and developing
              formal models of how factors beyond individual skill and motivation may affect
              the incomes and careers of individuals.
