Title       : Wage Trajectories in Occupations Segregated by Gender and Race
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1998   
File        : a9422236

Award Number: 9422236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula England   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1041,1092,CVIS,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of wage trajectories in sex-segregated and race-segregated
              jobs, using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, with survey
              waves each year between 1979 and 1994, and information on when workers changed
              employers.  This research assesses whether favorable industrial placement
              affects wage levels and returns to seniority to the same degree for jobs with
              all race and sex compositions.  The alternative hypothesis is that industrial
              premiums, in higher wages or steeper wage trajectories, apply primarily to jobs
              filled largely by white males.  If this is true, then the effects of sex and
              race composition on wages are greater in industries with higher wages. 
              Theories of "new structuralists" posit that high-wage industries and firms also
              have steeper returns to seniority, because of union-negotiated seniority-based
              raises or internal labor markets.  Yet the claim has never been tested on data
              with measures of seniority, nor has the possible interaction of such effects
              with sex and race composition been explored.  The present research fills this
              crucial gap.  %%%   Scientific contributions of this Human Capital project
              include assessment of whether: 1) the sex and race composition of jobs affects
              wage levels, with composition measured for more detailed job categories than in
              previous research; 2) the sex and race composition of jobs affects wage growth
              with seniority; 3) higher paying firms also offer steeper wage growth as
              seniority within an organization accumulates; 4) the sex and race composition
              of jobs interacts with industry and firm characteristics such that premiums in
              industries and organizations with higher starting wages and higher returns to
              seniority accrue primarily to jobs filled by white males; and 5) effects of
              industry or sex and race composition have diminished or increased in recent
              years as the economy has restructured.  Learning the truth concerning these
              hypotheses will clarify the extent to which both individuals and the nation
              suffer from the under -utilization of the skills and abilities of many
              Americans.
