Title       : Coordination Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9422650

Award Number: 9422650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Turvey turvey@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will examine the rhythmic coordination between two  limbs in
              patterns that are exhibited by humans in simple (e.g.,  two limbs moving at one
              tempo), moderately complex (e.g., one  limb moving at twice the frequency of
              another), and very complex  (e.g., 7-ball juggling) activities.  Its objective
              is twofold,  (1) to identify general (dynamical) principles that govern the 
              stability and variability of rhythmic interlimb coordinations,  and (2) to
              understand how these principles apply in coordinating  the limbs with respect
              to objects and other environmental  influences.  Four classes of experiments
              will use two tasks,  swinging hand-held pendulums and cascade juggling.  The 
              experiments will manipulate the phase relation between the limbs  (e.g., moving
              in the same or opposite directions), the  frequencies at which they oscillate
              together when coordinated,  and the frequencies at which they tend to oscillate
              when not  coordinated.  Spatial and temporal features of the environmental 
              information constraining the rhythmic patterns will also be  varied. 
              Computerized motion recorders will analyze movement  patterns in three
              dimensions, and theory and methods of nonlinear  dynamics will be used to
              address them.  The types of rhythmic interlimb coordination patterns under
              study  are common and basic to very many everyday activities, as  seemingly
              nondescript as walking and as skilled as playing a  musical instrument.  The
              behavioral simplicity of the basic  coordination pattern is deceptive; its
              understanding requires  that we use recent advances in a branch of physics to
              identify  lawful regularities within which cognitive (psychological) 
              constraints on movement can be defined nonarbitrarily.  This  so-called
              dynamical perspective promises a richer set of  constraints on modeling what
              the brain has to do in order that  coordinated rhythmic movements in general
              and locomotion in  particular can be executed.  It should also provide new 
              hypotheses about the causes of movement disorders as well as  ideas for
              designing prosthetic and robotic limbs.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
