Title       : Economic Organization, Efficiency and Market Failure in Households and Local
               Economies in Sub-Saharan Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1995   
File        : a9422886

Award Number: 9422886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Udry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1092,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9422886    Empirical studies of consumer demand, labor supply and household 
              production are commonly based on the premise that families behave  as though
              they are single individuals.  However, a growing number  of studies have
              concluded that families should be modeled as the  outcome of the interaction
              between household members with diverse  preferences and resources.  This
              project derives and tests the  implications of the assumption made by virtually
              all models of  the household that intra-family allocation is efficient.  The 
              project contains three components, concerned respectively with  the economic
              organization of families, the market environment  within which African
              households live, and the possible existence  of community mechanisms which
              internalize local environmental and  learning externalities in sub-Saharan
              Africa.    Within many African households, agricultural production is  carried
              out simultaneously on many plots controlled by different  members of the
              household.  This is an ideal environment for  examining the internal
              organization of families, because  efficiency implies that variable factors
              should be allocated  efficiently across these plots.  Preliminary results base
              don  Burkina Faso data indicate that plots controlled by women are  farmed much
              less intensively than similar plots within the  household planted with the same
              crop in the same year, but  controlled by men.  These results, if confirmed,
              contradict the  efficiency of resource allocation of the household.  This
              project  extends this methodology to a variety of other African contexts  and
              examines the causes of the violation of efficiency.   Theoretical research is
              required to establish the classes of  models of the household consistent with
              the pattern of empirical  violations of efficiency.    This project also
              studies the existence of community mechanisms  which provide incentives for
              individuals to engage in  agricultural experimentation and internalize local
              environmental  externalities.  The current project  is for short-term
              preliminary  fieldwork in Ghana that will permit the design of the survey that 
              will be used for extensive survey-based field research in Ghana.
