Title       : The Relationship of Foraging Strategy and Social Organization in Western Lowland
               Gorillas and Chimpanzees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9422438

Award Number: 9422438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270195             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Doran ddoran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                There is no consensus on the underlying cause of the evolution of a particular
              type of social system.  One popular hypothesis is that the differences in great
              ape social organization, in particular, are primarily the result of differences
              in foraging behavior; that differences in the quantity and distribution of food
              (both spatially and temporally) result in differing levels of within-group
              feeding competition, which in turn is the underlying cause for differences in
              social organization.    The African apes differ considerably in their social
              organizations, with mountain gorilla groups being cohesive, and chimpanzee and
              bonobo groups being non-cohesive.  There are also considerable differences in
              in their diets.  Mountain gorillas are leaf-eaters because of their habitat,
              while chimpanzees and bonobos are primarily fruit eaters, and their resources
              are distributed unevenly in time and space.  This therefore appears compatible
              with the hypothesis just described.   However, while a great deal is known
              about mountain gorilla behavior, little is known about the habits of western
              lowland gorillas, even though they are the more numerous. More interestingly,
              the diet of the western lowland gorilla is less well documented, but looks to
              be considerably more frugivorous than that of the mountain gorilla, and may be
              very close to that of the chimpanzee.    This research project, to be conducted
              by a young and committed scientist, will establish study conditions
              (habituation) with lowland mountain gorillas and study this and other important
              questions in ape sociality and behavior.  This is essential if we are ever to
              isolate the factors that explain the diverse array of social organizations in
              our close relatives, and ultimately, if we are to identify the factors which
              shaped early human social organization.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
