Title       : Gender Inequalities Across Metropolitan Labor Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9422546

Award Number: 9422546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73492              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reeve D. Vanneman reeve@cwmills.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1041,1092,CVIS,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of gender inequalities across metropolitan labor markets. 
              Existing theory suggests that a principal cause promoting gender equality is
              the growth of women's labor force participation.  Participation rates are
              themselves consequences of the demand for female labor, especially of the
              degree to which a labor market has high concentrations of female-dominated
              occupations.  A high demand for female labor reduces other aspects of gender
              inequality through market, normative, and political mechanisms.  This research
              will test the normative linkages by using survey data aggregated to the area
              level.  The political linkages will be tested with data from Equal Employment
              Opportunity complaints and from other more general indicators of women's
              political mobilization.  Testing these ideas requires combining area and
              individual data into three contextual analyses.  First, area measures of labor
              demand, norms, mobilization, and occupation will be related to the size of the
              gender coefficient in a standard earnings function predicting hourly wages. 
              Second, the demand, normative, and political contexts will be related to the
              gender composition of a worker's occupation.  Third, a standard labor supply
              analysis will be extended to include a measure of the occupational composition
              of the area's labor force.  A final analysis will summarize all the contextual
              relationships within a single framework with areas rather than individuals as
              the unit of analysis.  %%%   This research differs from earlier work on gender
              differences in the rewards to human capital by emphasizing the role played by
              the economic, social, and political environment in which women find themselves.
               Only some of the progress towards gender equality that we have witnessed in
              recent years can be understood as the result of the changing characteristics of
              individual women.  This project will systematically examine how differences in
              labor markets, normative climate, and political mobilization might explain more
              of the variation in  gender equality than do studies based on individuals
              alone.  Thus it will strengthen our understanding of socio-political factors
              that shape the rewards men and women receive for the human capital they
              possess.
