Title       : An Interactive Interpretation of Quantum Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9422185

Award Number: 9422185
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39511              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Healey rhealey@U.Arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity are the two central pillars on
              which contemporary physics rests.  Quantum field theory links and builds on
              them, thus constituting our most fundamental physical theory.  It is of proven
              predictive and explanatory power.  Yet this power has been purchased at
              considerable conceptual costs:  the conceptual foundations of quantum field
              theory are ill-understood.  Success in deriving predictions from its complex
              mathematical formalism has not required the kind of clear analysis which is the
              goal philosophy of physics.    Previous research by Professor Healey has
              resulted in an interpretation of non-relativistic quantum theory.  In this
              research, he is investigating the prospects of extending this work to an
              interpretation of quantum field theory.  If this extension proves possible,
              this would result in a significant advance in our most fundamental physical
              theory.  But the possibility of the extension is not a presupposition of this
              research.  Whether or not the interactive interpretation that he has already
              advanced can be successfully extended to quantum field theory, progress in
              understanding that theory is most likely to result from a focused investigation
              which begins with a definite interpretation of ordinary quantum mechanics, even
              if that interpretation must be more or less radically modified before it yields
              understanding of quantum field theory.
