Title       : Autoregressive Conditional Duration, Arch, Common Features and Cointegration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9422575

Award Number: 9422575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197941             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Engle rengle@ucfd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9422575  Robert Engle    As computers increase in power and memory it
              becomes feasible to collect and analyze data at higher and higher frequencies. 
              Data sets that record every transaction-- the highest frequency possible-- now
              exist for many financial data sets as well as microeconomic transactions such
              as telephone calls and credit card purchases that are recorded by computers. 
              The analysis of such data sets poses new and interesting econometric
              challenges, one of them being the choice of the proper interval of time within
              which to aggregate the data so as to generate a data set with observations
              spaced evenly apart.  The problem with fixed interval analysis is that it can
              leave the investigator with many uninformative data points or disguise the
              periods of most interest.  The PI proposes an alternative to fixed interval
              analysis which he calls autoregressive conditional duration.  Instead of
              selection a fixed interval for analyzing the data, it is proposed to let the
              interval between transactions be the random variable to be analyzed.  Thus the
              data set becomes a list of durations and characteristics of each transaction. 
              This procedure models the time intervals directly without using auxiliary data
              or imposing assumptions on the causes of the time flow.    The ACD model is
              used to analyze the price, volume and duration process for IBM stock
              transactions.  This research can help institutions forecast market liquidity
              and volatility on a high frequency basis.  It can also have implications for
              government interventions in financial markets either through transactions or
              through circuit breakers.    The research also includes a number of other
              projects.  One project examines non-linear business cycles.  The nature of the
              non-linearities is always difficult to extract because there are relatively few
              cycles in recent history.  However, if sectors and final goods categories
              regions of the country all participate in the business cycle, then the
              non-linearities ought to be common and easier to  detect.  An economic model is
              developed to motive these ideas.  Another project involves using ARCH models of
              volatility to produce a term structure of volatility forecasts.  These
              forecasts can be used to construct a portfolio whose value is unaffected by
              portfolio shocks.  Such portfolios provide a new dimension in which to examine
              the accuracy of volatility forecasts: Is the term structure of volatility
              adequate to reduce the variance of such multiple maturity portfolios?
