Title       : Valuing Risk Under Alternative Reduction Strategies and Elicitation Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1995     
File        : a9422813

Award Number: 9422813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason F. Shogren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research examines how the economic value of risk is  affected by
              alternative reduction strategies and two  different elicitation
              mechanisms-experimental auction  markets and contingent valuation surveys.  The
              results will  help clarify fundamental methodological issues in valuation 
              which is central to environmental policy.  The approach is  illustrated through
              the specific example of the value of  reduced risk from Escherichia coli
              0157:H7 and Salmonella  from beef consumption, a particularly salient commodity
               given risk can be reduced privately by home preparation or  collectively with
              irradiation treatments or improved  production methods. The project employs a
              four phase design:  (1) mental models interviews to determine how subjects 
              assess the risk of food-borne pathogens and how best to  communicate food
              safety risks, and to guide the design of  the valuation studies; (2) a
              contingent valuation survey  that includes both in-person and mail interviews;
              (3)  experimental auction markets that use real food, real money  and repeat
              market experience; and (4) an internal and  external validation procedure where
              the internal check will  use cooked meat samples, and the external check will
              use  survey results from a commercial store that sells irradiated  products. 
              The project will explore:  (a) how to best  communicate risks of food-borne
              illness; (b) whether people  have general preferences for food safety rather
              than  pathogen-specific preferences; how preferences for risk  reduction vary
              with the severity of the risk; how "who" is  at risk-children vs.
              adults-influences preferences; (c)  relative preferences for alternative
              combinations of  collective action (safe handling labels, irradiation, Hazard 
              Analysis at Critical Control Points (HACCP)) and private  protection (home
              preparation-rare, medium, and well-done  hamburgers); (d) and if there is a
              systematic difference in  revealed values from the hypothetical contingent
              valuation  survey and the non-hypothetical contingent valuation  survey  and
              the non-hypothetical experimental auction markets.  This  research is supported
              under the Joint NSF/Private Sector  Research Initiative and the cooperating
              organization is the  American Meat Institute.
