Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Constructions of Citizenship and Peoplehood in
               Guam's Quest for Commonwealth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9422660

Award Number: 9422660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim Lane Scheppele   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422660  Schepple  The objective of this project is to investigate important
              questions about the rights and basic meaning of citizenship through a case
              study of the people of Guam.  This study views citizenship as a set of
              practices (juridical, political, economic, and cultural) that embody a wide
              range of modernizing processes in law, politics and culture.  It views
              peoplehood, or indigenous identity, as a set of practices that resist,
              appropriate, and transform citixenship practices.  The research draws together
              new theoretical and methodological approaches to narrative studies in law and
              in social science history with empirical studies in citizenship.  This study
              involved the solicitation and collection of narratives through individual and
              focus group interviews and through document study in Guam and selected mainland
              sites.  These narratives will be examined for what they reveal about how the
              people of Guam understand their political status and how they represent their
              identities in making rights claims.  The study will focus on episodes of rights
              claim seeking that will enable a critical analysis of the applicability of T.
              H. Marshall's theoretical narrative of the evolution of civil, political and
              social rights.  %%%  This study will investigate how the people of Guam are
              seeking a change in their political status to achieve an enhancement of the
              benefits and constitutional protections of the citizenship status granted them
              in 1950.  It will also analyze how the Chamoru people are working to achieve
              federal recognition of their status as the indigenous people of the island and
              of their right to self-determination,  It will seek to explain why these two
              sets of possibly conflicting claims to rights are converging, what are the
              historical and institutional contexts in which these claims are made, how these
              contexts affect how the people of Guam understand their political identities,
              and what Guam's quest for commonwealth status signifies for the meaning of
              citizenship, membership, and sovere ignty in the United States and its
              territories.  ***
