Title       : Dissertation Research: Coastal Foragers of the South-Central Andes and the
               Process of Sedentarization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1994   
File        : a9422105

Award Number: 9422105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Aldenderfer aldenderfer@alishaw.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Aldenderfer    Under the direction of Dr.Mark Aldenderfer, Ms. Karen Rasmussen 
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct  one season
              of excavation at the archaeological site of Yara which  is located on the
              desert coast of Peru. Previous work at the site  indicates that it was occupied
              during the Middle Archaic period,  between 6,000 and 8,000 years ago. The
              density and configuration  of the remains suggests that Yara may have been
              occupied on a  long term basis and Ms. Rasmussen will examine this possibility.
               She will excavate two large horizontal blocks, one centering on a  domestic
              area and the other around a possible cemetery. This  should permit exposure of
              such items as house floors, fire  hearths, storage areas and other indicators
              of a potential long-  term residential center. The site contains abundant
              faunal as  well as other cultural remains and Ms. Rasmussen will analyze  both.
                 After the end of the last Ice Age, human social organization in  many parts
              of the world was characterized by increased  sedentarization and the appearance
              of communities occupied for  extended periods of time. Most often this change
              is associated  with the appearance of agriculture and/or the herding of
              domestic  animals; archaeologists postulate that the appearance of these  new
              and rich food resources was responsible for the change in  settlement pattern.
              However the coast of Peru appears to be an  exception since sedentary
              communities seem to have emerged well  before domesticates became available.
              Ms. Rasmussen, as well as  many other archaeologists, want to understand what
              made this  transition possible and her excavation at Yara is directed  towards
              this end.    This research is important because it will provide data of 
              interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our  understanding of how
              complex society emerged and will contribute  to the training of a promising
              young scientist.
