Title       : Spectroscopic and Electrical Characterization of Buried Oxide Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9422369

Award Number: 9422369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Zvanut zvanut@uab.phy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,9164,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9422369  Zvanut  The aim of this work is to test new methods of buried oxide
              technology without the complication of device fabrication.  By identifying
              problems before device fabrication this work will provide characterization
              tools to streamline new fabrication techniques.  The study will examine defects
              in silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers and predict optimum fabrication methods
              for successful device operation.  The work will concentrate on the atomic level
              defects in the oxide layer of Si/SiO2/Si structures and their relationship with
              the electrical response.  Although the top Si layer of a SOI wafer is the
              critical layer for device operation, the quality of the insulating oxide
              'substrate' is also important to the success of the technology.  For example,
              it has been pointed out that this layer is responsible for total dose upset and
              inadequate lateral isolation.  These and related problems will be attacked by
              comparing the defect density and type of defects in buried oxides structures
              produced by several variations of a specific fabrication process.  The two
              processes which will be highlighted  here are thin buried oxides (less than
              200nm) and  oxides buried underneath SiGe layers.    The methods to be used for
              this study consist of a variety of electrical characterization techniques and
              electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR).  The first step will be to
              identify the difficulties in the electrical response of the buried oxide using
              electrical techniques such as capacitance-voltage current-voltage, and
              conductance measurements.  Then, the material will be examined from a different
              point of view focusing on the point defects (atomic level defects) using EPR. 
              This spectroscopic technique can provide chemical information about the defects
              at concentrations approaching those important to electronic devices.    The
              significance of this work to the advancement of knowledge lies in the power of
              EPR to identify chemically the problems which plague electronic materials. 
              These results will  provide general information of buried oxide materials;
              thus, it is expected that the conclusion and observations of this project will
              apply to the future generation of buried layer devices as well as those studied
              today.  ***
