Title       : Prototype Internet Services for the General Social Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1995      
File        : a9422785

Award Number: 9422785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Smith smitht@norcmail.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reginald P. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This is a prototype Internet service for the General Social Survey employing
              NCSA Mosaic.  The project will develop a system to provide enhanced access to
              survey data, using the General Social Survey for implementation of these
              integrated services, which will subsequently be extended to a variety of other
              survey data sets.  These services will provide facilities for hypertext viewing
              and searching of complete survey documentation, customized and documented
              extracts from data sets, statistical analysis, and File Transfer Protocol
              delivery of full or extracted data sets.  The General Social Survey is an ideal
              source of survey material to develop the system, because it is a highly diverse
              large dataset of complex structure, extensively documented in terms of
              publications based on each item, and has already been the basis of more than
              three thousand scientific publications and dissertations.  The system developed
              on the General Social Survey will then become the standard not only for
              providing survey data over Internet, but also for research design and data
              collection in new surveys.  %%%   This project is part of the Digital Library
              Initiative, adding questionnaire survey data to the kinds of information that
              can be managed effectively over Internet and contributing to the national
              information infrastructure.  Not only is the General Social Survey widely used
              in scientific research, but it has proven to be an excellent teaching tool at
              both the graduate and undergraduate levels.  Survey data are used extensively
              in government and commerce, so an advanced system for managing and distributing
              information of this kind will contribute to effective government and economic
              growth.
