Title       : RUI: Communication Complexity of Distributed Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1995     
File        : a9422199

Award Number: 9422199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68132              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pengyuan Chen chen@gac.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 This project concentrates on the study of communication  complexity, an
              important aspect of distributed computing,  using a continuous  model of H.
              Abelson.    It focuses on the development of a general method  for 
              establishing lower bound results on communication complexity  as well as to 
              obtain lower bounds for some important  concrete problems.  For that purpose, a
               study is conducted  to understand the geometric structure of continuous 
              distributed computations and to seek a mathematical  characterization of 
              communication complexity.  Relations of  the mathematical structure of the 
              computational problem to  its complexity are explored.  Connections between the
               characterization of communication complexity and the  classical Pfaff's
              problem  and between the design of  distributed algorithms and Hilbert's 13th
              problem  will also  be investigated.  Several conjectures about lower bounds
              are  tested  with the hope that a proof or disproof will result.  The tools and
              techniques  used in this study come mainly from  several branches of continuous
              mathematics  such as analysis,  differential geometry, and topology.    To aid
              the  computation of lower bounds on communication  complexity, a Mathematica
              symbolic  computing software  package is expanded and refined.  This package is
              important  for performing experiments in order to formulate and help  prove
              conjectures  about the lower bounds for various  problems.    An important part
              of this  project is the summer research  experience for undergraduate students
              under the  NSF Research  Undergraduate Institutions Program, who are directly 
              involved in  various aspects of this research.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
