Title       : Waves in the Lower Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9422869

Award Number: 9422869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220605             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Chimonas george.chimonas@eas.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The object of this research is to explore how wavelike disturbances are created
              in the lower atmosphere, how these waves contribute to turbulence and mixing,
              and how these waves influence the location of severe weather events such as
              storms and squall lines.    The waves of intent are gravity waves, ordered
              disturbances with wavelengths ranging from a few hundred meters to many
              hundreds of kilometers, and periods ranging from a few minutes to large
              fractions of a day.  The scales of these waves and some other physical
              characteristics allow them to interact strongly with meteorological systems
              such as storms, gusts, squall lines, and the turbulence that leads to
              atmospheric mixing.  The importance of these waves in meteorology has been
              recognized since the 1950's, but the challenge of learning how to apply the
              wave theory to practical situations remains.  The wave theory itself is still
              incomplete, particularly with respect to the origin of many of the waves and
              how they behave when they reach large amplitudes.    This proposal studies a
              wave generation mechanism that receives attention in engineering applications,
              but has been rather neglected in meteorology, Jeffreys' drag mechanism.  The
              mechanism originates with the friction that a fluid experiences as it moves
              over a rough surface - in the meteorological context, the surface of the earth.
               The disparate natures of the forces that drive the motion of the fluid and the
              surface forces that oppose the flow can result in a breakdown of basic flows
              parallel to the surface:  wavelike disturbances appear in the flow, extracting
              energy from the forces that drive the motion.    Previous studies of this
              process suggest that it may be very effective in producing the atmospheric
              waves that break to produce mixing and turbulence.  The studies also indicate
              that the process contributes to the strong, larger-scale waves associated with
              bands of severe weather.  The theory will be developed further and used to
              interpret particular meteorological events, prob ably in the Southeast.
