Title       : Design, Characterization, and Evaluation of Elastomeric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1998  
File        : a9422223

Award Number: 9422223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $627500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Mark james.mark@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9422223  Mark  End linking of functionally-terminated polymer chains will  be
              used to obtain elastomers of known and controlled  structures.  Some will
              contain dangling-chain  irregularities, and others unimodal and multimodal 
              distributions of network chain-lengths.  Included will be  trimodal networks
              and unusually broad pseudo-unimodal  networks obtained by combining
              separately-prepared batches  of polysiloxanes of widely varying molecular
              weights.  Additional elastomers will be produced under conditions  giviing
              structures that are unusual in other respects, for  example by cross linking in
              solution or in a state of  strain.  Experiments will be performed for
              identifying  strain-induced crystallization, in elongation, biaxial  extension,
              shear, and torsion.  Simulations will also be  carried out to characterize the
              crystallization occurring in  some new polysiloxane chains of unusually high 
              stereoregularity.  Elastomeric gels will also be studied,  including some
              involved in processing techniques giving  liquid-crystalline polymers of
              enhanced orientation.  Gelation  kinetics will be studied, as will diffusion 
              coefficients of solvents into and out of swollen networks.  Novel reinforcing
              fillers will be prepared by the  hydrolysis, photolysis, or thermolysis of
              organometallic  materials such as silicates, titanates, zirconates, 
              aluminates, and simple metal salts such as ferric chloride.  Of particular
              importance will be identifying the particle  size that maximizes reinforcement,
              and characterizing the  effects of  particle shape.  The resulting
              filler-reinforced  elastomers will be characterized primarily by mechanical 
              property measurements, electron microsocpy, and by X-ray and  neutron
              scattering.  Simulations will also be carried to  elucidate reinforcing
              mechanisms in filler-reinforced  elastomers in general.  Finally, experiments
              will be carried  out to exploit the ability of elastomeric domains to improve 
              the impact resistance of polymer-ceramic hybrid composites  in which the cer
              amic is the continuous phase.  %%%  The primary significance of these projects
              is the  achievement of a better molecular understanding of  rubberlike
              elasticity and the ways in which fillers  reinforce elastomers.  The results
              should provide importance  guidance for producing elastomeric materials and
              elastomeric-  modified ceramics having unusaully attractive mechanical 
              properties.
