Title       : Trusted Interoperation of Health-Care Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9422688

Award Number: 9422688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1303144            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Dawson dawson@sdl.sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaolei Qian  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9139,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9422688 Qian   This award is made in support of the NSF initiative
              ENG-CISE-IITA94,  National Challenges.  It  is a joint initiative between the
              Engineering Directorate and the Computer Information and Engineering
              Directorate.  SRI International, in collaboration with Stanford University
              Department of computer Science and Medicine, and Inova Health System,  will
              develop and demonstrate techniques for the trusted interoperation of autonomous
              heterogeneous health care databases containing sensitive data that mismatch in
              semantics, representations, and security/privacy policies.  This effort will be
              built on the query mediation framework developed under ARPA and Rome Laboratory
              sponsorship.    The framework supports the automated and efficient mediation of
              queries between autonomous heterogeneous databases.  Semantic connections
              between component databases are encoded in a knowledge base, which are then
              used by a mediator to automatically resolve mismatches and transform queries
              between component databases using the local language and schema, making a local
              database access data in multiple databases using the local language and schema,
              making interoperable both the data and the applications accessing the data in
              legacy databases. Technique will be developed and demonstrated for solving
              three critical problems that hinder the trusted query mediation of autonomous
              heterogeneous health care database containing sensitive data that mismatch in
              semantics, representations, and security/privacy policies.  In particular, the
              following questions will be answered:   1. A security/Privacy Policy Framework.
               What is the relationship and   difference between security and privacy? How
              can the security/privacy   policy of a health care database be characterized
              and formalized?  How   can we compare the security/privacy policies of
              autonomous    heterogeneous  health care databases?   2. Trusted Query
              Mediation.  When autonomous heterogeneous health care   databases are
              interoperating through query mediation, how c an we   guarantee the autonomy
              and security/privacy of component databases. In   other words, how can queries
              be mediated such  that neither the rights nor   the security/privacy of
              components databases are compromised?   3. Schema Mediation.  In constructing a
              physician's workstation as a uniform   interface to multiple autonomous
              heterogeneous health care databases,   how can a consistent view (schema) be
              constructed that (1) captures   exactly the data that are relevant to users of
              the workstation, and (2)   resolves all the mismatches in the relevant data? 
              These techniques will be implemented in a demonstration system that leverages
              off an existing one developed for the query mediation framework, which
              demonstrates query mediation between an clinic database and a hospital database
              ( adopted for the T-helper database for Stanford University School of
              Medicine).  Health care databases form Inova Health System and Stanford
              University School  of Medicine will be used in the demonstration.  This effort
              will contribute to the goal of developing and providing technology by which
              health care providers can access and share patients medical records while
              protecting the accuracy and privacy of  those records.
