Title       : Studies in Postwar Monetary Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9422584

Award Number: 9422584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153825             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Romer dromer@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422584  Romer  This project investigates a variety of aspects of monetary
              policy  in the postwar United States.  The first part investigates why 
              contractionary open-market operations typically raise long-term  interest
              rates.  The research uses the Federal Reserve's internal  inflation forecast
              and private forecasts to test the hypothesis  that contractionary policy
              actions raise the long-term rates  because market participants infer from the
              actions that the  Federal Reserve has unfavorable information about future 
              inflation.  The research tests whether the Federal Reserve has  useful
              information about inflation beyond what is known to market  participants,
              whether it tends to tighten when its forecasts of  inflation are higher than
              private forecasts, and whether private  forecasts of inflation are revised
              upward when the Federal  Reserve tightens.  The research also tests whether
              changes in  Federal Reserve policy are associated with changes in the premia 
              for holding securities of different maturities.    A second part of the project
              uses the evidence provided by times  when the Federal Reserve interfered with
              banks' ability to obtain  funds at prevailing interest rates to investigate the
               macroeconomic importance of credit market imperfections.  Many  theories
              assign an important role to such imperfections in the  behavior of economic
              aggregates.  But the fact most measures of  the functioning of credit markets
              may be affected by other  factors that influence aggregate activity makes these
              theories  difficult to test.  Since the Federal Reserve's direct credit 
              actions were aimed specifically at credit markets, however, it is  unlikely
              that they could have affected the economy through any  channel other than
              through these markets.  The research will  therefore use the evidence provided
              by these actions to examine  the effects of credit market disruptions on
              aggregate pricing  behavior, investment, inventory accumulation, and other 
              variables.    Additional portions of the research will in vestigate the
              response  of monetary policy to inflation and whether there are measures of 
              inflation that provide prompt evidence of changes in the  underlying inflation
              rate.
