Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Humphry Davy and the Rise of Modern Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1995    
File        : a9422201

Award Number: 9422201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6565               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Sorrenson rjs@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Romanticism" seems absolutely antithetical to science. We associate romanticism
              with poetry and emotion and set it opposite science and its associated
              qualities of rationality and objectivity.  Historians of science have
              traditionally accepted this view and have seen romanticism as an obstacle to
              good science and an unfortunate weakness of certain scientists which clouded
              their judgment and confounded their method.  Yet historical research has shown
              that romantic attitudes in science have not in fact obstructed the advance of
              science.  Indeed, one of the most important of scientists in the creation of
              modern chemistry, Humphry Davy,  was a romantic.  How did romanticism shape
              science and its institutions?  How did romanticism become incompatible with
              science?   The answer to these questions could help to create a rapprochement
              between the rationalist needs of contemporary science and the views of its
              romantic critics.    Julianne Tuttle's dissertation "Humphry Davy: A Case Study
              of Science and Romanticism" pursues questions arising from the striking
              observation of several Davy scholars that Romanticism dominated Davy's thought
              at some phases in his career but was almost absent in others.    Ms. Tuttle's
              dissertation centers around a close reading of Davy's works including
              unpublished journals, letters, lab notes, drafts of scientific papers, lecture
              notes, and poetry. This close reading will 1) track the prevalence of
              Romanticism in Davy's chemistry, epistemology, and notions of genius, 2)
              analyze how Davy integrated Romanticism with mainstream chemistry and method,
              and 3) discern and analyze instances in which Davy tempered or excluded his
              Romanticism in favor of a more fully Baconian, mechanistic, or nonmetaphysical
              science.    Ms. Tuttle's dissertation will contribute to the recent scholarship
              which has found Romanticism to be integral to the development of  modern
              science. Furthermore, taking Davy as a case study suggestive of larger trends,
              the dissertation will explore conflicts or incomp atibility between Romanticism
              and science with the goal of understanding how science was recast to exclude
              Romanticism.
