Title       : Research in Nuclear Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9422060

Award Number: 9422060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John W. Lightbody, Jr.                  
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $625000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. T. Fortune   (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Balamuth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Zurmuhle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422060  Fortune  A program will be carried out in experimental nuclear physics,
               using a variety of probes from a number of user facilities.  Specific areas
              that will receive attention include:  pion-induced  single and double charge
              exchange at LAMPF, muon capture at LAMPF  and TRIUMF, (n.p) single charge
              exchange at TRIUMF, electron  scattering at CEBAF and as part of the HERMES
              project at DESY,  and nuclear structure experiments at Michigan State and 
              elsewhere.  The single charge exchange experiments make use of  the new neutral
              meson spectrometer (NMS) at LAMPF and have two  major components - search for
              isovector spin-flip giant dipole  resonances, and non-analog single charge
              exchange as pathways in  sequential double charge exchange.  The double charge
              exchange  program seeks 1) to elucidate the role of single and double spin 
              flip, both to low-lying discrete states and to giant resonances,  2) to
              populate giant resonances built on the isovector giant  monopole, and 3) to
              clarify non-sequential aspects of the  reaction mechanism.  The muon capture
              experiments at LAMPF and  TRIUMF determine the induced pseudoscalar coupling
              constant of  the semileptonic weak interaction.  The (n.p) program at TRIUMF 
              include extraction of strength of higher multipoles - the spin  flip dipole and
              quadrupole.  The HERMES proposal involves the use  of newly developed polarized
              gas target technology to study in a  complete and precise way to spin structure
              of the nucleon.  It  will measure spin-dependent deep inelastic scattering from
              the  proton and neutron using the longitudinally polarized electron  beam of
              the HERA storage ring in Germany.  At CEBAF , several  issues are addressed. 
              Those include measurements of the  propagation of nucleons through the nuclear
              medium, in particular  an effect called color transparency, they also include
              pion  electroproduction on nucleons in nuclei and the study of the  structure
              of nuclei containing strange baryons.  Work in the area  of nuclear structure
              will concentra te on investigation of the  behavior of systems with a
              neutron-to-proton ratio significantly  different from that found in stable
              nuclei.  Particle gamma  coincidence techniques will be used to observe
              electromagnetic  transitions in nuclei with nearly equal numbers of neutrons
              and  protons with masses between 54 and 84.  Work on elementary  excitations in
              very light highly neutron-rich systems such as 6He  and 8He will also be
              pursued.  The relative role of Coulomb and  nuclear forces in the breakup of
              6He and related systems will be  studies at energies near 60 MeV/nucleon using
              a highly efficient  array of scintillation detectors to tag events in which
              breakup  is accompanied by gamma rays from the target.  ***
