Title       : Cooperative Molecular Motions in Polymer Glasses and Their Effects on Structure
               and Deformation Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9422049

Award Number: 9422049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert F. Yee afyee@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1037,1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9422049  Yee  At ordinary use temperatures - temperatures well below the 
              softening temperature of polymers - the origin of the  viscoelastic behavior is
              thought to be local molecular  motions in the frozen solid.  The occurrence of
              secondary  relaxations in a polymer is often related to ductile  behavior.  To
              achieve an understanding of this complex  relationship, a series of research
              projects will be aimed at  uncovering some fundamental relationships between
              molecular  structure and molecular mobilities.  The basic material used  in
              these studies, BPA-polycarbonate, has been chosen for its  well-known
              ductility.  The synthesis of several series of  homologous copolymers derived
              from BPA-polycarbonate has  generated the following unique and important
              observations:  1.  The secondary relaxation in BPA-polycarbonate is due to  the
              cooperative motion of about seven repeat units.  2. The  extent of cooperative
              motion can be systematically reduced  by the insertion of certain chemical
              linkages, e.g.,  terephthalate, into the backbone structure.  3.  The greater 
              the extent of cooperative motion, the more likely the  polymer is to exhibit
              ductile behavior (yielding).  Conversely, limiting the cooperation encourages
              brittle  behavior (crazing).  4.  Motions of elementary units along  the
              polymer chain, e.g., the rotation of phenylene rings,  can be constrained by
              other units along the chain and  between chains.  Such constraints also result
              in profound  changes in the mechanical behavior.  Copolymers with various 
              secondary relaxation characteristics will be synthesized to  obtain materials
              with different scales of cooperative  motions, and with different degrees of
              intrachain and  interchain constraints.  The scale of cooperative motion  will
              be tailored by changing the block lengths of the  bisphenol-A units between
              flexible terephthalate linkages.  These units act to delimit the cooperative
              motion.  The  strength of the intrachain constraint will be varied by 
              incorporating bulky tetramethylbisphe nol-A units into the  backbone.  Finally,
              the degree of the interchain constraint  via coupling will be controlled by the
              introduction of the  fluoride groups onto the phenyl rings.  These synthesized 
              materials, with various secondary relaxation  characteristics, will be used in
              stress relaxation  experiments.  %%%  The ultimate purpose of this work is to
              create a relatively  detailed understanding of how the structure and motions of
               polymer molecules can affect the interplay between ductile  behavior and
              brittle behavior in the materials.  Polymeric  materials are increasingly
              playing a critical, enabling role  in advanced engineering systems.  Yet,
              despite many  serendipitous discoveries, the relationship between the 
              molecular structure of polymers and their mechanical  properties remains an
              enigma.  An explanation of this  relationship requires an understanding of  how
              polymer  molecules aggregate into the solid state, and how this solid  state
              adjusts to the externally imposed stress and its time  dependence.  ***
