Title       : Option Value and Bargaining Power
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9422830

Award Number: 9422830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50766              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis R. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422830  Taylor    Few concepts in economics are as intuitive as the idea that 
              traders on the long side of a market receive little of the gains  from trade. 
              In the classic one-shot trading game in which  identical buyers each with unit
              demands for an indivisible  homogenous good face identical sellers each with
              one unit of the  good for sale, if buyers outnumber sellers then any outcome
              that  confers gains from trade to a buyer will be undercut by higher  bids from
              the buyers who would otherwise be frozen out.    By the same logic if sellers
              outnumber buyers, then sellers will  keep making lower offers until all gains
              from trade for the  sellers have been eliminated.  But this classic result is
              brittle  because the equilibrium abruptly changes when moving from more 
              sellers than buyers to more buyers than sellers and market  institutions affect
              the distribution of the gains from trade only  in the very special case in
              which the number of buyers and  sellers is equal.  The contribution of this
              research will be to  extend the classic one-shot trading game to an infinite
              horizon  environment with stochastic arrival of new traders.  This 
              generalization not only lends realism to the setting but it  softens the
              brittle "all-or-nothing" equilibrium outcome in an  intuitive and appealing
              way.  Preliminary findings indicate that  the equilibrium terms of trade depend
              both on spot market  conditions and market demographics.  When agents discount 
              heavily, the degree of imbalance in the spot-market plays the  central role in
              determining the equilibrium terms of trade, and  when agents are patient,
              market demographics are paramount.   Several pricing institutions are
              considered, and the incremental  value to the side of the market which posts
              prices is identified.   Under a simple dynamic adjustment process, the expected
              duration  of a market "correction" can be calculated.
