Title       : The Rise of Synthetic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9422068

Award Number: 9422068
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Rocke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Alan Rocke research,  focusing  on events in France but having a
              strong comparative dimension toward Germany, promises to shed important new
              light on such general questions as how local knowledge  becomes universal; how
              research schools exercise (or fail to exercise) influence more broadly; the
              reality and significance of national styles in science; the operation of
              nationalist and internationalist pressures in the pursuit of science; and the
              interaction of socio-cultural and internal factors in the development of
              scientific ideas and applications.  He is addressing these issues in the
              context of his study of the rise and fall of synthetic chemistry in France and
              Germany.    The remarkable power of modern chemistry--"power" intended in both
              a scientific and a technological sense--is founded on synthetic methods in
              organic chemistry, but our understanding of how those methods developed
              historically is still in a fairly rudimentary state. Two episodes are apt to
              come to mind upon mention of this subject: early classic examples of chemical
              syntheses by Friedrich Wohler and his student Hermann Kolbe; and the
              exploration of an entire series of such reactions by Marcellin Berthelot a few
              years later, culminating in his path breaking work of 1860, Chimie organique
              fondee sur la synthese. Viewed thus in national terms, both German and French
              scientists were intimately involved with the birth of this field. It is ironic
              that the publication date of Berthelot's book marked the very point when the
              Germans began to exert extraordinarily powerful influence in synthetic organic
              chemistry. German chemistry, especially organic, attained a sort of take-off
              point in the 1850s, a movement that was not paralleled in France.   
              Ironically, the Germans' success can be related to their rapid adoption of
              reforms begun in France, namely the new atomic weights and unified molecular
              magnitudes championed by Auguste Laurent and Charles Gerhardt. These reforms
              led to the creation of a powerful sort of chemistry gu ided by structural
              organic theory. Not so, however, in the home of the reforms, France, which
              provides an interesting conundrum. The differential experience in the two
              countries must have been due largely to social, cultural, and institutional
              factors, for the French had equal access to the same scientific publications of
              the early 1850s that so quickly converted their German neighbors. What was it,
              then, about the French that led to such differences from the German experience?
              This is the central question for the project to explore.  By exploring this
              central question, Professor Rocke promises to elucidate many of the issues that
              determine continuing leadership among nations in science and technology.
