Title       : Institutional Support for Innovations in Econometric and Statistical Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9422505

Award Number: 9422505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Ruud   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. McFadden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9139,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9422505  Paul Ruud and Daniel McFadden    The use of advanced statistical
              and econometric techniques by economists doing   empirical research has always
              been constrained by the computational resources   available to them.  For
              example, until the invention of the PC about twelve years    ago, most
              economists were limited by the limited availability and high cost of  
              mainframe computers to using ordinary least squares.  In recent years the  
              computational power available to most economists has grown so rapidly that the 
               econometric techniques that are computationally feasible have advanced well  
              beyond the ones used in day to day research by most practicing economists and  
              taught to most cmllege students.  There is a growing need to bring the many  
              newly feasible econometric methods to the attention of applied researchers.   
              Such dissemination is the purpose of this set of conferences on innovations in 
               statistical and econometric computation.  These conferences will provide a
              focal   point for the dissemination of research, for the closer interaction of
              researchers in   statistics and econometrics, for the demonstration of
              state-of-the-art software,   and for instruction of graduate students.    These
              conferences have three objectives.  The first objective is to bring together  
              statisticians and econometricians.  Statisticians can learn of the
              methodological   and computational problems facing econometricians and
              econometricians can   learn of new methods developed by statisticians.  The
              second objective it to   foster the development of new computational
              algorithms.  This is done through   "hands-on" demonstrations of new
              computational methods by those who have   invented them.  The third objective
              is to introduce graduate students and junior   faculty to the statistical and
              econometric community.  The relatively small size of   the conferences creates
              an intimate atmosphere conducive to lively interaction.
