Title       : On the Role of the Corporate Tax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9422589

Award Number: 9422589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125524             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger H. Gordon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422589  Gordon  The purpose of this research is to analyze the role the
              corporate  income tax plays in the overall tax system.  The first part of  the
              project explores the possibility that the primary role of the  corporate tax is
              to provide a backstop to personal taxes on labor  income.  The basic idea is
              that individuals can arrange to  receive their labor income not only in the
              form of cash wages,  but also as capital gains on shares they own in the firm. 
              Qualified stock options provide this opportunity, for example, in  publicly
              traded corporations. Similarly, employees of closely  held firms can be issued
              shares at a book value below market  value instead of being paid cash wages. 
              This project will  examine carefully the various incentives involved, and then
              make  use of recent variation in corporate vs. personal tax rates in  the U.S.
              to measure the responsiveness of behavior to incentives  using both aggregate
              income data and panel data on individual  taxpayers.    The second project will
              reexamine the appropriate tax treatment  of foreign subsidiaries in a setting
              where information flows  between countries occur primarily because of the
              activity of such  subsidiaries.  Not only may foreign firms acquire knowledge
              of  domestic technology by acquiring a domestic firm that uses this 
              technology, but domestic firms may acquire information through  observation of
              the production process of foreign subsidiaries  located nearby.  While the
              original domestic owner of the  technology would likely use the technology
              primarily in the  domestic economy, a foreign acquirer of the information in 
              contrast would likely make use of it primarily within its own  country. As a
              result, a foreign acquisition may have long term  implications for future
              economic activity. The project will  attempt to model carefully the equilibrium
              role of foreign  subsidiaries, given the possibility of such information flows.
               The project will then examine the implications of the model for  the corporate
              tax treatment of bo th capital exports and capital  imports.  ***
