Title       : Systematics of the Synthesis and Reactivity of Heteronuclear Cluster Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1997    
File        : a9422001

Award Number: 9422001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293887             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Adams adams@mail.chem.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, which is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
              Organometallic Chemistry  Program, Dr. Richard D. Adams of the University  of
              South Carolina will continue his studies of  heterometallic polynuclear
              clusters.  These recently discovered compounds contain triangular  layers of
              platinum and ruthenium or osmium atoms and carbonyl ligands.  Preliminary
              results  suggest metal selectivity  in reactions with organic compounds. Major
              objectives of the research  are the development of systematic methods for
              preparation of these novel metal clusters and a  comprehensive investigation of
              selectivity effects in coordination of substrates, and cooperativity  in their
              activation, by the different metal layers.  A combination of infrared,
              polynuclear NMR and  single crystal x-ray diffraction coupled with reactivity
              studies, including kinetics, will be used to  explore these new cluster
              compounds.    A number of significant industrial heterogeneous catalysts
              contain more than one type of metal.   These mixed metal, heterometallic
              catalysts are more active and/or selective in their reactions than  are
              catalysts generated from the individual metals.  The reasons for this
              synergistic action are not  well understood.  This project will utilize novel
              heterometallic cluster compounds to investigate  reactions in homogeneous
              systems that may then be related to heterogeneous situations.  The  information
              obtained may  allow for the development of a better understanding of the
              reasons why  mixed metal, heterogeneous catalysts have unique properties and
              ultimately for the rational design  of new catalysts.
