Title       : The Development of Semiclassical Methods for the Evaluation of Vibrational
               Energy Relaxation Rates in Condensed Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9422786

Award Number: 9422786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Herman mherman@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Michael Herman, Tulane University, is supported by a grant from the  
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his   theoretical
              work on the development of semiclassical methods for the   evaluation of
              vibrational relaxation rates in condensed media.  The goal   of this work is
              the development of well tested, accurate methods that are   sufficiently
              flexible so as to allow for the evaluation of the   vibrational energy
              relaxation in a broad range of physical systems.  The   strategies for the
              development of these methods employ a quantum   mechanical description of the
              vibrational motion of the molecules.    Semiclassical techniques are employed
              to describe the time evolution of   the nonvibrational degrees of freedom in
              the system.  These methods allow   for the coupling of the evolution of the
              nonvibrational degrees of   freedom to the quantum vibrational transitions,
              while retaining much of   the computational advantage of a classical mechanical
              description.  The rate at which molecules gain and lose vibrational energy
              influences   reaction kinetics, energy transport, the interpretation of
              spectroscopic   experiments and many other processes occurring in liquids,
              dense gases   and solids.  The theoretical description of this problem, in a
              manner   that leads to quantitative predictions, requires that the vibrations
              be   treated quantum mechanically.  The evaluation of transition rates between 
               quantum states of the molecule in a condensed phase system is an   important
              and challenging theoretical problem, requiring the coupling of   quantum
              techniques with procedures for averaging over the multitude of   configurations
              available to the condensed phase system.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
