Title       : Dissertation Research: An Integrative Study of Ceramic Exchange During the
               Illinois Valley Middle Woodland Period
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9422345

Award Number: 9422345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7750               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ezra B. W. Zubrow zubrow@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zubrow    Under the direction of Dr. Ezra Zubrow, Ms. Shannon Fie will  collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her  research is to understand
              how intra-regional exchange served to  integrate three prehistoric "Woodland"
              populations in the  Illinois Valley and to accomplish this goal she will
              analyze  ceramic remains from a number of archaeological sites. Because 
              ceramics contain both technological and stylistic markers which  help
              scientists to determine point of origin, analysis of such  data allow one to
              reconstruct trade routes and to determine both  direction and intensity of
              interaction. On this basis a social  network can be reconstructed. To
              accomplish this goal, MS Fie  will focus her attention on non-elite ceramics
              which were used  for everyday purposes and are more common that their finely 
              worked counterparts. She will establish a regional database of  clay sources
              and determine the chemical and mineralogical  composition for each deposit. She
              will then subject  archaeological materials to petrographic and neutron
              activation  analysis to group sherds by both clay source and source of 
              manufacture.    The sites which MS Fie will examine all form part of the
              Hopewell  phenomenon. Approximately 2,000 years ago the first large scale 
              complex societies arose in the American midwest. Hopewell peoples  constructed
              large and impressive earthworks, and traded widely in  exotic goods which
              originated in many parts of North America.  While many ceremonial centers have
              been studied, archaeologists  still have little understanding of how Hopewell
              groups were  organized and interacted on a local level. The ceramic study 
              which MS Fie will conduct, promises to shed new light on this  question.   
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase  our
              understanding of how complex societies arise and will provide  new insight into
              an important aspect of American prehistory. It  also will assist in the
              training of a promising young scientist.
