Title       : Deciding Compensation for Non-Economic Damages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9422789

Award Number: 9422789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53941              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Saks MICHAEL-SAKS@UIOWA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen J. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roselle L. Wissler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1093,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422789  Saks  Profound controversy exists about many aspects of damages in tort
              litigation, but there is very little systematic knowledge about the nature of
              decision making in litigation for damages.  This research will initiate a
              program of study on how people make awards of compensatory damages in personal
              injury cases.  Compensatory damages are awards to compensate accident victims
              for their pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life, disfigurement,
              disability, and similar losses.  The research will seek to discover how people
              organize their perceptions of an accident victim's injury and translate their
              perceptions into compensation amounts.  It will seek to develop parallel or
              contrasting explanations for judges, plaintiff and defense lawyers, and
              ordinary citizens, who serve as civil jurors.  Its overriding goal is to more
              fully account for and more accurately predict compensation decisions.  The
              study to be conducted presents to samples of judges, attorneys, and citizens a
              wide variety of injuries and their consequences in an effort to map the "injury
              space" within which damage decisions are made and to identify the core injury
              attributes people use to organize their judgments about injuries.  It will
              serve as a foundation for future research elaborating the model of damage
              decision making that will be developed.  %%%%  Profound controversy exists
              about many aspects of damages in tort litigation, but there is very little
              systematic knowledge about the nature of decision making in litigation for
              damages.  This research will initiate a program of study on how people make
              awards of compensatory damages in personal injury cases.  Compensatory damages
              are awards to compensate accident victims for their pain, suffering, loss of
              enjoyment of life, disfigurement, disability, and similar losses.  The research
              will seek to discover how people organize their perceptions of an accident
              victim's injury and translate their perceptions into compensation amounts.  It
              will seek to develop parallel or con trasting explanations for judges,
              plaintiff and defense lawyers, and ordinary citizens, who serve as civil
              jurors.  Its overriding goal is to more fully account for and more accurately
              predict compensation decisions.   ****
