Title       : Financial Markets and Financial Intermediaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9422194

Award Number: 9422194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105223             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Gale   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422194  This project advances our understanding of industrial  organization in
              three areas: financial markets and financial  intermediation, the timing of
              investment decisions, and general  equilibrium with incomplete information. 
              The first part of the  project studies the striking differences between the
              financial  systems of different countries.  In the U.S., for example, 
              financial markets are highly developed; in other countries such  as Germany,
              intermediaries play a much larger role.  These cross-  country differences
              raise questions about the optimality of  different financial systems and the
              costs and benefits of  convergence.  The object of this study is to compare the
              relative  performance of financial markets and intermediaries in providing 
              risk sharing, information, and allocative services.  The work  involves
              developing models of intermediation and comparing their  welfare properties
              with those of financial markets.    The second part of the project studies the
              timing of business  investment decisions.  When making investment decisions,
              firms  often have an incentive to delay in order to gather information  about
              what other firms are going to do.  This leads to strategic  behavior, since
              every firm prefers to make its commitment after  others have made theirs.  This
              project shows how endogenous delay  in business investment decisions can
              prolong recessions and  increase the amplitude of fluctuations in economic
              activity, and  produce cycles in the introduction of new technology.    An
              important function of the market system is to economize on the  amount of
              information required to achieve an efficient allocation  of resources. 
              However, markets may not function well when some  agents are able to exploit
              private information.  The third part  of the project builds on and extends
              earlier work which modeled  equilibrium in market systems with private
              information.  Two  applications, one concerning financial regulation and one 
              concerning securitization of contracts, motivate the deve lopment  and analysis
              of a richer class of models to investigate how well  the market system copes
              with private information in these  environments.
