Title       : Structural Determinants of Race-Sex Labor Market Segregation and Earnings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9422800

Award Number: 9422800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Kaufman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1041,1092,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                 This is a study of structural determinants of race-sex labor market
              segregation and earnings.  It will analyze differences between race and gender
              groups in their distribution across industrial and occupational segments and in
              the rewards they received from these positions, using census data from 1980 and
              1990.  The work has three chief goals.  First, it will describe the linkage of
              rewards and allocation differentials, using an earnings decomposition analysis
              which explicitly models the impact of the differential distribution of race-sex
              groups across labor market positions.  This structural decomposition measures
              the extent to which earnings gaps among race-sex groups can be attributed to:
              (1) group mean differences in characteristics; (2) group differences in returns
              to characteristics, and (3) group differences in their distributions across
              work positions that have varying rewards.  The second goal is to assess the
              linkage of allocation and rewards differentials using a causal model of their
              determinants and their inter-relationship.  A two-stage model will be used to
              test hypotheses drawn from an integration of segmented market theory and
              race-sex queue theory.  Predictors include structural contexts and conditions
              of work, aspects of sex and race-stereotyped work situations, and the
              population redistribution of the work force across positions.  The third
              objective is to update and disseminate improved measures of contemporary
              industrial structure.    %%%     This project will lead to an improved
              understanding of how race and gender affect the utilization and financial
              reward of human capital in the United States.  For example, it will help us
              understand the extent to which the concentration of blacks and women in
              low-paying jobs affects the average incomes of these groups, in contrast with
              the underpayment of these groups in the same jobs held by whites and males.  In
              addition, the research will clarify the extent to which both individuals and
              the nation suffer from the under-utilizatio n of the skills and abilities of
              many Americans.
