Title       : Collaborative Research: Calcareous Nannofossil Biostratigraphy and
               Paleoenvironmental History of the Cape Roberts Project Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9422893

Award Number: 9422893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72378              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Pospichal pospi@geomag.gly.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherwood W. Wise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports basic characterization of calcareous  nannofossils as part
              of the development of the biostratigraphic  framework for drill core recovered
              by the Cape Roberts Project  (CRP).  This is a major program within the
              international  Antarctic earth science community, designed to sample the 
              stratigraphic record that spans the time interval 30 to 100  million years ago,
              by drilling four sites on the flank of the  Victoria Land basin. This award is
              to support the drilling  program by providing rapid age and paleoenvironmental
              information  through the study of calcareous nannofossils.  This research will 
              systematically sample the recovered sedimentary cores and analyze  their
              calcareous nannofossil content at the Crary Science and  Engineering Center
              (CSEC) at McMurdo Station, Antarctica. The  preparation of an Initial Reports
              volume at the end of each of  the two drilling seasons will include the results
              of this work as  part of the initial characterization of the cores.    The
              calcareous nannofossil biostratigraphic record spans the  entire interval to be
              cored by the CRP. Recent work on calcareous  nannofossils from ocean drilling
              sites around Antarctica has  yielded a refined zonation for the Paleogene and
              Upper Cretaceous  of the Southern Ocean that will provide a high-resolution 
              biostratigraphic framework for hemipelagic and pelagic sediments  recovered by
              Cape Roberts drilling. This research, when combined  with data from other
              fossil groups, magnetostratigraphic data,  and other age-dating methods, will
              provide integrated age control  that is essential for other geological
              investigations. In  addition, calcareous nannofossils are excellent 
              paleoenvironmental indicators for surface water temperature and  productivity. 
              Statistical analysis of quantitative population  census data will be used to
              infer paleoenvironmental variations  during the Paleogene and Cretaceous. 
              These data, in combination  with data from other fossil groups and
              sedimentological studies,  will be useful f or assessing climatic change
              through the critical  period of 30-100 million years before present.
