Title       : Professional Development Fellowship: The Dynamics of Scientific Development: The
               Case of India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1995   
File        : a9422173

Award Number: 9422173
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abha Sur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, MA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under a Professional Development Fellowship, Dr. Sur, a trained chemist, is
              studying the emergence of experimental physical science in India in the late
              nineteenth to mid-twentieth century.   The study, although located in India,
              nevertheless has wider implications. The study promises to provide insight into
              general theoretical questions pertaining to the dynamics of scientific
              development. In as much as it would unravel the complex interplay between
              universalist and nationalist demands on the scientists, the  research addresses
              theoretical questions regarding the nature and workings of a community of world
              scientists with distinct national styles yet linked together in a common
              endeavor.  The period of Dr. Sur's study marks the transition from colonial
              science to national science in India. She is analyzing this transition from
              three different perspectives, namely, the nature of science, the philosophies
              and social backgrounds of three prominent scientists, and the impact of
              colonialism on the nature of science and on the scientists  .  The beginnings
              of indigenous modern science in India coincide with rising nationalist
              consciousness. What implications did this have for science and for that matter
              for nationalism? Did the Indian scientists consciously adapt modern science to
              make it more compatible with the cultural and social heritage of India, and if
              so in what specific ways?   How was scientific activity organized? What
              motivated scientists to pursue science? These questions form the backbone of
              the study.  The study is focusing on perhaps the most exemplary, and certainly
              the oldest, institution of higher education in India, Calcutta University.
              Here, it  concentrates on the lives and works of three of the most influential
              scientists in pre-independence India, Prafulla Chandra Ray, C. V. Raman, and
              Meghnad Saha. These three scientists held highly di  vergent views on the
              nature of science, the interaction of science with society, and on the nature
              of society itself. How did their views medi ate their science and how did their
              science impinge on the development of science and scientific institutions in
              India? Systematic review of archival records in India and England and recent
              publications as well as personal interviews will be used to further the goals
              of the study.    In addition to the research described, the fellowship period
              includes course work in history of Science and in Modern Indian History at
              Harvard and Tufts University. Directions of study and research are being
              formulated in association with Professor Peter Galison of the Department of
              History of Science, Harvard University.
