Title       : Time-Domain Electron Spin Resonance Studies of Spin-LabelledSynthetic Peptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9408284

Award Number: 9408284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Millhauser glennm@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9408284  Millhauser  The goal of the proposed research is the development of new
               electron spin resonance (ESR) methodologies for the study of   peptides and
              proteins.  The research plan contains four projects.    I.     The first
              project focuses on the interactions between  helical peptides as a means for
              probing early events in protein  folding.  Modern theory suggests that protein
              folding begins with  the formation of isolated regions of local secondary
              structure.   Tertiary structure then follows from adhesion events between 
              these localized regions.   However, little is known about these  adhesion
              events.  To probe this process, 2D electron-electron  double resonance (2D
              ELDOR) will be used to monitor interactions  between structured helical
              peptides in solution. 2D ELDOR is a  new ESR technique that has just been shown
              to be extremely useful  for studying peptide-peptide interactions.   The
              methodology will  be further developed for mixed isotope experiments.  In doing
              so,  the critical relationship between helical peptide structure and  the
              strength of peptide-peptide interactions will be determined.    II.     The
              second project is the synthesis of a rigid side chain  nitroxide amino acid for
              incorporation into FMOC automated  peptide synthesis.  Recent research has
              shown that nitroxide spin  labeled peptides can provide wealth of information
              on peptide  structure and dynamics.  However, almost all published  experiments
              have used spin label modifications of natural amino  acid side chains. 
              Linkages of this type are necessarily flexible  and therefore less than ideal
              for certain types of experiments.   The specific label proposed here is rigid,
              follows L amino acid  stereochemistry, and contains the necessary design
              features for a  "helix-neutral" amino acid.    III.     The third project is an
              exploration of the use of  neutral networks for determining motional parameters
              from slow  motional ESR spectra.  Slow  motional spectra in ESR and solid 
              state NMR result when the rotational cor relation time is too long  to satisfy
              the motional narrowing conditions.  Although more  difficult to interpret, slow
              motional spectra are extremely  sensitive to dynamic details of molecular
              motion.  In the past,  such spectra were stimulated and motional parameters
              were  determined by estimating a best fit.  This is a very laborious  process
              that uses considerable computer and human resources.  The  proposal outlines
              and approach for tackling this problem form an  entirely new perspective. 
              Neural networks will be used to  quickly extract dynamic details from slow
              motional spectra.                  IV.    The last project is the development
              of a new spectroscopy  called Biradical Electron-Electron Correlated
              Spectroscopy (BEE-  COSY).  This technique will be used for determining
              distances of  up to 15A in doubly spin labeled peptides.  COSY spectroscopy has
               long been used in NMR to reveal through bond scalar couplings  between nuclear
              spins.  In biradical peptides, electron-electron  couplings results from a
              through space interaction.  BEE-COSY  will both detect and help quantify these
              couplings.  The  detectable length scale is between that of NMR (< 4 ) and 
              fluorescence energy transfer (> 20 ) and is therefore extremely  important for
              biomolecules.  % % %       Electron spin resonance (ESR) is a modern
              biophysical  technique used to explore structure and motion in biologically 
              important molecules.  The main goal of the proposed research is  to develop new
              ESR methods to help biochemists refine their ideas  of protein structure and
              activity.  In turn, these methods will  serve as indispensable aids in basic
              and applied research.  As an  example, in our last funding period, we developed
              the use of  double label ESR to reveal previously unseen structures in  protein
              fragments.  Our ideas were then implemented by another  lab to solve the
              protein coat structure of the Pf1 virus.  This  critical problem had remained
              unsolved for nearly 10 years!  For  the new funding period we propose to explo
              re methods to probe  protein assembly.  In particular, our 2D ELDOR project may
              allow  us to observe events that correspond to the earliest protein  assembly
              processes.  The insights gained from this research may  prove critical for
              predicting structure and stability from  protein sequences.  Such information
              will help in drug design,  understanding of diseases and the human genome
              project.  * * *
