Title       : Physical Aspects of Self-Correcting Assembly and Force Generation in
               Cytoskeleton Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9408905

Award Number: 9408905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1273073            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanislas Leibler leibler@puhepl.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Libchaber  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1051,1761,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9408905  Leibler  The cytoskeleton is a polymer structure made out of protein 
              fibers essential for intracellular transport, cell locomotion and  division. 
              This structure is dynamical and highly regulated  through the cell cycle. 
              Assembly and disassembly of the fibers  and the action of associated motor
              proteins are out-of-  equilibrium processes.  The necessary free energy is
              provided by  the hydrolysis of nucleotides (ATP, GTP) bound to the proteins.  A
              Study will be initiated from a physics point of view - of the  following
              aspects of this organization:  o    the dynamics of rigid and semiflexible
              protein fibers.  The  large persistence length of f-actin and microtubules
              allows  direct visualization and study of their individual and collective 
              behavior.  o    the non-equilibrium nature of the fiber assembly.  It leads, 
              for example, to a unique dynamic behavior of microtubules, called  dynamic
              instability, in which the length fluctuations are of the  order of the mean
              length.  o    the regulation of the fiber assembly.  The dynamic  instability,
              when regulated, is the basis of "trial and error",  self-correcting
              architecture.  Despite progress in the  biochemistry if the assembly
              regulation, the spatio-temporal  aspects (characteristic time and length
              scales) are poorly  understood.  o    the transduction of chemical to
              mechanical energy.  Both  cytoskeleton fibers and associated motor proteins can
              be viewed  as Brownian machines which are chemical-mechanical transducers.  The
              understanding of these noisy machines must involve the  methods of biochemistry
              and statistical mechanics.  The approach is both experimental and theoretical. 
              It involves  physics and molecular biology departments, and the expertise of 
              two industrial laboratories.  Given the complexity of the  problems involved,
              this multi-disciplinary approach seems  necessary.  ***
