Title       : RPG: Archaeology Survey at Isla Cilvituk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9408326

Award Number: 9408326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rani T. Alexander   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408326  Alexander    This Research Planning Grant permits Dr. Rani Alexander to
               conduct preliminary fieldwork and establish the basis for a  larger more
              long-term project. In this first stage she will  conduct an intensive
              archaeological survey of the site of Isla  Cilvituk, located in Campeche,
              Mexico. The site dates to the Late  Postclassic period (AD 1250-1521). During
              this interval, it was  economically peripheral relative to the boundaries of
              the large  Aztec empire to the west, to major waterborne trade routes and to 
              the powerful Mayan polities to the North. Dr. Alexander wishes to  examine how
              the expansion and contraction of these late  Postclassic economic entities
              impacted the subsistence strategies  and economic organization of a single
              community, Isla Cilvituk,  whose political and economic position is presumed
              marginal  relative to contemporary developments in Mesoamerica. In this  first
              stage of the investigation, she will conduct an intensive  survey in which the
              remains of house lots, features and dwelling  units, as well as non-residential
              structures will be fully  recorded. A random sample of auger tests will also be
              employed to  establish the chronological depth and distribution of artifactual 
              material across the site.    Dr. Alexander is interested in the nature and
              development of  family units and recent analyses of economic organization of 
              large-scale core-periphery systems suggests that episodes of  economic
              expansion and contraction of urban centers have wide  ranging effects on
              household subsistence strategies, not only in  the core's immediate sustaining
              area, but also in peripheral  regions. The work will therefore examine how,
              over long periods,  of time the basic human economic unit - the household -
              responds  to economic and political change.     This research is important
              because it will provide data of  interest to many archaeologists. It will
              increase our  understanding of the factors which affect households and will 
              assist in the career development of a pr omising young scientist.
