Title       : RUI: Studies of Singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9408439

Award Number: 9408439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43456              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Garfinkle garfinkl@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The singularity theorems tell us that singularities form in  a large class of
              spacetimes, including the physically  relevant cases of the big bang and of the
              gravitational  collapse of a star to form a black hole.  However, these 
              theorems tell us very little about the nature of the  singularities.  For
              example, we would like to know the  entire class of incomplete observers, how
              the curvature  behaves along their world lines and whether they can see the 
              singularity before they hit it.  Since we do not have the  general solution of
              Einstein's equation in closed form,  Prof. Garfinkle intends to use all the
              methods available for  the study of singularities: (i) to find exact solutions
              and  study their singularities; (ii) to prove theorems about the  behavior of
              singular spacetimes or (iii) to perform a  numerical study of spacetimes with
              singularities to address  these issues.  Numerical evolution of generic initial
              data for axisymmetric  cosmologies will be used to study the approach to the 
              singularity of spatially inhomogeneous models.  He will  examine nonsingular,
              stationary electrovac solutions in  general relativity and in string theory. 
              He will also  explore Choptuik's numerical discovery of scaling behavior  in
              the formation of a zero mass singularity from the  collapse of a spherically
              scalar field using a gauge  invariant null initial value formulation.  Perhaps
              the most important problem in the study of  singularities is cosmic censorship:
              the issue of whether  singularities are hidden behind event horizons.  Work by 
              Shapiro and Teukolsky suggests that highly prolate objects  can form naked
              singularities during gravitational collapse.  As an alternative, he will start
              a numerical investigation  of the collapse of highly prolate gravity waves to
              see  whether a naked singularity forms.
