Title       : High Speed Wireless Communication Using Non-Directed Infrared Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9408957

Award Number: 9408957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396374             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Kahn jmk@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9408957  Kahn  Non-directed infrared radiation is a promising medium for
              high-capacity, short-range indoor communications.  Infrared possesses several
              advantages over radio, including an enormous unregulated bandwidth and the fact
              that infrared radiation cannot pass through walls.  As a result, high-speed
              links can operate in each room of a building without interference.  There are
              now available commercially several infrared-based local-area networks for
              portable computers, which use diffuse transmission to achieve network
              capacities as high as 4 Mb/s per room over a range as long as 15m.  The optical
              systems and modulation techniques used in current infrared will probably permit
              network capacities to be increased to about 10 Mb/s per room.  Achievement of
              higher bit rates will require new solutions to overcome the noise induced by
              intense ambient infrared radiation, signal distortion due to multipath
              propagation, and interference from other users.    The project will investigate
              components and techniques to enhance the performance of non-directed infrared
              communication systems operating at bit rates for 10 to 100 Mb/s, or even
              higher.  To provide concrete guidance, the research will address the
              full-duplex communication requirements of a representative application in
              wireless multimedia computing.  This application involves simultaneous
              transmission of multimedia from a base station to as many as 50 portable
              terminals within a single room, requiring an aggregate downlink bit rate of 50
              to 100 Mb/s.  As the portable terminals will not source video and most
              computations will be performed by servers on a backbone network, uplink
              requirements are modest, of the order of 10 Mb/s per room.  For this
              application, it is desirable minimize the complexity and power consumption of
              the portable infrared transceivers, at the possible expense of increased of
              increased base-station power consumption and complexity.  The research will
              encompass transmitter and receiver optical design, theoretical performance s
              tudies of modulation and detection techniques in the single-and multi-user
              environment, and experimental demonstration of full-duplex communication
              between a base station and portables.    The first two years of activity will
              focus on study of key components and communication techniques, and with the
              third year devoted to constructing a prototype link incorporating the optimized
              components and techniques  ***
