Title       : Cyclic Amp and Symbiosis in a Bioluminescent Bacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9408266

Award Number: 9408266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul V. Dunlap   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1308,9104,9169,9197,EGCH,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9408266  Dunlap  Mutualistic luminescent symbiosis between the marine bacterium 
              Vibrio fischeri and sepiolid squids (Euprymna scolopes and E.  morsei) is a
              model system to identify microbial determinants needed  for colonization. 
              Cyclic nucleotide metabolism in V. fischeri,  which may play a fundamental role
              in host-symbiont interactions,  will be examined from two perpsectives.  The
              role of periplasmic  3':5'-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (CpdPase) will
              be  determined with colonization assay of the squid using V. fischeri  cpdP
              deletion mutants.  V. fischeri cpdP deletion mutants will be  prepared using
              molecular biology methods.  Differential expression  of the cpdP gene will be
              determined measuring CpdP enzyme activity,  protein levels, and mRNA in
              bacteria during the initiation and  maintenance phases of the symbiosis.  The
              role of microbial  adenylate cyclase and cAMP receptor protein in squid
              symbiosis will  be observed also using squid colonization experiments with cya
              and  crp mutants from a squid-symbiotic V. fischeri strain. For these  studies,
              V. fischeri cya and crp genes will be obtained from a V.  fischeri DNA gene
              library by complementation with Escherichia coli  deletion mutants. Once
              obtained, wild-type V. fischeri genes will  be inactivated and transposon
              insertion will be employed to produce  cya and crp defective squid-symbiotic V.
              fischeri mutants.  Loss of  ability of the cya and crp deficient mutants to
              establish symbiosis  will help us understand the molecular basis of V. fischeri
               squid  colonization and identify the cAMP regulated genes involved.  %%% 
              Symbiotic associations between bacteria and higher organisms  dominate almost
              all terrestrial and marine habitats.  Vibrio  fischeri, a marine bacterium,
              forms a beneficial symbiosis with  certain squids.  The symbiosis is a useful
              model system that can  provide insight into the ways which animals prevent
              potentially  pathogenic bacteria from developing disease.  Preliminary evidence
               indicates that cyclic AMP (cA MP), a regulator of bacterial gene  expression,
              is likely to mediate bacteria-animal interactions  critical to this symbiosis. 
              Genetic experiments are designed to  identify these interactions and learn how
              cAMP works.  Mutants of  V. fischeri will be constructed that lack the gene for
              periplasmic  cAMP phosphodiesterase, the enzyme that breaks down cAMP outside 
              the bacterial cell, the gene for adenylate cyclase formation,  and/or the gene
              for cAMP receptor protein, which makes bacteria to  respond to cAMP.  These V.
              fischeri mutants will be tested in squid  to measure their ability to establish
              symbiosis.  Loss of this  ability will help us find V. fischeri genes necessary
              for the  symbiosis to develop.  This project is supported jointly by programs
              of Metabolic  Biochemistry (Molecular & Cellular Biosciences) and Ecological & 
              Evolutionary Physiology (Integrative Biology and Neuroscience)  ***
