Title       : Alternative Reproductive Strategies and Cooperative Colony Initiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1995       
File        : a9408024

Award Number: 9408024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27598              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Nonacs pnonacs@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY    Nonacs, IBN 9408024,  Alternative reproductive
              strategies  and cooperative colony initiation            There are thousands of
              social species in the animal  kingdom, ranging from molds to insects to birds
              to mammals,  including humans.  A central theoretical and practical  concern in
              the study of animal behavior, therefore, is how  and why cooperative groups of
              animals are formed.  Many of  our insights into the biology of cooperation have
              come from  the study of social insects such as paper wasps, which also  can
              provide a  model system  in which experimental studies  of cooperation are
              possible at relatively low cost.  Two of  the factors which affect cooperation
              in many species are the  degree of relatedness among individuals and ecological
               pressures (especially restricted resources) that favor  cooperation.       In
              this research, Dr. Nonacs will examine the decision  that female paper wasps
              make to either be cooperative or not  to be cooperative when founding their
              colonies.  A  combination of DNA fingerprinting and behavioral observation 
              will be used to determine how genetic relatedness determines  the formation of
              cooperative units, affects the levels of  aggressive conflicts between female
              wasps founding new  colonies and influences the decisions of the wasps to feed 
              different young within the nest.  The resulting data will  allow the
              measurement of the relative importance of genetic  relatedness and ecological
              pressures in the formation of  cooperative groups.       This research will
              also increase our understanding of  where and how wasp colonies are started. 
              While wasps in the  right places are important control agents of pest insects, 
              wasps nesting near humans are a nuisance and a danger.  Therefore, this
              research has the potential applied benefit  of giving us more information about
              how to encourage wasps  to nest where needed and not where they are unwanted.
