Title       : Wavepacket Studies of Conservative and Dissipative Transition State Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9408432

Award Number: 9408432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Graham Lappin Alexander.G.Lappin.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Tannor  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408432  Tannor  Univ. of Notre Dame  This project in quantum theory of reactive
              scattering is supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
              Program.  Conservative scattering processes in the gas phase will be studied
              using Tannor's recent formulation of scattering theory in terms of Gaussian
              wavepacket solutions of the time-dependent Schroedinger equation with absorbing
              boundary conditions.   In this approach, S-matrix elements are calculated by
              Fourier analysis of a time correlation function between reactant and product
              wavepackets propagating in the transition state region.   The  theory will be
              applied to the calculation of state-to-state reaction probabilities for
              elementary gas phase reactions.    Dissipative scattering processes in liquids
              will be studied using a similar flux-flux correlation function computed from a
              quantum density matrix obtained by solution of a quantum Liouville equation
              containing relaxational operators corresponding to frictional forces.  These
              methods will be applied to the analysis of laser experiments, performed by
              other investigators,  including phase sensitive detection of transient
              dichroism and birefringence.    It is possible to obtain a very detailed
              understanding of chemical reactions of small molecules in the gas phase in
              which one measures, or calculates, the rates for molecules in individual
              quantum states.  The first component of this research project is the
              development of mathematical methods leading to faster and more accurate
              computations of the speeds of these state-to-state transitions.  A chemical
              reaction in a liquid is the net result of a vast number of such processes so
              one seeks a theory in which these molecular details are averaged out yielding
              the net chemical reaction rate expressed in terms of temperature and bulk
              solvent properties such as viscosity.  The second component of this project is
              directed toward this type of theoretical description. In this fundamental
              research project, the results of lengthy computer calculatio ns will be
              compared with results of recent laser experiments to begin to test the validity
              of the underlying concepts and methods.
