Title       : Third International Marine Biotechnology Conference to be held August 8-12,
               1994, at University of Tromso, Tromso, Norway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1994    
File        : a9408254

Award Number: 9408254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harlyn O. Halvorson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9408254  Halvorson    This grant will provide support for U.S. scientists to
              attend a  five-day International Marine Biotechnology Conference to be held 
              August 8-12, 1994 on the campus of the University of Tromso, in  Tromso,
              Norway.  The specific objectives of the International  Marine Biotechnology
              Conference are:  (a) to present the latest  discoveries and applications of
              marine science with emphasis on  biotechnology; (b) to educate industrial
              scientists with the  advances made in marine science; (c) to bring together
              colleagues  from all over the world so that the science can be evaluated and 
              criticized; (d) to present opportunities for joint ventures and  research
              partnerships by making contacts through scientific  discussions and informal
              gatherings; (e) to put together a volume  of extended abstracts so that the
              science presented at this  conference will be available as a reference book. 
              (f) to provide  material that will lead to creative new ideas and applications.
                %%%  This grant will provide support for U.S. scientists to attend a 
              five-day International Marine Biotechnology Conference to be held  August 8-12,
              1994 on the campus of the University of Tromso, in  Tromso, Norway.  The topics
              chosen for the conference reflect the  great interest among scientists in
              exploring the nature of  biological interactions between organisms living in
              the very  diverse and often extreme habitats of the marine world.  Basic 
              research on biological mechanisms and molecular interactions  related to a life
              in aquatic systems has yielded valuable  information about fundamental
              biological principles.  Studies on  the processes and products of marine
              organisms have already  opened new and sometimes very unexpected applications
              within many  sectors of society, including medicine, production of marine food 
              and chemicals and sequestration of mineral resources.  Presently  a major focus
              is on the control of microbial diseases in  aquaculture and in aquatic
              ecosystems.  The emerging science of  marine bio technology is thus being
              applied in the management of  marine biological resources and in monitoring and
              remediating the  marine environment.  The underlying philosophy of this
              conference  to promote rapid advances in the various sectors of marine 
              biotechnology for the benefit of mankind and in harmony with  nature.    ***
