Title       : Institutions, Incentives and Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9408970

Award Number: 9408970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310087             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Schneider mark.schneider@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Teske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9408970  Schneider    The delivery of services by local governments involves a
              complex  series of steps going from the institutions that supply them to  the
              citizens who use them.  To improve the delivery of public  services, many
              reformers now suggest eliminating some of these  steps and having government
              imitate private markets, by  increasing the number of suppliers and
              "empowering" citizens to  shop around.  This market model assumes consumers
              already know  about the services they use or that they will search to find out 
              about price and quality.  While the costs of, and the incentives  for, search
              in private markets are fairly well understood, the  ability of
              "citizen/consumers" to gain information in the use of  local public goods is
              not well known.    This project will explore the process of information
              gathering in  local public services, with a primary focus on education, perhaps
               the most important service provided by local governments.  In  recent years a
              few local school districts have established  parental choice, breaking the
              tight relationship between  household location and the schools that children
              must attend.   Since these districts can be matched with others that have not 
              introduced choice, we will examine if and how choice affects  parental behavior
              and student performance.    Specifically, using a research design matching
              districts with  school choice to those without choice, this project will
              compare  how citizen/consumers search for information and the quality of  their
              information about schools.  To test for a link between  increased choice and
              citizen/consumer behavior, the project will  survey residents in four
              communities with different public  service delivery arrangements and different
              socioeconomic status.   The project will: 1) examine the level and the accuracy
              of  information citizens have about local public goods; 2) link these  levels
              of information and the search processes to institutional  structures that
              affect the incentives of individuals to gather  and  use information.  In
              addition, the project will:  3)examine  the networks of information in which
              local citizens operate and  explore how these networks influence the quantity
              and the quality  of information that citizens have; 2) examine the equity 
              implications of search procedures, especially by comparing the  networks in
              which individuals of different races and classes are  embedded; and, examine
              the efficiency gains that better matching  of student/consumer interest to
              school curricula can provide as  shown by improvements in student test scores
              in math, science and  reading.    This project promises to substantially
              enhance our understanding  of the topic.
