Title       : Mechanism of Ferric Enterobactin Uptake through Fepa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9408737

Award Number: 9408737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip E. Klebba @aardvark.ucs.uoknor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9408737  Klebba  The proposed research will study the transport mechanism of 
              ferric enterobactin, a bacterial iron shelter (siderophore),  through its
              Escherichia coli outer membrane receptor  protein, FepA.  This transport is
              energy -dependent and TonB-  dependent, involving two biochemical stages:
              binding and  internalization.  The research program will elucidate the 
              molecular mechanism comprising: Ferric enterobactin binding  to we will
              identify specific residues of  the receptor  protein that recognize and bind
              the  siderophore on the  external surface of the bacterial cell, using
              site-specific  and random mutagenesis of the FepA structural gene and 
              biochemical assays of FepA function, and, FepA structure and  conformation; we
              will characterize FepA structure with  nitroxide spin labels attached to
              cysteine residues that  have been introduced by directed mutagenesis, and
              monitor  structural changes that occur within the receptor during  ligand
              binding and transport.  Biochemical, molecular  genetics, and immunological
              techniques will be utilized,  including random and site-specific mutagenesis,
              kinetic  analysis of  binding and transport, covalent modification in  vivo and
              in vitro with nitroxide spin labels, and ESR  spectroscopy.  The proposed
              investigations will determine  the protein structure tha the involved in
              siderophore  recognition by the bacterial cell.  This goal has not been 
              accomplished for any tonB dependent receptor protein in any  organism.  Since
              all gram negative bacteria obtain iron with  mechanistically similar transport
              systems, the results of  theses studies will establish fundamental principles
              that  are applicable to numerous trainsport systems in many  different
              organisms.  ESR analysis of spin labeled FepA will  augment our general
              knowledge of membrane protein structure,  and provide specific information
              about the dynamic of  conformational changes that occur in TonB-dependent 
              receptors during their interaction with ligands.  Besides  the knowledge gained
              abo ut the siderophore transport, these  experiments  will generate a
              methodological foundation for  comparable investigations of any bacterial cell
              envelope  protein.  %%%  The proposed research will study how iron passes
              through a  membrane.  We will use the  bacterial outer membrane as a  prototype
              for this process, and determine how a protein  within this membrane, called
              FepA, recognize, binds, and  internalizes the molecules of ion that it
              encounters in the  environment.  We will use both genetic techniques and
              physic-  chemical methods to answer these question.  The proposed  experiments
              are deigned to identify any movement that occurs  in the membrane protein
              during the iron transport process  into the cell.  By studying this process in
              bacteria, we  hope to define a method that will lead to the understanding  of
              how iron transport occurs in other organisms, as well.  ***
