Title       : Western Apache Grammar and Dialectology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9408543

Award Number: 9408543
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178668             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem J. de Reuse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                de Reuse       This project consists of linguistic fieldwork to be carried out
               on Western Apache, a Southern Athabaskan language spoken on the four 
              present-day Apache reservations and communities of Arizona (San  Carlos, Fort
              Apache, Payson (Tonto-Apache), and Camp Verde (Yavapai-  Apache)).  The
              fieldwork will lead to a reference grammar of the  Western Apache (WA)
              language, with particular attention to dialectal  variation, and containing
              illustrative morphologically analyzed texts  in various dialects.  An attempt
              to document the remnants of the  Chiricahua Apache language on these Apache
              reservations will also be  made, if speakers can be located.       The
              resulting reference grammar of the Western Apache language  will contribute to
              the field of descriptive linguistics by providing  documentation of this
              typologically interesting language.  It will  emphasize points of current
              theoretical interest, such as: underlying  representations in tonal languages;
              the derivation of the linear  ordering of morphemes and the need for position
              class morphology; and  the function of the yi-/bi- alternation and its
              interaction with  definiteness and specificity.  It will also contribute to
              comparative  and historical Athabaskan, especially in view of the fact that WA
              has  phonological peculiarities reminiscent of the Northern Athabaskan 
              languages of Canada, which do not occur in Navajo, its closest  Southern
              Athabaskan relative.       Finally, this work will be relevant to theoretical
              work on  variation intralinguistically (i.e. variation within the WA language) 
              and interlinguistically (i.e. when WA is compared to other Athabaskan 
              languages).
