Title       : RUI: Peatlands and Global Climate Change: Continued Comparative Studies of
               Northern and Southern Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9408043

Award Number: 9408043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505058             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Kelman Wieder Kelman.Wieder@Villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Yavitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Wieder  Boreal and subarctic peatlands cover an estimated 346 million ha of the
              earth's land surface.  They presently function as a net sink for atmospheric
              CO2 and as a substantial source of atmospheric CH4, an important greenhouse
              gas.  Given predictions that climatic warming will be most pronounced in
              northern latitudes, the main goal of this research has been and will continue
              to be to gain insights into carbon balance in peatlands and gaseous exchanges
              of carbon between peatlands and the atmosphere.  Field and laboratory studies
              will be undertaken to assess the historical development and the present
              function of peatlands.  Numerous, relatively small, Sphagnum-dominated
              peatlands can be found along the axis to the Appalachian Mountains as far south
              as southern West Virginia. The Appalachian peatlands are of Quaternary age,
              with most having initiated peat accumulation 9,000-13,000 years ago.  Within
              the Appalachian region, with decreasing latitude peat deposits become fewer in
              number, smaller in areal extent, thinner, and more highly decomposed.  The
              Appalachian peat deposits have developed over thousands of years under climatic
              conditions that have been generally warmer than conditions in boreal and
              subarctic regions.  Therefore, our research approach has been founded on the
              premise that comparisons between northern (cooler climate) and southern (warmer
              climate) peatland sites will provide insights into potential changes in boreal
              peatlands under predicted scenarios of global climate change.  Specific
              objectives of this research are:  to determine during long-term peat
              accumulation through chemical analysis of 210 Pb-dated peat cores collected
              from sites along a north to south gradient, to estimate turnover of 
              photosynthetically fixed 14C in northern and southern sites to evaluate the
              effects of organic matter quality versus local climatic conditions on organic
              matter mineralization, to contrast spatial and temporal patterns in organic
              matter  mineralization in peat in northern and southern  sites, to determine
              the magnitude of within-site spatial variability in age/depth relationships,
              and to evaluate root exudation and root turnover as potential sources of labile
              organic matter fueling CO2 and CH4 production using laboratory mesocosm
              studies.  Results obtained from these studies will provide insights into the
              carbon balance, peat accumulation/degradation, and exchange of greenhouse gases
              with the atmosphere under predicted scenarios of global climate change.
