Title       : Development and Support for MUSE and the MUSE User Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9408389

Award Number: 9408389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian M. Humphries   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9408389  Humphries  The MUSE Project is a long term effort to support the
              computerization and management of natural history museum collection resources. 
              For the past six years the MUSE Project has designed, coded, and distributed
              software for the management of biological collection materials to over 70
              individual collections around the world (Table 1).  The range of services
              provided includes user training, workshops on museum computerization, network
              resources, and data models and data standards, participation in international
              efforts to facilitate the exchange of biological collection information,
              newsletter production, and maintenance of network resources (e.g., Gopher,
              World-Wide-Web and FTP servers and a MUSE list serve).  The goals of the next
              phase of the MUSE Project include five primary objectives:  (1) Continuation of
              support for existing MUSE users as well as assisting new sites with the
              adoption of MUSE.  The largest single activity of the MUSE Project is support
              for existing sites.  (2) Improvements to the MUSE suite of software including
              improved support for features of the Association of Systematics Collections
              data model, addition of geographic authority file verification, new forms of
              user security, new data logging features (allowing the permanent tracking of
              all data changes), improving the ease with which users can themselves make
              changes in MUSE data dictionaries, means for associating research data with
              specimen records, and improved support for international users.  (3)
              Development of MUSE for new taxonomic disciplines and improving features of
              MUSE for currently supported disciplines.  MUSE has been modified to deal with
              all vertebrate groups and is currently being modified for herbaria.  We would
              like to continue adding support for invertebrate collections as well as more
              diverse types of herbaria.  (4)  Development of direct network access methods
              for MUSE databases.  Data are currently exported from MUSE databases to provide
              Internet access.  We will develop tools for  direct access to PC servers
              located on the net.  (5)  Continued porting of the MUSE environment to Windows.
               The Windows version of the MUSE program itself is nearing completion, but all
              of the additional software and access tolls need to be ported to Windows.
