Title       : Systematic Vertebrate Collections in Archaeological Research: Stabilization and
               Reorganization of The University of Tennessee Comparative Vertebrate Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9408643

Award Number: 9408643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter E. Klippel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Darcy F. Morey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Klippel    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Walter Klippel and  his
              colleagues will work to improve the curation of the  zooarchaeological
              collection at the University of Tennessee.  These materials were acquired over
              a two decade span and the  collection continues to grow. The 8,000+ skeletons
              include fish,  reptiles, amphibians, birds and mammals. The 1,148 species 
              represented are weighted heavily towards taxa native to eastern  North America
              with an emphasis on species most frequently  recovered in regional
              archaeological sites. Ten represented  species, obtained in the early years of
              collection development,  have been placed on the Federal Endangered or
              Threatened Species  lists. While the collection is widely used by
              archaeologists  curatorial problems both threaten the materials themselves and 
              impede efficient use. With NSF support, Dr. Klippel and  colleagues will
              implement a fumigation program to control pest  infestation. Materials will be
              re-  boxed and stored in new  cabinets. Catalogue information will be entered
              into a computer  system.    Faunal remains are frequently recovered in
              archaeological sites  and are extremely important to scientists for a number of
               reasons. They permit the reconstruction of past environments and  provide
              insight into diet. They often allow archaeologists to  reconstruct other
              aspects of social behavior such as exchange and  population movement. Key to
              faunal analysis are collections of  known species which serve as standards of
              comparison. The large  and carefully documented Tennessee collection is widely
              used for  this purpose and constitutes a valuable archaeological resource. 
              With NSF support, its utility will increase significantly.
