Title       : Hormones and Avian Life Histories: Exploring the Mechanisticand Functional Bases
               of Fecundity Trade-offs in a Male Bird
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1995     
File        : a9408061

Award Number: 9408061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen D. Ketterson ketterso@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Val Nolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9408061  Ketterson         Animal species differ greatly in body-size, life
              span,  and numbers of offspring produced. Large-bodied species tend  to die
              younger but have fewer offspring, while smaller-  bodied species tend to die
              younger but to produce more  offspring per reproductive attempt. Patterns in
              which one  component of fitness is gained at the cost of another (long  life or
              large broods, but not both) are referred to as trade-  offs in order to strive
              to understand the physiological  bases for trade-offs in order to understand
              species  differences in aging and reproduction.       Another kind of trade-off
              is observed in reproduction.  Adults, particularly males, can gain in fitness
              either by  mating with multiple females or by behaving parentally  towards
              their offspring by a single female. Because time is  limiting and behavior that
              leads to successful mate  attraction often differs from behavior that favors
              offspring  survival, male animals often allocate time to parenting but  not to
              both simultaneously. This too is a trade-off, and  there is evidence to suggest
              that the male hormone  testosterone controls whether males specialize in one
              form  of reproduction or the other.       Birds are unusual among vertebrates
              in that almost all  species of birds provide some kind of parental care, and 
              male care of offspring is much more common among birds than  it is among other
              vertebrates. Presumably this is true  because males that are parental leave
              more offspring than  those that are not, but this needs to be tested 
              experimentally. It is also important to understand the  physiological
              underpinnings of male parental care.       To address the mechanisms of
              trade-offs in avian life-  histories, and how they are maintained, free-living
              male  dark-eyed juncos (Junco hyemalis) are treated with implants  of 
              testosterone. Treated males are then compared with  controls. Because hormones
              affect so many attributes of the  animal, some of the induced alterations may
              be detrimental  to fitness, othe r beneficial. Only by considering the net 
              effect of testosterone on an array of traits and a variety  of fitness measures
              can the maintenance of existing  phenotypes be understood.
