Title       : Effect of Demographic and Economic Cycles on Migration Timing and Regional
               Migraproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1994       
File        : a9408379

Award Number: 9408379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kavita K. Pandit   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408379  PANDIT       This proposal will examine, theoretically and empirically,
               the influence of demographic cycle cohort effects and economic  cycle period
              effects on migration timing.  Previous literature  has shown that these cycles
              are highly influential in determining  the "level" of migration: peak migration
              rates of young adults  tend to be lower for large cohorts and during
              recessionary  economic times because of competitive labor markets and depressed
               job opportunities.  This study suggests that demographic and  economic cycles
              may also influence the "timing" of migration.  It  builds on studies that have
              shown that individuals born into  large cohorts or those facing difficult
              economic conditions in  their early childhood frequently postpone their entry
              into the  labor force.  The first part of the research uses 1948-1988  Current
              Population Survey data to investigate (1) the effect of a  cohort's location in
              the demographic cycle on the timing of its  peak migration, and (2) the effect
              of economic conditions and  trends at a given time on the timing of peak
              migration rates.  The second part of the research will explore how regional 
              demographic and economic cycles, through their effect on the  level and timing
              of migration influence lifetime migration  expectancy or migraproduction. 
              Using regional data on cohort  size and economic conditions over time,
              migration age-schedules  and migraproduction rates are estimated for the nine
              U.S. census  regions.       The findings from the first part of the study will 
              contribute to the theoretical literature on the influence of both  demographic
              and macroeconomic conditions on behavior.  Findings  from the second part of
              the study will refine our understanding  of macroeconomic influences on spatial
              population flows.  Overall, this study will make an important contribution to
              the  linkage of demographic and economic cycles to individual behavior  which,
              in turn, will provide new policy insights into the causes  and consequences of
              migration  within the U.S.  ***
