Title       : Metabolic Regulation of Gene Expression During Cereal Seedling Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1996     
File        : a9408369

Award Number: 9408369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond L. Rodriguez rlrodriguez@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      9408369  Rodriquiz  This research deals with the Metabolite Signal Model
              which provides  a new perspective on source/sink relations during cereal
              seedling  development by integrating gibberellic acid (GA) regulation into a 
              larger regulatory circuit.  Metabolic regulation of gene  expression, in which
              metabolites effect changes in gene expression,  regulates genes encoding at
              least three enzymes of carbohydrate  metabolism in cereal seedlings.  Two
              alpha-amylase genes, one  expressed in scutellum and the other expressed in the
              aleurone  (source), are repressed by sugar or a metabolite derived from  sugar.
               Synthesis or release of GA from the embryo (sink) may also  be controlled by
              metabolic regulation.  If this is the case, then  the metabolic regulatory
              signal and the GA regulatory signal may  form a regulatory feedback circuit
              controlling the process of  seedling development.    Having the complete set of
              rice alpha-amylase gene clones enables  Dr. Rodriquiz and his colleagues to
              study the regulation of this  gene family at the gene-specific level.  The
              metabolically  regulated alpha-amylase genes RAmy3D and RAmy3E, which are the
              main  focus of this research, are distinct from the majority of alpha-  amylase
              genes cloned from other cereals.  There is evidence that  genes homologous to
              RAmy3D are present in other cereal species, so  studies with rice may help us
              to understand seedling development in  other species.  The switch from the
              early isozyme RAmy3D to a set  of later isozymes may be part of a developmental
              and physiological  transition that prepares the germinating seed for the next
              stage of  development, seedling elongation.  The relatively unique ability of 
              rice seeds to germinate under anoxic conditions and the  availability of a
              GA-deficient dwarf mutant of rice provide two  experimental systems which will
              facilitate this study.  ***
