Title       : In Vitro Differentiation of Embryonal Stem Cells to Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1994  
File        : a9408787

Award Number: 9408787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38445              (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Gottlieb gottlied@thalamus.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                           A number of systems have now been developed that obviate the need
              for the use of animals in the scientific investigation of biological processes.
              This research seeks to develop a new model system for the study of neuronal
              differentiation in cell culture.  When maintained under cell culture
              conditions, a small fraction of embryonal stem (ES) cells differentiate into
              neurons.  The studies that will be performed will investigate methods to
              maximize the percentage of ES cells that choose the neuronal development
              pathway.  Success in this endeavor will provide a number of significant
              advantages for future neurobiological research.  As an example, the effects of
              the modification of a specific gene on neuron development can be studied in
              culture, without the necessity of generating animals that carry the modified
              gene.  Further, since the developmental process under study can be continually
              monitored, the entire process is subject to investigation.  Development of this
              technological advance has the potential, therefore, to be of fundamental
              importance in understanding the processes involved in the development of the
              nervous system.
