Title       : Hudson Museum Collections Documentation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1994    
File        : a9408796

Award Number: 9408796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherrie Smith-Ferri   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : City of ukiah -- Grace Hud
	      431 South Main Street
	      Ukiah, CA  954824923    /   -

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Smith-Ferri    With National Science Foundation support, the Grace Hudson 
              Museum, which is located in the city of Ukiah, California, will  curate the
              Pomoan materials collected during the late 19th and  early 20th centuries. The
              Pomoan Indians inhabited this region of  California, to the North of San
              Francisco and Grace Hudson, her  father and later her husband collected Pomoan
              materials in a  careful and systematic fashion. The documentation which 
              accompanies the collection is, in most cases, detailed and the  scientific
              value of the materials is increased by photographs,  systematic ethnographic
              investigation and related correspondence.  Unfortunately the collection suffers
              from disorganization and a  lack of cataloguing and cross-referencing that
              renders much of  these important holdings inaccessible to all but the most 
              knowledgeable and persistent researchers. With NSF support, the  museum will:
              re-transcribe linguistic manuscripts into  a  universal phonetic transcription
              system; catalogue and annotate  photographs; catalogue baskets and other
              ethnographic artifacts;  work with manuscripts and correspondence to increase
              their  general availability.    The last native speaker of Pomo is extremely
              old and much of what  is known of early historic Pomoan lifeways is contained
              in the  collections of the Hudson Museum and a few other institutions.  Not
              only are these materials of great historical significance,  but they are also
              invaluable scientific resources. In their  current condition however they are
              very difficult to use and this  grant will significantly increase their access
              to the scientific  community.
