Title       : RUI: Testing Optimal Partitioning and Plant Strategy Theories: Do Conclusions
               Differ When Functional Adjustments are Explicitly Distinguished from
               Ontogenetic Drift?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9408120

Award Number: 9408120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly D. McConnaughay kdm@bradley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel J. McNaughton  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9408120  McConnaughay    In plant ecological research, differences among plants
              of  different genetic identity (e.g., species) or among plants  grown in
              different environments are usually assessed by  comparing plants at a single,
              often arbitrary, point in  time. This static view of plant responses does not
              recognize  the dynamic and indeterminate nature of plant development.  Most
              characteristics of plants change during growth and  development; the ratio of
              root: shoot biomass, for example,  is usually high in seedlings ald then
              declines as the plant  grows in size. Furthermore, plants of different genetic 
              identity or in different environments may differ in rates of  growth and
              development. Thus differences observed at any one  point in time may not
              represent an adapative response to a  given environment, but rather may be due,
              at least in part  to differences in the developmental stage or size of the 
              plant. In the last several years, there has been a  widespread recognition that
              a broad understanding of  environmental and genetic differences among plants
              requires  a dynamic characterization of plant growth and development.  We must
              shift our focus from snapshots of plants at one  point in development to the
              dynamics of development itself.    Biomass allocation patterns (i.e., relative
              amounts of  biomass put in to varying plant structures) have received 
              considerable attention from plant ecologists and plant  evolutionary
              biologists. For example, these traits have been  used to describe functional
              adaptations to environmental  constraints. Since allocation patterns may change
              during  plant growth and development, different allocation patterns  may result
              from flexibility in allocation per se (allocation  plasticity) or in overall
              plant growth (plasticity in growth  or developmental rates). In cases where
              allocational  plasticity is strictly due to alterations in growth or 
              developmental rates, much of our current theory concerning  optimal growth
              patterns and functional adaptations of plants   to variable environments may
              need to be revised.    We propose to separate the effects of resource
              availability  on plant growth rate and biomass partitioning. We will grow 
              plants in environments with different levels of resource  availability (CO2,
              light, nutrients and water) in order to  determine if differences in biomass
              allocation result from  differences in growth rates, partitioning, or both.
              These  experiments will provide much needed information concerning  plant
              functional adaptations to environments differing in  resource availability. ***
