Title       : Sources of Information in Children's Spelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9408456

Award Number: 9408456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca A. Treiman rtreiman@sun.science.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although there has been a good deal of research over the past few decades on how
              children learn to read, the study of how they learn to spell has been somewhat
              neglected.  The proposed research attempts to redress this neglect and to
              increase our understanding of spelling and spelling development.  The
              underlying hypothesis is that children bring their existing knowledge and
              skills to the task of spelling.  These include knowledge of the phonological or
              sound system of the spoken language, familiarity with the names of letters,
              knowledge of the spelling of the child's own name, knowledge of meaning
              relations among words, and knowledge of the kinds of letter sequences that do
              and do not occur in the printed language.  Experiments are proposed to examine
              the effects of each of these kinds of knowledge on beginning spelling.  In the
              experiments, normally-developing children are asked to spell selected words or
              nonwords and to perform other tasks involving sounds and letters.  The
              experiments involve American children in the preschool and elementary grades,
              as well as adults in some cases.  In some of the studies, the results from
              American children will be compared to those of British children to examine the
              effects of dialect and different cultural practices on spelling.   The results
              of this project are expected to shed light on the knowledge that children bring
              with them to the spelling task.  In addition, the results will show what kinds
              of errors are typical among children of various ages and why these errors
              occur.  These results should help in providing guidelines for those who teach
              spelling and other literacy-related skills to children in preschool,
              kindergarten, and the early elementary grades.  In addition, by providing
              important information about normal children's spelling behavior, the results
              should prove useful in the diagnosis and treatment of children and adults with
              spelling difficulties.
