Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Models of Nucleotide Substitution and the Demographic
               History of Natural Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9408071

Award Number: 9408071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6650               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Wakeley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9408071  Wakeley    This award supports a 12-month Japan Society  for the
              Promotion of Science Postdoctoral  Fellowship for Dr. John Wakeley, Department
              of  Integrative Biology, University of California,  Berkeley, at the Department
              of Population  Genetics, National Institute of Genetics,  Mishima, Japan.  Dr.
              Wakeley will work with Dr.  Fumio Tajima on a research project entitled 
              "Models of Nucleotide Substitution and the  Demographic History of Natural
              Populations."    Dr. Wakeley will pursue two main areas of  research in Japan. 
              The first involves  inferences about the pattern of DNA sequence  evolution. 
              The investigators will develop a  computer-based method of quantifying
              variation  in the rate of nucleotide substitution among  sites in DNA
              sequences.  The method involves  the random placement of hypothetical
              nucleotide  substitutions on a genealogy relating the  sequences.  The second
              area involves developing  statistical approaches to making inferences  about
              the demographic history of populations.   Having recently derived the variance
              of the  average number of nucleotide differences among  pairs of sequences in a
              sample from two  populations that exchange migrants, and  comparing this
              variance to previously published  results for two populations that have been 
              completely isolated from each other for some  length of time, Dr. Wakeley found
              that the  variance is greater under migration than under  isolation.  Thus, he
              plans to develop a test to  distinguish these two biologically interesting 
              cases.  ***
