Title       : Molecular Systematics and Evolutionary Relationships of the Green Algae in the
               Class Chlorophyceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1994   
File        : a9408193

Award Number: 9408193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Floyd   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Fuerst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9408193  Floyd       The green algae (known formally as the Chlorophyceae) are a
               diverse group of organisms, placed together by biologists because  of the
              nature of their photosynthetic pigments and storage  products.  It has become
              clear that they include several ancient  evolutionary lines.  The particular
              algal species chosen for this  study represent major groups within the green
              algae whose origins  and affinities are questionable.  The analysis emphasizes
              molecular  characters as markers of evolution.  The DNA sequences of genes 
              which code for the nuclear small subunit ribosomal RNA will be  determined. 
              These genes are referred to as the 18S rRNA genes.   Traditional approaches
              using morphological and microscopic  (ultrastructural) characters which can
              help to understand the  evolutionary pattern in these algae are either
              unavailable,  uninformative, or conflicting.         Several interrelated
              topics are to be investigated.  These  include: (1) the taxonomic relationships
              between members of the  algal order Tetrasporales, especially whether forms
              with four  flagella on their zoopores (called quadriflagellate) or two 
              flagella (biflagellate) are closely related, and whether the  species of the
              Tetrasporales are closely related to other algal  groups; (2) the origin and
              affinities of two groups of filamentous  algae, the Chaetophorales and the
              Oedogoniales, including if they  have a common origin, or are derived from
              other types of algae;  and, (3) the relationship between these filamentous
              algae and a  selected set of algae that do not produce motile cells at any time
               in their life history, for which appropriate cell ultrastructure  information
              is unavailable.  The 18S rRNA genes of approximately 40  species will be
              studied by using the polymerase chain reaction  (PCR) to amplify copies of the
              gene, then sequencing the DNA  products.  The results of the current project
              can be compared with  sequences of the 18S rRNA  genes of the other algae
              already studied  and with published data on  algal 18S rRNA gene sequences. 
              The  relationships identified from the molecular analysis will be  compared
              with those based on traditional morphological characters,  and on
              ultrastructural studies.
