Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Science: Quantum States of Shallow Impurities in Wide
               Band Gap Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9408165

Award Number: 9408165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene E. Haller eehaller@lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9415824  Haller    This Americas Program award will support collaborative 
              research between Dr. Eugene Haller,  University of  California, Berkeley, and
              Dr. Hugo Navarro-Contreras,  Instituto de Investigaciones Cientificas en
              Comunicacion  Optica, San Luis Potosi, Mexico, on the characterization and 
              study of the quantum states of shallow impurities in wide  bandgap
              semiconductors.  Techniques to be used  in this  research are far-infrared and
              photothermal ionization  spectroscopy.  The aim is to gain as much
              understanding as  possible of the impurities' quantum nature and to establish 
              a possible association between impurity atoms and other  defects in the
              materials to be studied.    Wide-bandgap materials are potentially useful for
              demanding  electronic applications and as visible optical emitters.  At 
              present, many research groups are focusing on the growth of  wide-bandgap
              blue-emitting semiconductor materials that  could be used to fabricate blue
              light-emitting diodes and  semiconductor lasers.  The application of these
              materials to  light-emitting devices is hindered by several factors, among 
              them, the difficulties encountered in growing high quality  single crystalline
              epilayers.   Recently, preparation of  relatively good samples has been
              achieved, but very little  is known about the spectroscopic properties of
              dopant  impurities in these materials.  The spectroscopic techniques  to be
              used in the present study will provide new and highly  relevant information
              concerning the nature of these  impurities.  ***
