Title       : Study of Carrier Transport and Impact Ionization in GaN/AlGaN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9408479

Award Number: 9408479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127719             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. P. Ruden ruden@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9163,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408479  Ruden  The purpose of this work is to provide the first theoretical
              comprehensive study of electron and hole transport in GaN and ALGaN bulk and
              multiquantum well structures with the specific goal of determining the electron
              and hole impact ionization rates in these systems.  From the knowledge of the
              transport properties of GaN/ALGaN obtained, the feasibility of developing a p-n
              junction GaN/AlGaN low-noise ultraviolet avalanching detector can be assessed. 
              To date no compact, low-voltage, solid-state ultraviolet photodetector exists,
              In order to judge the utility of a GaN/AlGaN avalanche photodiode it is
              necessary to know the impact ionization rates in these materials.  In this
              work, the electron and hole impact ionization rates will be theoretically
              determined using ensemble Monte Carlo simulations which include the full
              details of the conduction and valence bands calculated numerically from the
              pseudopotential method.  A new formulation of the impact ionization transition
              rates will be included in the Monte Carlo simulators which takes into account
              the k-dependence of the transition rate providing a first principles
              determination of the carrier ionization rates.  Using this technique, the
              electron and hole ionization rates will be calculated in bulk GaN, AlGaN and in
              related multiquantum well and superlattice structures.  The calculated results
              will provide the first assessment of GaN/AlGaN for use in p-n junction APDs for
              ultraviolet detection.  In addition, the refinement of the simulation tools
              used in this study will have significant impact on modeling other devices. 
              Some possible devices whose design and optimization can be aided by the
              development of the proposed simulators are low noise, high gain photodetectors
              for high data rate communications, new APD designs for detection of wavelenghts
              from the ultraviolet to the infrared, and ultra-low noise IMPATT diodes.  This
              study is a collaboration between researchers at Georgia Institute of Techology
              and University of Minnesota.   ***
