Title       : Analysis and Development of Algorithms for Antenna Array Based Communications
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9408154

Award Number: 9408154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99731              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold L. Swindlehurst swindle@ee.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Communication systems employing antenna arrays are required in  situations where
              multiple co-channel signals are present  simultaneously.  The spatial
              discrimination provided by multiple  antenna elements allows spectrally
              overlapping signals to be  individually extracted.  While such systems have
              typically been  proposed in the context of military applications, a number of 
              important commercial applications have recently gained attention.   In
              particular, it has been proposed that antenna arrays be used in  land-based
              mobile radio systems to provide enhanced spatial  discrimination and hence
              increased capacity.  Such arrays could  potentially provide frequency reuse in
              adjacent cells, or within a  communication cell itself.    This research is
              examining signal copy, interference cancellation,  and source localization
              using antenna arrays, with particular  emphasis on scenarios that might be
              encountered in mobile radio  communications (e.g., multipath fading
              environments, certain signal  formats such as analog FM IS-3 AMPS, GSM, IS-54
              offset QPSK, IS-95  CDMA, etc.).  A focus of this research is the development
              and  analysis of algorithms that exploit all available temporal and  spatial
              information.  Conventional techniques for direction finding  (DF) and signal
              copy (SC) rely on either spatial or temporal  structure in the data, but
              typically not both.  In situations where  both array response data and
              information about the signal structure  is available, it is obviously
              suboptimal to ignore either.   Consequently, several different techniques that
              exploit both  spatial and temporal signal structure for improved DF/SC will be 
              studies: iterative blindleast-squares; decision directed algorithms 
              array-based equalization of multipath channels; and optimal joint  DF/SC with
              parametric array uncertainty.  Finally, special emphasis  will be placed in
              this research on the use f real mobile cellular  radio data to test the
              effectiveness of the algorithms developed.
