Title       : Archaeology and Paleoenvironments of the Kapthurin Formation, Baringo, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9408926

Award Number: 9408926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally McBrearty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9198,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              McBrearty    With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Sally 
              McBrearty will continue archaeological research in the Baringo  Basin region of
              Kenya. In particular she will focus on the  Kapthurin Formation in the Tugen
              Hills. Previous archaeological  research in the area has yielded a stratified
              sequence of  archaeological sites as well as a small amount of hominid (human) 
              skeletal material. Building on previous work she will conduct  archaeological,
              geological and paleontological prospecting and  mapping. Limited excavation
              will also be carried out. Sediment  samples will be collected to determine age
              by means of argon  dating. Geochemical fingerprinting will serve to check on
              field  stratigraphic correlations and x-ray fluorescence analysis will  provide
              a technique to provenience surface fossils whose  stratigraphic position is
              unclear. Dr. McBrearty will use stone  artifacts and archaeological fauna in an
              attempt to reconstruct  human behavior. A number of techniques will be employed
              to  understand the fluxuating environment to which these hominids  adapted.   
              While a number of lines of evidence - archaeological,  paleontological and
              genetic - suggest that anatomically modern  humans first appeared in sub
              Saharan Africa just when and where  this occurred is unknown. What interests
              paleoanthropologists  most however is the process which lead to this emergence
              and here  also little evidence is available. Dr. McBrearty's research will 
              address this issue. Information to date suggests that the  transition took
              place during the Middle Pleistocene and the  Kapthurin Formation encompasses
              this time period. Prior work  indicates that it contains archaeological
              materials and fauna as  well as human remains. Dr. McBrearty's work will
              increase this  data base and bring a wide range of modern scientific techniques
               to bear in order to make interpretations.    This research is important for
              several reasons. It will increase  our understanding of Africa's past. It will
              provide data of  inter est to a large number of paleoanthropologists and shed
              new  light on the emergence of modern humans.
