Title       : Interaction of a Cytoplasmic Membrane Energy Transducer withOuter Membrane
               Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9408006

Award Number: 9408006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Postle postle@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9408006  Postle    Energy for the active transport of iron-bearing siderophores,
              vitamin B-12, and other ligands across the outer membrane of Gram-negative
              bacteria is transduced from the cytoplasmic membrane by a cytoplasmic membrane
              protein complex consisting of TonB and a set of auxiliary proteins.  Recent
              results from this laboratory using in vivo crosslinking have demonstrated that
              TonB protein can interact directly with high affinity receptors in the outer
              membrane to transduce energy.  In this project, both genetic and biochemical
              experiments will be performed to dissect the interactions between TonB and the
              outer membrane receptors.  Preliminary data suggest that the ability of TonB to
              fractionate with the M-band (a sucrose density gradient fraction proposed to
              consist of attached cytoplasmic and outer membranes) is determined by its level
              of activity.  Thus the ability of TonB to form stable associations with the
              outer membrane --- via outer membrane receptors --- should be influenced by the
              several parameters to be tested:  iron availability; protonophores; effects of
              TonB mutants; etc.  The sites through which TonB interacts the the outer
              membrane receptors will be mapped by crosslinking interactions and genetic
              tests for dominant negativity.    %%%  Gram-negative eubacteria are shielded
              from their environment by a multilayered external structure, consisting of an
              inner (cytoplasmic) membrane, a rigid wall, and an outer membrane.  The outer
              membrane serves as a permeability barrier which selectively allows for
              transport of needed metabolites.  Some metabolites (small hydrophilic
              molecules, such as sugars and amino acids) can traverse the outer membrane
              freely.  Others, such as larger molecules or those which are relatively rare in
              the environment and thus need to be transported actively into the cell, are
              brought in via energy-dependent, high-affinity specific mechanisms.  In the
              model bacterium, Escherichia coli, and other Gram-negatives, this transport
              mechanism is mediated by a mul ticomponent system that couples cytoplasmic
              membrane energy to active transport across the outer membrane.  The central
              component of this system in E. coli is a small (26 Kilodalton) protein which is
              the product of the tonB genetic locus.  This bacterial gene was originally
              discovered through mutational phenotypes in 1943, and its vital significance to
              the life of the bacterial cell was documented heavily in the 1970's.  However,
              it is only relatively recently that biochemical studies of the protein have
              made possible the formulation of plausible hypotheses about how this protein
              works.  This project addresses the question of TonB structure and mechanism of
              action.  The results of this work will increase our understanding of the
              biochemical mechanisms underlying bacterial assimilation of essential nutrients
              from the environment.  This kind of information has key implications for
              understanding microbial biodiversity.  ***
