Title       : Interindividual-Intergroup Discontinuity: Its Reduction Domain, and Cognitive
               Foundation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9408760

Award Number: 9408760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chester A. Insko   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Schopler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408760  Insko                              ABSTRACT         This program of
              studies addresses the classical issue of  understanding the psychological
              consequences that occur when  someone is behaving as part of a group as
              compared to behaving as  an individual.  Using a mixed-motive paradigm and
              face-to-face  interaction, the PIs have previously established a reliable 
              discontinuity. That is, repeated interactions of two people are  typically
              characterized by high rates of cooperation, whereas  group on group
              interactions typically produce high rates of  competition. Such discontinuity
              occurs even though competition  yields worse results than mutual cooperation.
              The past research  has provided evidence that such discontinuity between 
              interindividual and intergroup behavior is a very robust  phenomenon. It is
              explained partially by the greater tendency of  groups than individuals to
              distrust, or fear, each other and  partially by the fact that group members can
              provide each other  with social support for acting in a self-interested, or
              greedy,  manner whereas individuals have no way of obtaining such social 
              support. The present research has three foci which will identify:  (1) ways in
              which discontinuity can be reduced, by increasing the  cooperativeness of
              intergroup interactions, (2) individual  cognitive processes that support
              discontinuity,  and (3)  situational characteristics relating to the outcome
              domain that  is a necessary condition for the occurrence of discontinuity.     
               The violent resolution of intergroup conflict has plagued  the world for all
              of known history, and continues to this day.  Witness, for example, the
              intergroup conflicts in Bosnia and  Rwanda. The major focus of the proposed
              research is to identify  ways to decrease the competitiveness that is more
              characteristic  of intergroup relations than of interindividual relations. Past
               research has demonstrated that such discontinuity between groups  and
              individuals is explained partially by the greater tendency of  grou ps than
              individuals to distrust, or fear, each other and  partially by the fact that
              group members can provide each other  with social support for acting in a
              self-interested manner. The  proposed research will attempt to identify ways of
              reducing this  discontinuity. Although a research tradition exists for reducing
               the consequences of intergroup conflict by "decategorizing" the  participants'
              group affiliations, it is often not feasible or  even desirable to do this.
              Instead, cooperation between intact  groups will be induced by interventions
              that increase trust  without increasing vulnerability and that make group's
              more aware  of the long-term consequences of their actions. In order to 
              understand the conditions of applicability, the proposed research  will also
              attempt to identify the reasons for the distrust  between members of different
              groups, and the characteristic of  the social setting that is a necessary
              condition for the  occurrence of discontinuity. If the research is successful
              it  will be possible to specify the conditions under which  discontinuity will
              occur and the methods by which it can be  reduced.
