Title       : Oriental Institute Archaeological and Environmental Investigation of Yemeni
               Terraced Agriculture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9408714

Award Number: 9408714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19911              (Estimated)
Investigator: McGuire Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tony J. Wilkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408714  Gibson    With National Science Foundation support, Drs. McGuire Gibson
              and  Tony Wilkinson will conduct archaeological research in the  highland
              region of Yemen. Previous archaeological work has  revealed the presence of
              widespread terraces which date to  prehistoric times and served, presumably,
              for agricultural  purposes. However their dates and cultural affiliations are
              not  well known. Drs. Gibson and Wilkinson will use aerial photographs  to
              locate such complexes. They will then conduct on the ground  survey and
              mapping. They will carry out trial excavation to  determine the
              geomorphological characteristics of the terraces,  to collect organic material
              for radiocarbon dating, and to  discern cultural affiliation. These data will
              provide the basis  for a larger, more long term research effort.   
              Archaeologists wish to understand how complex civilizations  developed from
              smaller scale social units. Several theories  proposed focus on the
              agricultural process and the need to  coordinate large numbers of individuals
              to achieve common goals.  It has been argued that in semiarid environments,
              such as the  Near East, irrigation plays a central role because the 
              construction of irrigation canals requires large amounts of labor  and the
              allocation of water necessitates central hierarchical  control. The Yemen
              situation may be different because preliminary  indications suggest that
              terracing - which is a small scale  activity - and increased social complexity
              seem to go hand in  hand. Drs. Gibson and Wilkinson wish to examine this
              question.    This research is important because it will increase our 
              understanding of how humans adapt in semi-arid regions. It will  also shed new
              light on the development of complex societies.  ***
