Title       : Mechanisms of Rho-Dependent Transcription Termination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9408231

Award Number: 9408231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Bear dbear@salud.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U New Mexico Hlth Sci Ctr
	      HSSB - 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  871315041    505/272-6264

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9408231  Abstract  Termination factor Rho catalyzes the release of transcripts
              from  elongating RNA polymerase at specific sites in bacterial genomes.   At
              least two signals appear to be required for Rho-mediated  transcription
              termination:  (1) a site on the nascent transcript  that binds Rho to the
              ternary transcription complex and activates  the Rho AtPase, and (2) a release
              signal, most likely located  within the RNA, that pauses the transcription
              complex and  kinetically couples Rho binding to transcript dissociation.  We 
              will apply a novel approach developed in our laboratory to  facilitate the
              study of Rho-dependent termination by uncoupling the  Rho attachment/transcript
              release reactions from transcription  elongation.  A set of transcription
              termination intermediates has  been constructed where RNA polymerase is
              physically blocked from  further elongation by a cleavage-defective EcoR1
              endonuclease  mutant, EcoR1(Q111).  Rho-mediated release of transcripts from 
              these blocked ternary transcription complexes (BTC's) occurs quite  readily if
              the blockade occurs downstream of the natural  termination signal contained in
              the transcript.  By engineering the  blockades at different strategic locations
              along the Rho-dependent  terminator region, we can progressively uncover
              separate elements  of the signal that are required for Rho function.  Using the
              BTC  methodology, we have dissected the transcription termination signal  in
              the rho attenuator.  This terminator located in a 255 nt region  between the
              promoter and the Rho protein coding sequence, and  autogenously controls the
              level of Rho mRNA synthesis.  We propose  to continue our mutagenesis and
              binding site mapping analysis of  specific sequences in the attenuator that we
              previously showed to  be essential for Rho-dependent release.  We will also
              test a simple  two-step kinetic formalism to analyze the binding and release 
              reaction, and to determine the effects of the auxiliary termination  factors
              NusA and NusG proteins.  Several mode ls for termination  reaction will be
              tested using fluorescence spectroscopy and  electron microscopy to detect
              intermediates between the attachment  and release step.  The details of how the
              Rho RNA-DNA helicase  couples ATP hydrolysis to mechano-chemical work will be
              explored  using novel flow cytometry, electron microscopy and RNase H assays. 
              %%%  Often the expression of genes encoding information for the  synthesis of
              specific proteins must be controlled very tightly; too  much or too little of
              the gene product can have profound adverse  effects on cellular metabolism and
              development.  A common mechanism  for fine control of gene expression in
              bacteria, plants and animals  is transcription attenuation.  Attenuators are
              signals located in  front of genes that can conditionally stop the movement of
              RNA  polymerase during transcription (RNA biosynthesis).  Our laboratory  is
              interested in a protein factor called Rho, that catalyzes this  attenuation
              reaction in bacteria. Rho causes transcription  termination by binding to the
              RNA transcript and using the energy  stored in ATP to physically dissociate the
              transcript from RNA  polymerase.  Many of the details of this reaction are
              unknown.   Using a combination of recombinant DNA technology, biochemical 
              methods and high resolution electron microscopy we will determine  where and
              how Rho binds to the RNA transcript.  A reason for the  ATP energy requirement
              may be to fuel the movement of Rho along the  RNA transcript and to permit Rho
              to physically "push" the RNA off  the RNA polymerase and DNA.  To test this
              hypothesis, we will  construct transcription complexes containing strategically
              placed  fluorescent tags on the RNA. Using fluorescence spectroscopy and  flow 
              cytometry, we will monitor how fast Rho releases the RNA, and  determine if the
              fluorescent signals change intensity and  orientation during the reaction. 
              Such changes may provide insight  into the intermediate steps that occur
              between Rho attachment and  RNA release, including possib le movement of Rho on
              the RNA.  ***
