Title       : The Role of Motor Proteins in Astral and Spindle Forces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9408249

Award Number: 9408249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Aist JRA2@CORNELL.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Olen C. Yoder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Gillian Turgeon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9408249  Aist    The objective of this project is to determine how forces  that
              move the mitotic apparatus are generated.  The organism  of choice, the
              filamentous ascomycete Nectria haematococca,  is the most cytologically
              tractable fungus which is also  amenable to both conventional and molecular
              genetic  technologies.  It is the only organism in which both astral  pulling
              forces and spindle pushing forces have been  demonstrated to occur in vivo;
              both of these forces  contribute to chromosome separation during anaphase B. 
              Previous studies have also determined the time-course and  ultrastructural
              details of mitosis in N. haematococca.  The molecular targets of this
              investigation are kinesin-like  proteins (KLPs), which are candidates for
              generating pushing  force in the spindle, and dynein-like proteins (DLPs),
              which  are thought to produce pulling force in the aster.  KLPs are  known to
              be necessary for normal mitotic progression in  three other fungi
              (Saccharamyces cerevisiae,  Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and Aspergillus
              nidulans), and a  DLP has recently been shown to be necessary for mitosis to 
              progress normally in S. cerevisiae.  The superior  cytological and optical
              properties of N. haematococca will  be used to observe the roles of these
              proteins in mitosis in  vivo.  The strategy is to clone genes from N.
              haematococca  encoding KLPs and DLPs, destroy the function of each cloned  gene
              by site-specific mutation in the genome, and observe by  video microscopy the
              cytological phenotype (if any) caused  by each mutation.  For each protein, the
              hypothesis that  elimination or overproduction will alter the rate of mitotic 
              movements will be tested.  Laser microbeam experiments will  then be used as a
              confirmation of the suspected roles of the  proteins in mitotic force
              generation.  Additionally, each  protein will be localized in the mitotic
              apparatus in situ  using immunofluorescence microscopy, and the polarity of 
              force produced by each protein will be determined using in  vitro motility 
              assays.  One KLP-encoding gene, Klp1, has  already been cloned, the genomic
              copy has been disrupted,  and the phenotypic effect of the loss of KLP1 has
              been shown  to be abnormal behavior of the mitotic spindle.  The role of  KLP1
              in mitosis will be investigated, and the analysis will  be extended to
              additional KLPs and DLPs in the organism.  The proposed work represents a rare
              opportunity to correlate  specific motor proteins with in vivo demonstrated
              mitotic  forces of known polarity and location.  The strategy of  testing
              functional inferences by performing laser microbean  experiments on the mutants
              is entirely unique and, if  different motor proteins are involved in different
              aspects  of mitosis, the results may provide clear demonstrations as  to which
              motor protein is responsible for which mitotic  force.  This would contribute
              substantially to our  understanding of the mechanisms of mitosis, a process
              that  is fundamental to growth and development of all eukaryotes.  %%% 
              Mitosis, the process of cell division, is fundamental to all  eukaryotic life. 
              The process ensures that the genetic  material of the cell is equally
              distributed between the two  daughter cells, by carefully regulating the
              movement of  paired sister chromosomes to opposite ends of the cell prior  to
              physical division of the cell into two.  This is critical  to the viability of
              the daughter cells.  The process is  accomplished by a complex, highly
              regulated and predictable  series of microtubule-mediated movements of the
              chromosomes.  The biochemical mechanisms involved in these movements and  their
              regulation are not yet well understood, although there  is evidence that two
              kinds of microtubule-based motor  proteins (chemomechanical transducers),
              kinesin and dynein,  are involved.  With prior NSF support, this laboratory has
               used state-of-the-art laser microscopic techniques to study  the forces
              exerted by the microtubular apparatus (known as  the "spindle") on the
              chromosomes during the various stages  of mitosis.  Th e laboratory is now
              planning to apply state-  of-the-art molecular genetic approaches to determine
              the  biochemical basis for each stage of the mitotic process.  The work has
              broad significance.  The better we understand  the process, the better we can
              manipulate it, either to  disrupt unwanted mitotic events (e.g., pest or weed
              control  in agriculture, novel treatments for cancer, etc.) or to  understand
              and perhaps intervene in unwanted, pathological  disruptions.  Also, since
              these processes take place on very  small size scales (microtubule diameters
              are in the  nanometer range), a better understanding of the mechanism  and
              regulation of these small but precise movements may  serve as useful paradigms,
              or even as novel materials, in  nanofabrication engineering.  ***
