Title       : Membranes in the Control of Chromosomal Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9408830

Award Number: 9408830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliott Crooke crooke@bc.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9408830  Crooke       Bacterial DNA replication is carefully controlled at  the
              initiation stage , possibly by the regulation of the  essential activity of
              DnaA protein.  The cellular membrane  has long been hypothesized to be involved
              in chromosomal  replication, with accumulating evidence that indicates that 
              membranes have a profound influence on DnaA protein.  Escherichia coli membrane
              liposomes can convert an inert  form of purified DnaA protein into a
              replicatively active  form.  Characterization of the membranes has identified 
              fluidity and acidic phospholipids as essential features.  The importance of
              membrane fluidity for this activation has  been seen in vitro, and for DNA
              replication in vivo.  The long term goal of this research is to  elucidate  the
               physiological significance of the influence of membranes on  chromosomal
              replication.  To directly test the hypothesis  that membranes participate in
              the regulation of DnaA protein  activity, the following specific objectives
              were addressed:  1.  Subcellular localization of the DnaA protein.  Localize 
              DnaA protein within the cell by subcellular fractionation  and electron
              microscopic immuno-thin sectioning.  Determine  whether a flux in the cellular
              location of DnaA protein  between the membranes and the cytosol occurs during
              the cell  cycle and with different growth conditions, and whether such  a
              change is a means of regulating DnaA protein activity.  2,  Replication
              activities of membrane bound DnaA protein.  Investigate the initiation
              activities of chromosomal origin  recognition, strand opening and prepriming
              complex formation  by membrane -bound DnaA protein.  Examine how these 
              activities are altered when compared to those known for  soluble DnaA protein 
              to gain insight into how membranes  influence DnaA protein.  3.  Initiation of
              DNA synthesis in  cells with altered levels of acidic phospholipids.  Examine 
              the ability of liposomes prepared from cell having varied  ;levels of acidic
              phospholipids to rejuvenate DnaA protein.  C orrelate the rejuvenation activity
              with initiation rates in  vivo.  Determine whether constitutively stable DNA 
              replication alleviates the growth arrest of acidic  phospholipid defiant cells.
               %%%  This work should provide insight into the regulation of the  initiation
              of DNA replication, which is a key control point  in the prokaryotic cell cycle
              and in the determination of  eucaryotic cellular quiescence proliferation. 
              Therefore,  results of this work may be applied toward other, higher  organisms
              as this proved to be the case with other aspects  of cellular events.    ***
