Title       : Characterization of a Novel Fungal Protease Expressed in the Endophytic
               Infection of Poa ampla
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9408035

Award Number: 9408035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faith C. Belanger belanger@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley I. Hillman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9408035  Belanger  Fungal endophytes of the genus Acremonium infect many
              wild and  cultivated grass species and these associations have major 
              ecological and agricultural impacts.  In many instances the  endophyte-grass
              association is strictly mutualistic.  The fungi  synthesize alkaloids which
              protect the plants from herbivory by  insects and other herbivores, while the
              plants supply the fungi  with necessary nutrients.  The presence of toxic
              alkaloids in  endophyte-infected forage grasses, however, can result in
              poisoning  syndromes in grazing livestock.  Because of the importance of 
              livestock toxicosis to agriculture, considerable research has been  done on
              this aspect of endophyte infection of grasses.      Dr. Belanger is interested
              in the physiology of the interaction of  the fungal endophytes and their host
              grasses.  In contrast to the  information on alkaloids and animal toxicosis,
              the physiological  aspects of endophyte-grass interactions have not been well 
              characterized in any system.      The long range objective of this research is
              to understand the  factors which are important in establishing effective
              symbiotic  associations between the Acremonium fungi and their host grasses.  
              Dr. Belanger has detected a novel fungal protease which is  expressed in the
              endophytic infection of the grass species Poa  ampla by the fungus Acremonium
              typhinum.  The focus of this  proposal is to further characterize this protease
              and determine its  role in the endophyte-grass association.  In addition to its
               potential biological significance, this protease has unusual  features which
              make it a particularly interesting enzyme in its own  right.      The specific
              objectives of this research are:  1) Further characterization of the enzymatic
              and physical              properties of the A. typhinum protease  2)
              Characterization of cDNA and genomic clones for the A. typhinum      protease 
              3) Determination of the effect of protease gene disruption on the      ability
              of the fungus to infect its host  grass
