Title       : Assessing Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9408684

Award Number: 9408684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Tversky bt@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amos Tversky  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               We live in an uncertain world where the consequences of our actions are not
              always predictable. Therefore, the decisions to invest in the stock market, to
              undergo a medical treatment, or to go to court depend on our assessment of the
              chances that the market will go up, the treatment will be successful, or the
              court will decide in our favor.  Because in general we do not have objective
              methods for computing the probabilities of such events, we must rely on human
              judgment as the major instrument for assessing uncertainty. Hence, the question
              of how people evaluate evidence and assess uncertainty is highly relevant to
              many aspects of our lives, from the diagnosis of a patient to the evaluation of
              expert judgment. An extensive body of research on judgment under uncertainty
              indicates that intuitive judgments of both laypeople and experts are often at
              variance with accepted normative principles of probability and statistics (see,
              e.g., Arkes & Hammond, 1986; Camerer, 1993; Dawes, 1988; Kahneman, Slovic, &
              Tversky, 1982).  These findings have commonly been attributed to cognitive
              limitations, and explained in terms of judgmental heuristics or simplifying
              strategies. This proposal presents a new approach to subjective probability
              based on the notion of evidential support. It gives rise to a formal
              representation that is compatible with heuristic process-based accounts, and
              encompasses a wide range of phenomena within a unified theoretical framework.  
              The proposal is divided into four parts. Part 1 presents a new model of belief,
              called support theory, in which the judged probability of an event depends on
              the specificity of its description. In particular, judged probability is
              increased by unpacking the focal hypothesis and decreased by unpacking the
              alternative hypothesis. Part 2 describes a series of experiments designed to
              test the major predictions of support theory, including the subadditivity of
              probability assessments, and the difference between probablity and frequency
              judgments. Part 3 extend s the theory to the analysis of conditional
              probability and evidential support. In this account, judgments of conditional
              probability depend not only on the co-occurrence of the relevant events; it
              also depends on their correlation. This prediction will be tested in both
              knowledge-based and data-based judgments. Part 4 addresses the problem of
              ambiguity or vagueness, and provides a method for assessing the imprecision of
              belief in terms of upper and lower probability judgments. These will be
              compared to standard measures of reliability, and their implications to
              decision making will be explored. Theoretical and practical implications of the
              present approach to the representation and the elicitation of belief are
              discussed throughout.
