Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Formation Process and 3-D Dynamics of Vortex Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9408697

Award Number: 9408697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Meiss jdm@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Monika Nitsche  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9408697  Nitsche    The goal of the present project is to perform numerical 
              investigations to develop a better understanding of vortex ring  dynamics.  The
              case is considered in which a vortex ring is  formed by ejecting an amount of
              fluid from an opening.  In the  first part of the project, the focus will be on
              the initial  formation process of axisymmetric rings.  Viscous effects 
              dominate the flow in an initial time interval and affect the  vortex trajectory
              and total shed circulation.  The effects of  viscosity by adapting a successful
              2-dimensional Navier Stokes  solver for high Reynolds number flow to the
              axisymmetric case  will be investigated.  Inviscid effects of the flow using a 
              vortex sheet model will also be studied in order to determine  whether present
              similarity theory predictions can be adjusted to  better predict the initial
              flow.  The second part of the project  concerns 3-dimensional dynamics of
              vortex rings formed at an  opening.  The development of a numerical method to
              compute  3-dimensional vortex sheet separation at an edge will enable the 
              study of the stability of these flows, as well as the effects of 
              nonaxisymmetric openings and nonaxisymmetric forcing.  For this  purpose, a
              3-dimensional vortex filament method will be developed  which incorporates
              vortex separation at a sharp edge and  implements a fast summation algorithm to
              enable high resolution  calculations.    Understanding the dynamics of vortex
              rings is essential to  understand more complicated flows such as those that
              occur in  combustion processes, or in the airborne vortex structures 
              presenting a hazard to aircraft.  An inviscid numerical model has  been
              developed for axisymmetric vortex rings generated at a  circular opening.  This
              model was proven by comparison with  experiment to recover detailed information
              about the real flow.   In the present work, this model will be extended to
              3-dimensional  flows, and will be used to study the stability of the flows, the
               effects of non-axisymmetric openings a nd nonaxisymmetric forcing,  as well as
              the potential applicability of present theoretical  results to predict the
              flow.  Several of these aspects of the  flow are difficult to understand
              experimentally or analytically,  and the computations promise to give a deeper
              insight into the  flow dynamics. In order to perform this work, current
              numerical  tools available for 2-dimensional flows will be expanded to 
              3-dimensions.
