Title       : Mechanisms of Olfactory Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9408391

Award Number: 9408391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Johnston rej1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9232,ENVI,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this research are to increase our understanding  of the mechanisms
              of social recognition and perception at  the behavioral level of analysis. 
              Since this particular  project involves communication by odors, another goal is
              to  increase our understanding of the functions and mechanisms  of the
              olfactory system.  Recent biological theory has  emphasized the importance of
              the individual organism in the  process of evolution, yet we still know very
              little about  the mechanisms of individual recognition and species 
              similarities and differences in the perception of  individuals and knowledge of
              individuals.  This project will  investigate some surprising new phenomena that
              suggest that  animals have specialized perceptual and/or cognitive  strategies
              to discover a wide variety of information about  other individuals by
              investigation of the complex arrays of  scents that are left behind in the
              environment.  These  discoveries suggest entirely new processes of olfactory 
              perception and consequently of neural mechanisms underlying  these processes. 
              Furthermore, characterization of these  strategies should provide insight into
              the features or  aspects of individuals that have proven to be important for 
              animals to know about, and therefore that have been  important in the evolution
              of their behavior and of modules  in the brain to accomplish this kind of
              social knowledge.  These experiments have importance for at least three domains
               of science, and may well have some practical applications in  the future. 
              First, they will be important for our  understanding of animal behavior, in
              particular about how  scent is used to regulate social interactions, but more 
              generally about social recognition, territoriality, dominant  subordinate
              interactions, mate choice, and competition for  mates and other resources.  The
              results may have practical  implications for how to maintain healthy animals in
               captivity in zoos, labs, and as pets, and it could well be  important in
              wildlife management in these  times of shrinking  reserves for wildlife. 
              Second, it is important for  understanding higher-order, cognitive processes in
              the sense  of smell.  Third, the results should contribute to our  knowledge
              and understanding of social recognition processes  in humans and other species,
              processes that are gaining  increasing attention in areas such as cognitive 
              neuroscience, artificial intelligence, machine and/or  computer recognition
              processes, and security and law  enforcement (e.g., evidence from dogs or other
              animals about  the identity of the perpetrator of a crime).
