Title       : AWARE-Japan: The Role of Akt/PKB in the Maturation of Marine Worm Eggs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0225819

Award Number: 0225819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5648               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Stricker sstr@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5251,5921,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0225819
Stricker

This award supports a one-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Stephen Stricker of the University of New Mexico and
              Professor Takeo Kishimoto of the Tokyo Institute of Biosciences and
              Biotechnology.  The researchers will undertake a study on the role of Akt PKB
              in the maturation of marine worm eggs.  For fertilization and development to
              proceed normally, eggs characteristically must undergo a maturation process
              that is mediated by an important cell cycle modulator, termed
              maturation-promoting factor (MPF).  Immature eggs (="oocytes") of nemerteans
              spontaneously mature after contacting natural seawater (NSW) by undergoing a
              process called "germinal vesicle breakdown" (GVBD).  Such GVBD is blocked by
              isolating oocytes in calcium-free SW (CaFSW), but this inhibition can be
              overridden by adding low doses of the neurohormone serotonin (=5-HT).  The
              researchers will attempt to determine if during 5-HT-induced GVBD in nemertean
              oocytes, Akt/PKB is activated in a MAPK-and cdc25-independent manner that in
              turn downregulates Myt-1 and thereby activates MPF as in starfish oocytes. The
              research will be centered on optical imaging and spectroscopic techniques with
              high spatial and temporal resolution.  


The project brings together the
              efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities.  Professor Kishimoto's laboratory in Japan is one of the leading
              centers in the world for investigations of MPF regulation in a variety of
              cells, including maturing eggs.  The lab specializes in studies of starfish egg
              maturation.  The lab practices a low-pressure form of microinjection that is
              particularly well suited for quantitative injections required for antibody
              inactivations of Akt.  Professor Stricker's laboratory utilizes an alternative
              high-pressure microinjection system that does not readily lend itself to
              quantitation. The research will offer a good opportunity to join efforts
              between the two countries.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  The project advances international human
              resources through the participation of a graduate student

