Title       : Integrated Sensing: Biomimetic Sensors for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0225519

Award Number: 0225519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chang Liu changliu@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chryssostomos Chryssostomidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Water covers approximately 70% of the earth surface.  However, this majority of
              the planet is under-explored and poorly understood.  This is largely a result
              of the significant challenge posed by the underwater environment, with its high
              pressure, unpredictable currents, nearly freezing temperatures, attenuation of
              electromagnetic waves and light, and harsh chemical compositions.  A variety of
              scientific, military and industrial tasks call for tools that function in the
              ocean environment.  Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are important
              platforms for carrying out sophisticated underwater tasks.  Currently some
              tasks are not suitable for AUVs due to technical limitations.  More advanced
              applications demand small, integrated, power efficient and potentially
              networked AUVs to increase the effectiveness and reduce the costs.  A key step
              in moving toward this vision is improved sensors for AUVs.  This project aims
              to develop integrated underwater sensors inspired by the fish lateral line
              system.  Prototypes of sensors will be built and used to investigate the fluid
              mechanical behavior of such sensors through computational and experimental
              means.  The potential applications include the detection of hydrodynamic wakes,
              tracing of chemical plumes, and determination of hydrodynamic properties at the
              interface of fluid and structures.  The proposed effort will focus on one
              problem - that of detection of hydrodynamic wakes.

Planned research
              activities consists of three integral components: (1) The development and
              improvement of biomimetic integrated microsensors; (2) The validation and
              prediction of sensor performance using full scale direct numerical simulation
              and reduced-model simulation; (3) The experimental validation of sensor
              performance and computational results.  

