Title       : Integrated Sensing: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Objective-Oriented Mobile
               Heterogeneous Sensor Networks for Coordinated Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0225481

Award Number: 0225481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamer Basar tbasar@decision.csl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Objective-Oriented Mobile Heterogeneous Sensor Networks for
Coordinated
              Control

This proposal focuses on a comprehensive study of large, mobile ad
              hoc
reconfigurable networks for coordinated control, using
              coordinated
autonomous flight as a guiding example problem. State
              estimation
provides a link between control and communications which
              admits
heterogeneous sensors, that is the combining of dissimilar
              or
different accuracy data using concepts which underpin data
fusion.
              Management of complexity and preservation of design principles
are keys to the
              development of workable, tunable, mission-oriented
systems with many
              components.

The intellectual merit of this collaborative research proposal
              hinges
on the drawing together of cognate and disparate elements
              from
coordinated control, dynamic state estimation, ad hoc
              network
management, resource assignment, and fault tolerance. Its aim is
              to
provide a formalism in which the methods of sensor networking may
              be
integrated as part of a systematic design process focused on achieving
a
              specific control objective. This provides a framework for the
development of
              methodologies for embedding a sensor network in a
context of control
              performance.

The broader impact of this research is that it ties together
              tools and
techniques from distinct areas using concepts of
              information
quality. The team is multi-disciplinary across a gamut of
              Systems
Engineering and the problem area impacts a range of
              fundamental
problems in the individual areas of specialization. This
              linkage
across communications, control, networking and estimation is
              a
perceived bottleneck of current design techniques.

