Title       : PREMISE: Predictive Modeling of Environmental Impact and Tool Performance in
               Near Dry Turning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0225688

Award Number: 0225688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Y. Liang steven.liang@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is supported by the Product Realization and Environmental
              Manufacturing Innovative Systems (PREMISE) Program to develop the analytical
              understanding and predictive modeling capability or the quantitative planning
              of near dry lubrication parameters in turning operations.  The targets are set
              on the control of air quality and tool wear in achieving environmental and
              productivity missions.  This project utilizes machining science, fluid
              mechanics, heat transfer theories, and liquid atomization principles to develop
              a set of predictive models that estimate the aerosol concentration and the tool
              wear rate as functions of near dry lubrication parameters and cutting
              conditions.  To this end, the temperature and stress distributions under mixed
              or boundary lubrication will be developed; the generation of cutting fluid
              aerosol through evaporation, splash, and dissipation mechanisms will be
              examined; and the volumetric wear rate of cutting tool due to adhesion,
              abrasion, and diffusion will be quantitatively evaluated.  Experimental
              calibration in non-machining tests and full-range validation in machining tests
              will follow the theoretical development.

The results of the project will
              provide a scientific infrastructure needed for the evaluation, quantification,
              and optimization of near dry machining performances.  The broader impacts of
              the project include the extendibility of the resulting scientific understanding
              to support process optimization, activity based costing, and life cycle
              analysis of a wide range of part integrity issues, various waste concerns, and
              in different machining configurations.   The project will also aims to
              integrate research into educational programs, to encourage the involvement of
              underrepresented student groups, and to involve the collaboration of several
              industry sectors, including fluid dispensing system vendors, tool
              manufacturers, machine makers, and technology end users.  The successful
              completion of this study will open up opportunities for future full-scale,
              team-based research programs to follow. 

