Title       : FSML: SDSU Field Station Programs' Model: Building a Wireless Web-based
               Community to Integrate Research, Education, and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0225111

Award Number: 0225111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sedra S. Shapiro sshapio@sciences.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia A. Luke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy S. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A National Science Foundation grant has been awarded to San Diego State
              University Field Station Programs (FSP), under the direction of Ms. Sedra
              Shapiro, Drs. Claudia Luke and Kathy Williams to develop a wireless web-based
              community to integrate research, education and technology. Funding will be used
              to create a wireless telecommunications network and install an array of sensing
              devices at the Santa Margarita Ecological Reserve (SMER) sixty miles north of
              San Diego. Our mission is to support research, education, and university
              teaching through the collecting, sharing and understanding of environmental
              data. The Field Station reserves serve as foci for interdisciplinary work and
              relationship building among scientists, students, regional managers, community
              groups, and decision-makers.  SMER will serve as a model system for
              environmental observation that collects and shares data from various scientific
              disciplines using novel data collection methods. With improved understanding,
              scientists and FSP staff will be able to better inform policy makers, natural
              resource managers, and the general public on how to address these, and other
              critical questions. New technologies allow us a whole new way of conducting
              environmental science with wireless sensor technology linked into a high-speed
              Internet backbone providing scientists with a new resource to monitor, probe,
              explore, and understand our ecoregion. Completely new things can be measured;
              completely new insights are inevitable. Development of a wireless communication
              network and automated sensor arrays within a remote field station will feed
              into major collaborations with other NSF-funded environmental data acquisition
              and distribution projects, such as ROADNet  (Real-time Observatories,
              Applications, and Data management Network), under the direction of Scripps
              Institute of Oceanography's (SIO) PI, John Orcutt; and HPWREN (High Performance
              Wireless Research and Education Network), under the direction of the San Diego
              SuperComputer Center's PI, Hans-Werner Braun and SIO's Frank Vernon. Existing
              partnerships and collaborations along with the SDSU FSP personnel ensure
              success of this novel project. 

Currently, a fledgling network of
              Internet-accessible telecommunication facilities at SMER has attracted
              widespread interest from environmental and technology researchers, educators,
              and natural resource managers. Data collected by the FSP is non-proprietary and
              will be made freely accessible through the Internet. While the current system
              generated interest and collaborations, and provided basic biotic and abiotic
              information, new funds will be used to meet rising demands for a reserve-wide
              network. To achieve project goals, instrumentation to expand the SMER wireless
              network region or "communications bubble " allowing researchers to collect and
              share real-time data from novel sensor technologies on 65% of the 1760 ha SMER
              reserve. Additionally we will deploy a series of sensor arrays that collect
              hydrographic and meteorological data at strategic locations within the reserve.
              Collecting and sharing these data sets through real-time wireless streaming of
              data is important in that these types of data are frequently used by a wide
              community of researchers, can be important for education and outreach, and are
              significant environmental factors for real-time monitoring of water and air in
              our national quest for improved security and homeland defense. 
This project
              will benefit researchers, educators, students, and habitat managers, who may
              integrate their data with non-proprietary real-time and archived ecological
              data from SMER or elsewhere. This activity bridges the gap between
              environmental and technological research by establishing an extensive in situ
              sensor and telecommunication network. SMER will be a model site and living
              laboratory for ecological observation with emerging technologies benefiting
              environmental research being proto-typed at SMER. A novel aspect of this
              project, in addition to new data collection capabilities, is the broad interest
              by collaborators in assessing potential uses of wireless technology by the
              scientific community as a whole. The broader impact of this project will
              increase access to ecological data and support novel learning strategies for
              expanding educational uses. With an increasingly diverse undergraduate student
              population nation-wide, we must aggressively meet the challenge of increasing
              diversity of the Science, Math, Engineering, and Technology (SMET) workforce by
              improving preparation of ALL students. SDSU graduates one of the most diverse
              student bodies in higher education. These data sets will also be used in K-12
              and community education.

