Title       : PGE/RES: Why Does It Work? A Study of Successful Gender Equity in Industrial
               Engineering at the University of Oklahoma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0225228

Award Number: 0225228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teri J. Murphy tjmurphy@math.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teri R. Rhoads  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Betty Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randa L. Shehab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Jayne Fleener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Oklahoma (OU) will study the factors that impact the retention
              of female undergraduate majors in its Industrial Engineering program. The
              program is especially successful: as of Fall 2001, 58% of the undergraduate
              majors in Industrial Engineering are women. This proportion is strikingly
              higher than both the nationwide proportion in industrial engineering and the
              proportion in other STEM degree programs at OU. Furthermore, the proportion has
              more than doubled in the space of five years, having steadily increased from
              27% in 1996. OU did not set out specifically to accomplish this rate of
              retention of female students. 

The study will investigate combinations of
              factors that affect students' choices. For example, one factor is the
              proportion of female faculty. Industrial Engineering at OU has a high
              proportion of women faculty (4 of 10 faculty, 40%), which is one of the factors
              identified by Seymour and Hewitt (1997) as having an impact on retention of
              women majors. This phenomenon alone is unlikely to account for the present high
              retention, as evidenced by nationwide trends in other disciplines (e.g.,
              chemical engineering and computer science). 

The primary source of data will
              be 600 interviews with students. Students will be sophomore to senior, as well
              as alumni. During the first year, the team will interview only Industrial
              Engineering majors at OU. In the second and third years, they will interview
              students at OU majoring in Aerospace & Mechanical Engineering, Chemical
              Engineering, Computer Science, Mathematics, and Physics, in addition. Finally,
              during the third year, they will include additional interviews of Industrial
              Engineering majors at Arizona State University, the University of Nebraska at
              Lincoln, and the University of Pittsburgh. To assure triangulation, other
              sources of data will include student transcript records, the Pittsburgh
              Engineering Attitudes Toward Engineering Survey(copyright), and interviews with
              faculty, program directors, advisors, and graduate students, all of whom affect
              student experiences in college.

The fifteen-person research team consists of
              two anthropologists, two educational researchers, two faculty in industrial
              engineering at OU (one with expertise in engineering education research), one
              faculty liaison for each of the other participating departments at OU (one with
              expertise in undergraduate mathematics education research), one faculty liaison
              with each of the participating institutions, and an experienced project
              director.

