Title       : Virgin Islands EPSCoR Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0225425

Award Number: 0225425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry H. Smith hsmith@uvi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of The Virgin Islands
	      2 John Brewer's Bay
	      Charlotte Amalie, VI  00802    340/693-1202

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The University of the Virgin Islands seeks NSF support to undertake a series of
              planning activities designed to identify and address the competitive research
              and education challenges facing the Virgin Islands.   The principal outcome of
              this effort will be development of a 10-year plan for strengthening the
              Territory's Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) research and
              education enterprise.  Specific activities will assess existing STEM research
              resources and strengths; identify potential institutional and territorial
              barriers to development of competitive research; develop a priority list of
              research areas and disciplines for development tied to UVI's strategic mission
              and the Territory's development needs; and determine the human, financial and
              technological resources required to succeed.

As the only institution of
              higher education in the U.S. Virgin Islands, the University of the Virgin
              Islands fulfills a variety of community needs - from community college to
              workforce training to liberal arts education to research university.  The
              strengthening of the research enterprise is clearly associated with enhancing
              the Territory's ability to meet its workforce training needs and take advantage
              of new opportunities for technology-based diversification of the Virgin
              Islands' economy.  The University will build and expand on a number of existing
              collaborations with institutions and private sector organizations within and
              outside of the Virgin Islands.   Furthermore, plans for establishment of a
              research and technology park will be developed to maximize these collaborations
              and to grow and sustain the science, engineering and technology enterprise in
              the Virgin Islands.  

