Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome diversity
               among prehistoric Native Americans from the Ohio and Illinois Valleys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0225986

Award Number: 0225986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  2002   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11997              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Smith dgsmith@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study will help document the prehistory of Native American populations that
              lived in the Ohio River Valley by characterizing genetic relationships among
              the Archaic population of Indian Knoll, responsible for leaving large shell
              middens, like those found throughout the eastern United States, in Ohio County,
              Kentucky between 6000 and 4500 years ago, two Adena populations that built
              earth burial mounds in Boone and Montgomery counties, Kentucky between 2500 and
              1800 years ago, and a Hopewell population that lived in Calhoun County,
              Illinois between 2100 and 1600 years ago. Although the archaeological
              traditions of these populations have been well described, little is known about
              their relationships with each other or to modern populations living in eastern
              North America during historic times. Were the populations who built Adena
              burial mounds in different counties of western Kentucky related to each other?
              Were the Hopewell populations of Ohio and Illinois, both of whom developed
              similar elaborate burial practices and artistic traditions, genetically related
              to each other? Were the Adena populations genetically related to the Hopewell
              populations who succeeded them in some areas of the Ohio Valley or,
              alternatively, were either more closely related to other adjacent populations
              of eastern North America? Were the Adena and/or Hopewell populations
              genetically related to the Archaic populations that preceded them or the Late
              Woodland Mississippian populations (or, in fact, living populations) that
              succeeded them in eastern North America? Archaeological, ethnohistorical and
              historical linguistic evidence has been cited in favor of various hypotheses
              proposing either invasions of populations into this region from adjacent
              regions or, alternatively, genetic continuity in the region during the last
              6000 years, but no consensus has emerged.
 Recent technological advances have
              made it possible to extract and study small quantities of DNA from prehistoric
              human remains and thus directly investigate genetic relationships among ancient
              and modern populations. DNA will be extracted from skeletal remains from four
              different prehistoric cemetery sites and both mitochondrial DNA and
              Y-chromosome traits known to be highly polymorphic in Native American
              populations will identified using restriction analysis and nucleotide
              sequencing. Genetic comparisons among these samples, published data on other
              prehistoric populations of eastern North America and modern populations will be
              made using sophisticated multivariate phylogenetic methods and computer
              programs. Populations to be compared in addition to those cited above include
              those from Glacial Kame and Red Ochre sites in the Lower Great Lakes region,
              other Hopewell populations in different geographic locations, later
              Mississippian populations that replaced populations throughout eastern North
              America during Late Woodland times. These comparisons will determine whether or
              not cultural traditions that were shared among groups that lived in different
              geographic areas represents admixture or, alternatively, cultural diffusion and
              whether or not the succession of populations in the Ohio Valley represents a
              continuous genetic continuity or, alternative, the replacement of indigenous
              populations by invading immigrants. The combination of genetic evidence with
              evidence from genetic, archaeological, ethnohistorical and historical
              linguistic research will allow more reliable inferences to be made about the
              prehistory of the Ohio Valley.

