Title       : NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences: Fully Nonlinear
               Equations in Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0225735

Award Number: 0225735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31417              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Gursky gursky.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qing Han  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The study of nonlinear partial differential equations is necessitated by
              countless problems
from diverse disciplines: physics, economics, biology, etc.
               Fully nonlinear equations is a more recent subject within this field, but its
              importance is increasing due to the growing number of connections to other
              
fields.  In particular, the study of special Lagrangian submanifolds of
              Calabi-Yau manifolds is of particular interest in string theory, and
              consequently an active area of research among physicists and mathematicians
              alike.

Because of the rapid growth and broad interest of the field, it is a
              natural topic for a CBMS Regional Conference.  Researchers and graduate
              students who are new to the field can see how geometric problems of current
              interest can be reformulated as problems in nonlinear PDE, and at the same time
              witness the often surprising ways in which the geometric aspects of the problem
              inform the analytic aspects (and vice versa).

Adding to the appeal of the
              meeting is the principal lecturer, Prof. Neil Trudinger.  His reputation as an
              eminent researcher and gifted expositor make him an ideal choice to deliver the
              lectures.  Moreover, the monograph resulting from the meeting will be of
              interest to scientists in a wide range of fields.
