Title       : PREMISE: Emerging Materials and Future Global Resource Scarcity: Identifying
               Technologies with Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0225855

Award Number: 0225855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph Kirchain kirchain@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Fine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing
              Innovative Systems (PREMISE) Exploratory Research project is to allow
              policy-makers to better allocate research funds by providing an understanding
              of both the environmental value and market potential of an emergent technology.
              Realizing the energy and resource benefits of emerging materials, depends upon
              market success for those materials. This success is driven by the bundle of
              characteristics provided by the incumbent and emergent technology. Although
              classic value theory can identify the preferred alternative, it provides no
              guidance in describing the actual path of adoption. Solely retrospective
              analyses are also inappropriate for describing markets confronted with
              significant structural changes (e.g., revolutionary materials). A methodology
              that addresses the issues that drive a material's potential for
              commercialization is needed and will be developed by this project, including:
              1) the cost and performance characteristics necessary to lead to substitution;
              2) the potential for a material I process to achieve those characteristics; 3)
              the manner in which material markets evolve in the face of increasing demand;
              and 4) the net lifetime impact on resource use provided by an emerging
              technology.
     The planning activity will assemble an interdisciplinary team
              to identify the issues which drive adoption and the methodologies appropriate
              to their study. The planning effort will yield a research plan for assessing
              such issues and identifying preliminary case studies to guide the second phase
              of work. Another objective of this planning project is the integration of
              resource use considerations and industrial ecology concepts into engineering
              education. The project will focus on the development of interdisciplinary,
              case-based courses. The integrated framework that will emerge from this work
              will allow decision makers to identify those materials technologies most likely
              to make an impact on environmental burden as well as to understand under what
              conditions those substitutions will occur.
