Title       : PREMISE/Collaborative Research: Integrating Manufacturing and Ecological Process
               Models For Ecosystem Impact Valuation: A Problem-Based Learning Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0225893

Award Number: 0225893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Costanza Robert.Costanza@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9147,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing
              Innovative Systems (PREMISE) Exploratory Research project is to establish a
              multi-disciplinary team that brings together several manufacturing engineering
              disciplines with system ecologists and city planning to understand how
              ecosystem and social valuations can be integrated into enterprise
              decision-making.  The creation of tools that support this goal will enable
              systematic approaches to enterprise design to appropriately balance industrial
              activity and human development with ecosystem health, and the analysis of
              process modifications at spatial scales that span the local watershed to the
              global environment. The specific objective is to engage in a "scientific
              atelier" - a problem-based learning course that has participants, faculty and
              students, from Georgia Tech and the University of Vermont. The specific case
              studies will take existing ecosystem models, Patuxent Landscape and the Gwynns
              Falls Landscape Models, which contain both urban and rural land use and
              pressures for human system development, and combine them with at least two
              different types of manufacturing activities. The probable success of
              integrating models of ecosystems with manufacturing systems is built on the
              fact that both use "unit models" - convenient decompositions of the systems
              under study into re-useable components, and solve the resulting transient mass
              and energy balances.  The key challenges are bridging conceptual and
              terminological gaps between the modeling communities, determining the
              appropriate scaling and abstractions of the models such that data that is
              transferred matches the information that is available, and understanding how
              manufacturing decisions can and should be influenced by ecosystem capital and
              service valuations.  Ensuring environmental quality is emerging as a key
              societal goal for industrialized nations.
     This project  will enable
              research on understanding how we can value, and account for, the ecosystem
              services upon which we build our wealth as we design and operate diverse
              manufacturing systems.
