Title       : Integrated Sensing: Virtual Sensor-Actuator Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0225449

Award Number: 0225449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Krogh krogh@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose M. Moura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rohit Negi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the interface between application software and the
              real-time data in large-scale arrays of wireless sensors and actuators. The
              objective is to develop the theory and algorithms for creating a virtual
              sensor-actuator array (VSAA) that will make it possible for application
              algorithms to avoid dealing with the continually changing features of physical
              sensor-actuator arrays. Using the VSAA, application-specific software can be
              written as if the sensing and actuating devices are located as assumed in the
              application design model, and that information is received with appropriate
              time stamps, in addition to being filtered and integrated in a near optimal
              manner. 


This project will build on recent research in intelligent data
              integration for distributed systems. Raw data 
will be delivered and
              manipulated as soft decisions in the form of probability distributions.
              Information from multiple sources will be integrated using novel algorithms
              based on graphical representations of the 
information relationships among the
              sources, and information-theoretic techniques will be developed for sharing and
              moving the computations among the nodes so that performance does not degrade
              significantly in the face of intermittent communication and node failures. The
              algorithms developed in this project will be evaluated for intelligent building
              control applications using in a wireless sensor-actuator array in the
              Intelligent Workplace, an existing experimental facility at Carnegie Mellon
              University.

