Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: Spintronics with Novel Half-Metals: Computational Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0225007

Award Number: 0225007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-Yao Fong fong@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren E. Pickett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0225007
Fong

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics
              for the 21st century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal
              focuses on the computational design of novel quantum structures in the forms of
              heterojunctions, quantum wells, and quantum dots composed of half-metallic
              compounds in zinc-blende structure with both magnetically and nonmagnetically
              doped semiconductors as new materials for spintronics. The unique features
              possessed by these half-metals compounds are: (A) the half metallic properties
              of each compound are preserved for a range of each lattice constant, (B) large
              magnetic moments (= 1 uB), (C) high Curie temperature (= 400oK), and (D) less
              intrinsic scattering (greater coherence) than for dilute magnetically doped
              semiconductors due to the fact that the half metals are stoichiometric
              compounds. They inspire a singular opportunity for making novel quantum
              structures. 
	
The outcome of this proposal will include (1) the
              technological information of quantum structures for spintronic applications,
              (2) specific scientific knowledge about the effects of interfaces, surfaces on
              the magnetic and electronic properties of the proposed quantum structures, and
              (3) the selections of elements serving as antisurfactants to grow half-metallic
              quantum dots. Specifically relevant to (1), The PIs will provide: (a) the
              compositions of quantum structures involving chromium and manganese compounds
              with magnetic and nonmagnetic doped semiconductors and exhibiting half-metallic
              behaviors as new spintronic materials, (b) the magnetic and electronic
              properties of the promising quantum structures, (c) the possibility of making
              spin polarized Schottky barriers, and (d) the conditions for ballistic spin
              transport in heterojunctions, and quantum wells. For (2), the information will
              lead them to understand: (i) Whether spin polarized Schottky barriers are being
              formed in heterojunctions and quantum wells made of half metal compounds with
              various doped semiconductors, and do the interfaces affect the corresponding
              half-metallic character and magnetic moment? (ii) What are the effects of the
              Schottky barrier formed by the metallic spin channel of a heterojunction on its
              semiconducting spin channel? (iii) Do subbands formed in a quantum well exhibit
              the stepwise feature in the conductance? (iv) How do the magnetic properties of
              a quantum dot made of a half-metal compound depend on the sizes of the dots,
              and on cation- versus anion-terminated surface? Finally, the results relevant
              to (3) will provide guidelines for facilitating the growth of quantum dots
              composed of half-metals with the zinc-blende structure.



