Title       : Integrated Sensing: Towards Sensate Media and Electronic Skins - Testbeds For
               Very High Density Distributed Sensor Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0225492

Award Number: 0225492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Paradiso joep@media.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A pair of testbeds will be built to study the behavior of very dense sensor
              networks.  The first involves constructing small sensor nodes in the form of a
              pushpin, having a pair of insulated-jacket conductive pins that provide power
              to the nodes when they are pushed into a large piece of laminated conductive
              wallboard.  The nodes couple to their immediate neighbors via local
              communication once inserted, and form an ad-hoc network across the wallboard. 
              The wallboard substrate will accommodate relatively large numbers (e.g., over
              100) of these pushpins, and they can be trivially reconfigured, essentially as
              one would move tacks about on a bulletin board, allowing different network
              densities and geometries to be easily investigated.  Likewise, the pushpins
              themselves have a configurable, layered structure, allowing the processor,
              communications system, and sensor suite to be easily swapped.  Our second
              testbed will push these ideas towards the concept of a multisensory electronic
              "skin" - a sheet of material with circa 100 or more processor/sensor nodes, now
              spaced significantly closer than a centimeter to one another. The processors
              will talk to their neighbors to reject background while isolating and
              parameterizing sensor stimuli and routing the results peer-peer to external
              connections at the network's perimeter. In order to scale gracefully, most data
              reduction (feature clustering, detection, parameterization, etc.) must be done
              by the network itself, using regional communication.  Accordingly, these
              testbeds are useful for exploring and developing new kinds of self-organizing
              and physics-inspired algorithms to reduce and process the data locally on the
              network
