Title       : Regulation of Somitogenesis by Calcium Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0225028

Award Number: 0225028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Ferrari ferrarim@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091174
Ferrari

This project will test the general hypothesis that calcium
              (Ca 2+ ) transients within the presomitic mesoderm (PSM) and forming somites
              are necessary for somitogenesis (SMG). The specific aims are to 1) determine if
              somite formation is directed by Ca 2+ transients and, 2) examine the
              relationship between somitogenic gene expression and Ca 2+ transients.

The
              morphogenetic movements which produce somites have been described, but the
              cellular control mechanisms have remained elusive. However, recent observations
              indicate that several genes are expressed with spatiotemporal patterns
              corresponding to somite formation. For example, the bHLH transcription factor
              c-hairy-1, a pair-rule segmentation gene, is transcribed such that the time for
              a single oscillation equals the time to form one somite. These patterns have
              generated much excitement, as they are consistent with theoretical models based
              on a clock and wave somite formation mechanism. However, the biochemical or
              molecular nature of this segmentation clock remains unknown. This proposal will
              test the hypothesis that Ca 2+ transients may form part of the clock mechanism
              and/or serve to entrain cell populations via intercellular Ca 2+ waves.

Ca
              2+ signaling appears to play an important role in SMG. In both zebrafish and
              Xenopus, a high degree of Ca 2+ transient activity exists in the PSM and
              forming somites, and when this activity is blocked SMG is disrupted. Since
              somites are produced with high regularity, significant correlations between
              this process and Ca 2+ signals are possible. This regular patterning allows
              even subtle defects to be detected after experimental manipulation of Ca 2+
              signaling.
A large array of fluorescent compounds exist for observing and
              modulating both intra- and intercellular Ca 2+ signals. These fluoroprobes are
              used in conjunction with high-resolution fluorescence microscopy of living
              Xenopus embryos and explants. Of particular utility are a number of caged
              compounds, which can be photoactivated with temporal and spatial specificity to
              control Ca 2+ dynamics. Using these compounds, experiments are planned to
              determine if transients are part of an epigenetic signaling pathway responsible
              for somite patterning. For example, transients will be inhibited in specific
              regions of the PSM by photoreleasing BAPTA, a high affinty Ca 2+ chelator.
              These regions will then be examined for the ability to form somites and produce
              the correct pattern of somitogenic gene expression. The proposed work may
              further our understanding of how epigenetic signals can control and modify
              morphogenetic events.

