Title       : INTEGRATED SENSING: Ontology Based Radios
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0225442

Award Number: 0225442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mieczyslaw M. Kokar kokar@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Baclawski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wireless communication is essential for coordination of emergency
response
              efforts. However, the various kinds of unit (fire, police,
FBI and unattended
              sensors) do not necessarily have access to common
radio architectures. To
              achieve high levels of flexibility and
scalability for wireless communication,
              the processing of the wireless
waveforms must be performed in software: i.e.,
              "software
radio". Migrating algorithms from hardware to software can
              increase
the level of functionality but only if the communication protocols
              are
established at run time. We propose an approach to
              establishing
communication by explicitly maintaining self-awareness
              and
communication of knowledge about the operation of the
              communication
nodes.  The self-awareness and communication of knowledge is
              based on
the maintenance of an explicit, declarative knowledge base
              or
"ontology" of communication.  Hence, we refer to the concept as
"Ontology
              Based Radio" (OBR).  An ontology captures the basic
terminology (concepts) of
              the domain of interest and the relationships
among the concepts.  Ontologies
              can be expressed in the DARPA Agent
Markup Language (DAML), and processed
              either off-line using a theorem
prover or in real time using an expert system
              engine.  The main idea
of OBR is that the communication nodes ``understand''
              the contents of
information to be transferred, their own capabilities and
              capabilities
of the destination units.  The goal of the proposed project is
              to
develop a proof of concept that demonstrates optimized
              dynamic
interoperability between different kinds of communication
              node,
especially unattended sensors as well as radios used by
              emergency
response teams.



