Title       : PREMISE: Collaborative Design for the Environment (DFE) for Global Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0225890

Award Number: 0225890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debasish Dutta dutta@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Derek Yip-Hoi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas N. Gladwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this PREMISE research is to use engineering, business,
              environmental science and public policy knowledge to develop methods and design
              metrics that enable the integration of design for environment considerations
              into the design, development, production and marketing of global products.
              Enforceable guidelines for global manufacturers and material suppliers to use
              in rating their products will also be developed. This will include approaches
              for capturing the impact of single components as well as that of assemblies of
              globally manufactured components. The research results will lead to an
              educational module on design for environment in the Global Product Development
              course taught jointly at the University of Michigan, Oxford University and
              Seoul National University. In return, the course will provide a realistic test
              bed for research on topics that transcend local and national economies.

The
              most important benefit of this research is that product designers will have
              available to them methods for designing environmentally friendly global
              products. The design for environment rating for global products will provide an
              analytical tool that can be used for tradeoffs and analyses in various phases
              of the product development. Global products with "environmental awareness"
              features will increase the consumer's awareness to environmental issues. The
              environmental rating scheme will facilitate decision making to distribute the
              product's raw materials and processing to regions where the environmental
              impact of production is the lowest. This research will also allow global
              product development teams to consolidate resources around environmental
              objectives in a way that is not possible for products that are predominantly
              local in their production, use and recycling.


