Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for the Built Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0225093

Award Number: 0225093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Butcher                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Arens earens@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail E. Brager (Schiller)  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests to continue support of the NSF Industry/University
              Cooperative Research Center, the Center for the Built Environment (CBE).  CBE
              was established at the university of California, Berkeley, in 1997 and is
              dedicated to the industries and professions that design and construct
              buildings, manufacture building components, and that operate and maintain
              buildings.  Its objective is to improve the performance of buildings by
              enhancing their indoor environmental quality, and by improving the energy
              efficiency with which that quality is produced.

There are great
              opportunities to improve the performance of buildings in the U.S. through
              applied research and development.  Improved building design and technologies
              may reduce energy consumption, improve employee health and productivity, and
              improve economic competitiveness and domestic security by reducing US
              dependence on energy imports.  CBE builds upon the accomplishments of an
              extensive group of faculty members that perform building science research at
              UCB.  This group has an impressive record of achievements, both individually
              and in past joint projects, and maintains extensive and state-of-the-art
              research tools and facilities.  Through collaboration with its industry
              partners, CBE's research focuses on providing tools and analysis to assist
              building industry firms and design professionals.

