Title       : PGE/DIS: OUT LOUD - Women's Voices in Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0225030

Award Number: 0225030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Darcy mdarcy@wamc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WAMC Northeast Public Radi
	      P.O. Box 66600
	      Albany, NY  122066600    518/465-5233

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              WAMC Northeast Public Radio (WAMC) will produce, air, and distribute a series of
              segments on its radio programs 51% and The Best of Our Knowledge that will draw
              material from projects funded by the NSF Program for Gender Equity in
              STEM.

The show 51% is dedicated to coverage of issues affecting women. The
              Best of Our Knowledge is devoted to coverage of issues and topics related to
              education, educational policy, innovation, and research. The program segments
              will place a national spotlight on gender equity in STEM, specifically in the
              areas of high school, undergraduate, teacher and faculty development, and
              educational technologies. They will be delivered in multiple media formats:
              radio, CD, tape, and the web.

WAMC's long-term goal is to play a pivotal
              role in the national effort to broaden the participation of women and girls in
              STEM education and workforce. In the shorter-term, WAMC's goals are: 1) to
              significantly expand education and awareness of targeted audiences and the
              general public about research and strategies to improve education policies and
              practices; and, 2) to enhance the image of the STEM professions and their
              practitioners so that the image is positive and inclusive of women.

Results
              of the project will be: a set of quality radio programs for multiple uses,
              targeted nationwide distribution, new segments within WAMC's regular
              programming, and new collaborations between a media organization and women'
              groups, major science and education institutions engaging in research and
              demonstration projects, high schools, government agencies, trade associations,
              and private foundations.

