Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Significance of Sunken Court
               Architecture to the Development of Sociopolitical Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0225057

Award Number: 0225057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11482              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Stanish stanish@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Stanish, Amanda Cohen will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation during the Summer and Fall of 2002.  She will direct
              excavations at a sample of three Formative Period (1200 B.C. - A.D. 300) sites
              in the Pukara Valley of the northwestern Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru. This
              research will assess the role of public or ceremonial architecture in the
              evolution of complex societies in the Titicaca Basin of southern Peru. A
              process of steady settlement nucleation and growth took place during the
              region's Formative Period, culminating in the emergence of the Pukara Polity
              (200 BC - AD 300), the earliest known urban-scale society in the southern
              Andean region. Prior to the rise of Pukara in the Late Formative Period, the
              Pukara Valley was populated by a series of small villages. It was within this
              context of interacting autonomous villages that public architecture emerged in
              the Early and Middle Formative Periods (1200 B.C.-200 B.C.). These social
              evolutionary processes were paralleled by the development and elaboration of a
              distinctive tradition of public architecture, sunken courts with associated
              surface structures, and an associated corporate ceramic and sculptural style.
              An earlier survey by the applicant has located at least a dozen sites in the
              Pukara Valley containing low mounds with central rectangular depressions,
              almost certainly indicating the presence of sunken courts. To test the relation
              between the sunken court architectural form and increasing sociopolitical
              complexity, three of these sites representing the Early and Middle phases of
              the Formative Period will be sampled. The resulting data will trace
              architectural and behavioral changes through time at sites with sunken courts.
              Two models that purport to explain the social significance of early ceremonial
              architecture will be evaluated. The first suggests that as societies become
              increasingly stratified ceremonial structures become increasingly specialized.
              In this scenario, early examples of public architecture are normally associated
              with a wide range of activities, ritual and domestic. As sociopolitical
              complexity increases, however, the range of activities associated with public
              architecture becomes restricted to ritual or ceremonial activities. An
              alternate model is that public architectural features are highly specialized
              early in their history, and become less specialized over time as community
              permanence and cohesion become increasingly institutionalized in the practices
              of everyday life. In this view, the social integrative function of public
              ritual facilities is most important in the early stages of sedentary life.  The
              proposed research will evaluate these two models through a diachronic analysis
              of Pukara Valley sunken courts, their architectural form, and associated
              artifact assemblages. 

The study has implications for comparative social
              science study.  Additionally, the survey, combined with paleoecological and
              paleoclimate data, may be of some use to development programs in the future.
              This project will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and shed new
              light on the development of complex societies


