Title       : Pharmaceutical Sorption to Model Soil Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0225696

Award Number: 0225696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378094             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allison MacKay mackaya@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dharni Vasudevan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0225696   MacKay   Human and veterinary pharmaceutical compounds are detected
              increasingly in many environmental media, including soils, sediments,
              groundwaters and surface waters. It is unknown how humans and organisms will
              adapt to increasing environmental exposures to these bioactive compounds.
              Health effects of concern include the spread of antibiotic resistance,
              endocrine disrupting activity and adverse responses in non-target
              organisms.
Hypothesis and Goal: In addition to interactions with natural
              organic matter, we hypothesize that pharmaceutical sorption to soils and
              sediments is governed by 3 mechanisms: (1) electrostatic attraction to
              oppositely charged sites on mineral surfaces; (2) cation exchange reactions
              with aluminosilicate clay minerals, and (3) surface complexation to iron and
              aluminum oxides. The ultimate goal of the proposed research is to
              quantitatively describe sorption of pharmaceuticals to clay and oxide soil
              minerals based on a mechanistic understanding of sorption phenomena.
Methods:
              The research goal will be achieved by investigating pharmaceutical sorption to
              model
sorbents so that with sorbent phases present in real soil or sediment
              samples can be probed
independently. Five model sorbents will be used: 2- and
              3-layer clays (kaolinite and montmorillonite), and iron and aluminum oxides.
              The high-use veterinary antibiotics oxytetracycline, ciprofloxacin, and FCQA
              and Enro-CO2 (substructures of ciprofloxacin) will be employed as test sorbates
              because agricultural antibiotic use represents the most concentrated
              pharmaceutical release to the environment.
Results from this research can be
              used to predict pharmaceutical sorption from compound properties (solution
              complexation constant) and sorbent characteristics (surface chemistry at given
              pH/ionic strength).
Significance and Benefits of Research: The proposed
              research will provide the first mechanistic model of solid-water partitioning
              of important veterinary antibiotic compounds. The quantitative models developed
              for high-purity sorbents can be adapted to develop a general partitioning model
              for any soil or sediment phase. Accurate descriptions of soil- and
              sediment-water partitioning will help to interpret observed pharmaceutical
              distributions in field surveys of ambient concentrations of pharmaceutical
              compounds, including our test sorbates, in surface and groundwater (USGS Toxic
              Substances Hydrology Program). Ultimately, the quantitative model of
              pharmaceutical sorption developed here can be used in
an environmental fate
              model that, coupled with a toxicology model, will enable accurate assessments
              of the risk posed by the release of veterinary pharmaceuticals to aquatic 
              environments.
Educational Benefits: Integration of undergraduate students into
              research activities will provide an opportunity for these students to work
              closely with faculty to solve open-ended research problems. The proposed
              research will also form a foundation for future integrated research activities
              between Environmental, Pharmacy, and Agricultural programs at UConn and Duke.

