Title       : PGE/RES: Enhancing Women's Experiences with Teamwork in Technical Writing and
               Computing Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0225186

Award Number: 0225186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna Wolfe joanna.wolfe@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Louisville will examine the experiences of over 400 students
              working on team projects in scientific and technical writing and computer
              science classes over three semesters.  The results of this study should provide
              technical writing and computer science instructors and researchers with new
              insights into the different communication styles and values of male and female
              students, new information about differences in the epistemological styles of
              men and women and how these affect teamwork experiences, empirical data on the
              effectiveness of a variety of workshop interventions for improving teamwork
              experiences, and extensively-tested materials suitable for inclusion in a
              textbook or CD-ROM on teamwork.

Teamwork and collaboration are often
              proposed as ways to augment the experiences of female students in SMET
              disciplines. However, in practice, women frequently have negative experiences
              with team projects that leave them feeling even more alienated than before. Men
              and women often conflict over their preferences for different types of
              communication and problem-solving styles, and these conflicts often result in
              women's silence and frustration. Such silence is harmful not only because women
              lose out on opportunities to contribute to the project, but also because their
              silence is often perceived by others as insecurity over their technical
              competence.

In the first research phase, six to ten teams working on
              technically-oriented writing projects will be observed in detail. Data
              collection will consist of field notes, video recordings, and written
              documents. In addition, students will complete questionnaires assessing their
              attitudes towards teamwork and their favored epistemological styles (i.e.,
              attitudes toward knowledge and authority). Relationships have been found
              between gender, the ability to manage conflict, and epistemological styles.
              Team interactions will be transcribed and analyzed for quantity of interaction,
              interruptions, roles played by different individuals, reactions to different
              types of conversational interchanges, and different approaches to
              problem-solving. These analyses will be compared against the questionnaire data
              to assess how communication, problem-solving, and knowledge styles can affect
              men and women's experiences in teams.

The next phase of the project will
              draw upon these taped interactions to produce materials that will be used in
              workshops designed to enhance the team experience. Four different workshops
              will be compared for effectiveness: (1) analyzing tapes of team interactions;
              (2) analyzing transcripts of team interactions; (3) analyzing tapes of team
              interactions followed by role-playing activities; (4) listening to a lecture.
              It is hypothesized that analyzing the annotated transcripts of team
              interactions will be the most effective workshop intervention and the lecture
              will be the least effective.

