Title       : ITR: The OptIPuter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0225642

Award Number: 0225642
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13500000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Smarr lsmarr@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The OptIPuter project explores a new architecture for the distributed
              information infrastructure (which NSF terms infostructure) required by a number
              of this decade's science and engineering shared facilities. The project is
              driven by a close collaboration with leaders of two of these community
              systems?NSF's EarthScope and NIH's Biomedical Imaging Research Network
              (BIRN)?both of which are beginning to produce an accelerating flood of data
              which will in stored in distributed federated data repositories. One
              characteristic blocking such science is that the individual data objects (a 3D
              brain image or a terrain dataset) are large (Gigabytes) compared to what can be
              interactively manipulated or visualized over today's networks.  What these
              scientists 
require are ultra-high-speed predictable "clear-channel" networks
              linking PC clusters, storage and visualization systems, enabling collaborating
              scientists to explore interactively massive amounts of previously uncorrelated
              data. 

An important opportunity exists over the next few years to develop a
              radical new architecture for this needed scientific infostructure.  Observing
              that the exponential growth rates in bandwidth and storage are now much higher
              than Moore's Law, this research "goes to the end of the rainbow" to exploit a
              new world in which the central architectural element is optical networking, not
              computers.  This transition is caused by the use of parallelism, as in
              supercomputing a decade ago.  However, this time the parallelism is in multiple
              wavelengths of light, or lambdas, on single optical fibers, creating
              supernetworks.  The OptIPuter project aims at the re-optimization of the entire
              Grid  stack of software abstractions, learning how, as George Gilder suggests,
              to "waste" bandwidth and storage in order to conserve "scarce" computing in
              this new world of inverted values. 

Such a period of technological paradigm
              shifting requires large-scale application-driven system experiments and a broad
              multidisciplinary team to understand and develop innovative solutions for a
              "LambdaGrid" world.  Smaller scale efforts are unlikely to produce the radical
              changes needed to seize the opportunity.  Without tackling this  research
              arena, more traditional approaches to developing e-Science infostructure will
              instead be widely adopted, but at what ultimate cost to the country in our loss
              of scientific leadership in the long term?  Our approach is not without risk;
              however, with these exponentials crossing, and therefore a technologically
              driven reordering of 
infostructure architectural considerations inevitable,
              an exciting research opportunity is now made possible. 

Essentially, the
              OptIPuter is a "virtual" parallel computer in which the individual "processors"
              are widely distributed clusters; the "backplane" is provided by IP delivered
              over multiple dedicated lambdas (each 1-10 Gbps); and, the "mass storage
              systems" are large distributed scientific data repositories, fed by scientific
              instruments as OptIPuter peripheral devices, operated in near real-time. 
              Furthermore, collaboration will be a defining OptIPuter characteristic; goals
              include implementing a next-generation Access Grid with optical multicast,
              enabling tiled stereo HDTV screens of reality-matching visual resolution.  The
              OptIPuter is an embodiment of the vision of the "hollowing out of  the
              computer" prophesized by Erich Schmidt in the mid-1990s. The old
              "computer-in-a-box" is being blown up and scattered across the Net.  The
              OptIPuter's fundamental inventions include software and middleware abstractions
              to deliver unique capabilities in a lambda-rich world, a world in which
              endpoint-delivered bandwidth is greater than 
individual computers can
              saturate.  

This research on campus and metro-scale OptIPuters complements
              State (CENIC/ONI in California, I-WIRE in Illinois), national (TeraGrid), and
              international (StarLight) projects.  The six-university OptIPuter research team
              spans applications, software, networking and hardware expertise to address the
              challenges.  This team has a long history of successfully managing large
              multidisciplinary and multi-institutional projects, working with companies, and
              delivering high-impact innovations in hardware and software systems.  Since
              industry is developing key subcomponents of the OptIPuter, several leading
              companies are involved as partners.  The new architectural models and the
              software systems to make them function should contribute important capabilities
              to other large-scale Federally funded networked science facilities.  Going
              beyond research, the collaborative visualization data-fusion OptIPuter centers
              coupled to remote instrumentation will be enabling technologies for broader
              societal needs, including emergency response, homeland security, health
              services, and science education. 
