Title       : Downstream Geomorphic Impacts of Large Dams on American Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0225780

Award Number: 0225780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13480              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Graf graf@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this investigation is to examine the downstream impacts of
              large dams on the nation's rivers.  In particular the PI wishes to develop new
              knowledge about how dam installation and operation have affected the
              characteristics of river channels and riparian environments.  Specific
              questions include the temporal and spatial distributions of stream power
              downstream in relation to scale and engineering characteristics of dams, as
              well as, operating rules. In addition the geographic effects of distributions
              of stream power will be assessed from the perspectives of channel width, flood
              plain dimensions, channel patterns and near channel landforms, and spatial
              distributions of riparian ecosystems.  The strategy is to compare present
              conditions on experimental river reaches that have been impacted by dams with
              nearby similar control reaches that are without such structures for up to 42 of
              the largest dams in the country.  Methods of investigation focus on hydrologic
              analyses of streamflow data using statistical techniques, geographic analyses
              of aerial photographic images using GIS, and field investigations to collect
              sediment and vegetation data.  The project will advance present fluvial theory
              for impounded rivers for such theory is in its infancy and does not include
              generalizations about the range of hydrologic and geomorphic impacts of dams. 
              From an applied perspective the work will provide new information on the effect
              of rivers on critical habitat.
