Title       : ITR Collaborative Research: Enabling the Science Environment for Ecological
               Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0225635

Award Number: 0225635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2413796            (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Beach beach@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Gauch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Vieglais  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Townsend Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Understanding and sustaining the natural world in the 21st century depends on
              improving our capacity to access ecological, earth science, and human-dimension
              data; mining these data for new knowledge; and conveying new insights to
              decision-makers and the general public. Computer science and information
              technology research can effectively address many of these issues and advance
              our ability to conduct ecological science. This multidisciplinary research
              investigation will create a "Science Environment for Ecological Knowledge"
              (SEEK)-an information technology framework and infrastructure that will be used
              to derive and extend ecological knowledge by facilitating the discovery,
              access, integration, interpretation, and analyses of distributed ecological
              information. SEEK will provide for the integration of local desktop data with a
              larger network of data and analytical tools, enabling ecologists and other
              researchers to tackle complex research problems that were hitherto intractable.
              
The SEEK initiative stands on the foundation of substantial and productive
              NSF investment in ecological and biodiversity informatics and it brings
              together four highly collaborative, forward-looking institutions in a
              partnership committed to inventing and supporting a global computing
              infrastructure for environmental biology. The project involves a
              multidisciplinary team of computer scientists, ecologists and technologists
              from the Partnership for Biodiversity Informatics (PBI), a consortium
              comprising the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS);
              the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC); the University of Kansas (KU), and
              the University of New Mexico (UNM)) and partnering institutions (Arizona State
              University, University of North Carolina, University of Vermont, and Napier
              University in Scotland).
This five-year initiative will lead to fundamental
              improvements in how researchers can 1) gain global access to data and
              information, 2) rapidly locate and utilize distributed computational services,
              and 3) exercise powerful new methods for capturing, reproducing, and extending
              the analysis process itself. SEEK will also specifically provide ecologists and
              other researchers access to a large-scale network of information resources and
              computational services, via powerful data discovery and analysis tools that
              operate from desktop computers. These capabilities will significantly build
              research capacity to more effectively address global research, management and
              policy issues in environmental biology that increasingly require much more
              efficient, automated access to distributed and heterogeneous data.
A
              multi-faceted approach will be employed to insure that the research products,
              software, and information technology infrastructure resulting from SEEK
              optimally benefit science, education, and the public. Outreach includes
              community involvement, a WWW portal, informatics training, and an innovative
              annual symposium and training program that focuses on information technology
              transfer to young investigators and students, particularly those from
              underrepresented groups. 
In the information economy, access to information
              for knowledge creation and decision-making is as valuable as the information
              itself. This project will enable bringing the intellectual content of
              biodiversity and ecological information into currency for science and society.
              Examples of significant project outcomes include: (i) revolutionizing
              discovery, access to and integration of ecological, earth, and human dimension
              data and information through the SEEK infrastructure; (ii) developing
              intelligent analytical tools and infrastructure to support the needs of
              scientists, decision-makers, and the general public; (iii) education and
              training of the next generation of ecologists in information technology skills;
              and (iv) improving the opportunities for scientists, resource managers, policy
              makers, and the public to make scientifically-informed decisions about the
              environment by expanding access to ecological data, information, and
              knowledge.

