Title       : Renovation of Research and Education Spaces at the Telonicher Marine Laboratory,
               Humboldt State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0225239

Award Number: 0225239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71334              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Thoney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Humboldt State Univ Fnd
	      P.O. Box 1185
	      Arcata, CA  95518    707/826-4189

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports renovation of classroom and office space at the Fred
              Telonicher Marine Laboratory.  Located in Trinidad, CA, the laboratory provides
              access to a variety of nearby marine and terrestrial habitats, including an
              extensive rocky intertidal zone, sand beaches, protected and exposed subtidal
              areas, lagoons and estuaries, mudflats, eelgrass beds, and submarine canyons.
              The Laboratory's main building includes two large classrooms, 14 offices for
              faculty and graduate students, research labs and additional space used to
              support education and research activities. A filtered seawater system supplies
              classrooms, a large wet laboratory with numerous holding tanks, and a small
              public aquarium. The Laboratory offers a diverse set of marine-oriented
              research and educational programs, including college level courses, graduate
              research, K-12 programming, and self-guided tours for the general public. The
              Laboratory's close proximity to a variety of habitats and the ability to
              maintain a wide variety of organisms at the laboratory permit "hands on"
              laboratory and field experiences for students. Fifteen faculty members
              regularly use the marine facilities for research and teaching. The amount and
              quality of existing laboratory space, offices and classrooms has made it
              difficult for the Laboratory to accommodate visiting scientists, additional
              faculty and more students. Using the support provided by this award, the
              institution will renovate three large rooms to create additional research space
              and to improve the quality and utility of space currently used for teaching and
              faculty offices. The renovated classrooms will provide a far superior space for
              conducting course lectures and laboratories. Separate rooms will allow the
              Laboratory to offer two courses concurrently, making more space available for
              new classes. The lecture and laboratory courses to be offered will include:
              biological oceanography, chemical oceanography, geological oceanography,
              zooplankton ecology, and estuarine ecology.  In addition all three rooms will
              meet ADA requirements for wheelchair access as a result of the renovations.

