Title       : Integrated Sensing: Acquisition, Compression and Interpolation of Panoramic
               Stereo Images of a Scene for Remote Walkthroughs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0225523

Award Number: 0225523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Narendra Ahuja ahuja@vision.ai.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yoshihisa Shinagawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is aimed at producing novel images of a scene from arbitrary new
              
viewpoints using a sparse set of compressed panoramic snapshots or sample
              
images of the scene. The samples are taken from a relatively small number of
              
strategically placed cameras. A major application and evaluation testbed of
              
the proposed work is to enable walkthroughs of a 3D scene by generating the
              
images of the scene along a trajectory dynamically chosen by a remote user.
              
The focus of the proposed work is on the acquisition of panoramic stereo
              
images which serve as scene samples, and their interpolation (or
              
extrapolation) for producing a new stereo pair of images of the scene from an
              
arbitrary new viewpoint. The user follows a dynamically chosen arbitrary
              
trajectory and wishes to continuously teleview the scene from along the
              
trajectory points. It is assumed that relative locations of the objects in
              the 
scene for which walkthroughs are to be generated are known; the object
              
locations are sparse; and that the strategic placement of the cameras does
              not 
change significantly to warrant camera replacement. Development and
              
implementation of a stereo panoramic camera is proposed. Limited work is
              
proposed on joint image compression. The topology of the camera network also
              
allows the determination of which cameras are to be used to generate the
              
walkthrough image at any given point along the user drawn trajectory.
              
Applications of the proposed work include video surveillance, virtual museums
              
and video conferencing.

