Title       : Integrated Sensing: Active Stereoscopic Visual Search Driven by Natural Scene
               Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0225451

Award Number: 0225451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Bovik bovik@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joydeep Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence K. Cormack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

"ACTIVE STEREOSCOPIC VISUAL SEARCH DRIVEN BY NATURAL SCENE
              STATISTICS"

Alan C. Bovik, Lawrence K. Cormack, J. Ghosh
	
The primary
              thrust of this proposal is to develop methods based on the natural statistics
              of stereoscopic images that will enable the  design and implementation of  the
              next generation of foveated, fixating machine vision systems that are capable
              of efficient and intelligent visual search, by exploiting and applying
              knowledge about human fixation and search mechanisms.
	We summarize the
              intention of our proposal via the following key goals:
Goal 1: To develop a
              quantitative description of human active stereo vision as a function of natural
              scene statistics in a variety of three-dimensional visual search and learning
              tasks. Our emphasis will be on developing statistical models of stereo
              primitives that attract low-level visual attention based on a unique and
              in-depth statistical analysis. We feel that statistical models based on natural
              scene statistics have a very good chance of succeeding where deterministic
              models have failed.
Goal 2: To train a state-of-the-art foveated, fixating
              active computer vision system (named FOVEA) to search and to learn to search
              4-D (space-time) scenes.  To do this, back-end artificial neural networks
              trained on telepresent human search patterns will be used. The statistical
              models and extracted statistical stereoprimitives discovered as part of the
              research in Goal 1 will be used as a priori knowledge to improve the
              configuration and learning of the networks. We envision that these experiments
              will result in smart active machine vision protocols for exploring, searching,
              and interacting with 4-D environments, while giving new insights into visual
              cognitive processes.

