Title       : ITR: Robust Large-Scale Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0225660

Award Number: 0225660
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Frans Kaashoek kaashoek@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Shenker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is a novel decentralized infrastructure, based on distributed hash
              tables (DHTs), that will enable a new generation of large-scale distributed
              applications.  The key technology on which we build, DHTs, are robust in the
              face of failures, attacks and unexpectedly high loads.  They are scalable,
              achieving large system sizes without incurring undue overhead.  They are
              self-configuring, automatically incorporating new nodes without manual
              intervention or oversight. They simplify distributed programming by providing a
              clean and flexible interface.  And, finally, they provide a shared
              infrastructure simultaneously usable by many applications.

The approach
              advocated here is a radical departure from both the centralized client-server
              and the application-specific overlay models of distributed applications.  This
              new approach will not only change the way large-scale distributed systems are
              built, but could potentially have far reaching societal implications as well. 
              The main challenge in building any distributed system lies in dealing with
              security, robustness, management, and scaling issues; today each new system
              must solve these problems for itself, requiring significant hardware investment
              and sophisticated software design.  The shared distributed infrastructure will
              relieve individual applications of these burdens, thereby greatly reducing the
              barriers to entry for large-scale distributed services.

Our belief that DHTs
              are the right enabling infrastructure is based on two conjectures: (1) a DHT
              with application-independent, unconstrained keys and values provides a general
              purpose interface upon which a wide variety of distributed applications can be
              built, and (2) distributed applications that make use of the DHT-based
              infrastructure inherit basic levels of security, robustness, ease of operation,
              and scaling. Much of the thrust of the proposed research is an exploration of
              these two conjectures.

We will investigate the first conjecture, that the
              DHT abstraction can support a wide range of applications, by building a variety
              of DHT-based systems.  Our recent work has used DHTs to support such varied
              applications as distributed file systems, multicast overlay networks, event
              notification systems, and distributed query processing.  DHTs simplify the
              structure of these systems by providing general-purpose key/value naming rather
              than imposing structured keys (e.g., hierarchical names in DNS).  These systems
              are early prototypes, but they suggest that DHTs may be as useful to
              distributed applications as ordinary hash tables are to programs.

The second
              conjecture relies on techniques for creating robust, secure, and
              self-organizing infrastructures out of many mutually distrustful nodes.  Our
              initial work on robust DHT designs gives us confidence that such techniques are
              within reach. The bulk of our proposed research will be devoted to the in-depth
              study of these techniques, with the express aim of producing a sound and
              coherent design for the infrastructure. To investigate the real-world behavior
              of our design, we will create a large-scale open testbed for which we will
              distribute our infrastructure software, some enabling libraries, and a few key
              compelling applications.

In addition to its impact on the creation of
              distributed applications, our research program will have benefits in education
              and outreach. Given their current importance, security, robustness, and the
              design of distributed systems should become central topics in undergraduate
              computer science education. To this end, we are planning a new
              interdisciplinary course that will address these issues, and bring them into
              sharper focus early in the undergraduate course sequence.

Our testbed and
              research agenda is also a good vehicle for encouraging the participation of
              organizations not traditionally involved in networking and systems research. 
              Participation in the testbed requires little cost (a PC and an Internet
              connection) and minimal levels of systems expertise and over-sight.   Moreover,
              because the material is closely related to the P2P systems with which many
              students are familiar, the project might appeal to students who would not
              normally be attracted to research in this area.  Based on this premise, we plan
              an active outreach program to underrepresented populations at non-research 
              undergraduate institutions.


