Title       : SGER: Distribution of Photoheterotrophic Bacteria in the Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0225975

Award Number: 0225975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Sieracki MSieracki@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A new type of bacteria in the ocean was discovered this past year using in?situ
              infrared fluorescence measurements.  These cells, termed aerobic, anoxygenic
              photoheterotrophs, or AAPs, are capable of using sunlight and/or carbon sources
              for energy. They can fix C02, but do not produce oxygen as traditional
              photosynthesizers do. They were shown to live in coastal ocean waters and in
              the Northeastern Pacific Ocean. The ecological role and importance of AAPs is
              not known. In current carbon models they are confounded with heterotrophic
              bacteria, yet may play a very different role. This project, a small grant for
              exploratory research, will analyze samples collected from 3 recent research
              cruises in the NW Atlantic for counts of AAP cells across seasons and across a
              trophic gradient from productive, coastal Maine, Gulf of Maine, and Georges
              Bank waters to offshore oligotrophic waters of the Sargasso Sea.  This project
              will provide some of the first quantitative estimates of AAPs in different
              marine ecosystems and over different seasons, and will give the first
              indication of the potential ecological importance of this newly discovered
              microbial form.  The findings from this study should have broad significance in
              understanding ocean ecology and biogeochemical cycling in the oceans.
