Title       : Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0225603

Award Number: 0225603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick E. Nelson fnelson@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikolay Shiklomanov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Global climate change has the potential to produce serious impacts on natural
              and human systems in permafrost regions. The Circumpolar Active Layer
              Monitoring (CALM) program is concerned with observing the response of the
              active layer and near-surface permafrost to climate change at multi-decade
              timescales, and is one of two major international observation networks devoted
              to permafrost. Now
at the end of its first decade, the CALM network
              incorporates more than 100 sites involving field scientists from 15
              investigating countries in both hemispheres. This project will conduct a
              workshop designed to analyze the rich database obtained from the observational
              network, evaluate active-layer models for
application under climate-change
              scenarios, review existing CALM analytical methodologies and protocols, discuss
              future data formatting, submission, and archive protocols, review the relation
              of CALM to other international programs, discuss the role of CALM at the
              International Permafrost Conference in July 2003, and the future of the CALM
              program. Because widespread, systematic changes in the thickness of the active
              layer could have profound effects on the flux of greenhouse gases and on the
              human infrastructure in cold regions, it is critical that observation and
              analysis procedures be optimized. The proposed workshop will bring together
              permafrost scientists with workers in closely related areas, many of whom have
              divergent but complementary skills. A thorough examination of data from the
              major CALM sites will permit assessment of the overall performance of the
              network and its components. The
workshop will also facilitate evaluation of
              the effectiveness of observation strategies and
sampling designs.

