Title       : PPD: FASED: Shaping Vocational Frontiers: Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
               for Persons with Disabilities in Rural and Remote Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0225253

Award Number: 0225253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Radtke rradtke@seaofdreams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sea of Dreams
	      2738A Hipawai Place
	      Honolulu, HI  96822-182    808/988-1784

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Improving education and inclusion of students with disabilities in science,
              mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) through camps, science fairs
              and other programs are imperative to the diversification of our future SMET
              work force.  Students with disabilities in remote and rural regions are much
              less likely to have access to SMET resources because of their geographic
              location.  Additionally, students with disabilities and their families are
              often strapped financially due to excessive costs in transportation, adaptive
              technologies, support personnel, personal care, and architectural adaptations. 
              After families pay for these essentials, SMET camps and programs often are a
              financial burden. 
     As one step in our project, we plan to collaborate
              with existing SMET camps and programs, to demonstrate that all camps can be
              appropriate for students with disabilities.  This would enable students in
              rural and remote regions such as Alaska to participate fully in science and
              math education experiences leading to careers in SMET.  The Shaping Vocational
              Frontiers Project will be directed by Drs. Radtke and Owens with assistance
              from Access Alaska.  Dr. Radtke is a well known scientist and community
              activist and Dr. Owens is an experienced researcher and teacher, outdoor
              educator and inventor.  Both men have severe disabilities and are intimately
              familiar with the problems faced by persons with disabilities in SMET related
              activities.  Access Alaska will be instrumental in training, camp
              accessibility, and network development.  The project will create a program that
              involves a core of students, families, scientists, educators, and
              university-level science teacher trainers.  This amalgam will strive to enhance
              the opportunities for acquiring SMET education for students with disabilities
              throughout Alaska.  As a group we will work towards this goal through changes
              in science education curriculum, educational practices, and policy in the
              state.  We plan to identify students with disabilities across the state who can
              benefit from this program and provide them with hands-on, field-based science. 
              We will emphasize activities that provide for integration of students with
              disabilities with their traditional counterparts who do not have disabilities. 
              Role models and mentors, many with disabilities themselves, will advise,
              problem solve, and guide both individual students and heterogeneous teams of
              students (consisting of both able-bodied and students with disabilities) in
              these activities.  The appropriate assistive technology will be used in concert
              with Internet to insure that students with disabilities will be fully included
              in SMET activities, Electronic technology (including the Internet) will be used
              to encourage networking and information dissemination among student teams,
              educational organizations, administrators, and members of the community.  The
              project will be carefully documented for public television and Internet venues.
               All publications produced by the project will be available through fully
              accessible electronic media.  


