Title       : PREMISE: Ecologically and Economically Conscious Manufacturing of Polymer
               Composites - Coating Process Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0225933

Award Number: 0225933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bhavik R. Bakshi   (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Kardos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jose M. Castro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ly James Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing Innovative Systems
              (PREMISE) Exploratory research and education activities will initiate one of
              the first efforts for integrated systematic analysis of technical, economic and
              life cycle environmental aspects of manufactured products and processes at
              multiple spatial scales, with specific emphasis on polymer composites. 
              Advanced polymeric composite materials are used widely in their enormous range
              of lightweight products with superior physical/mechanical properties.  Although
              these composites provide many advantages in the use phase, they pose
              significant environmental challenges throughout their life cycle.  These
              challenges include the use of non-renewable resources, emissions of hazardous
              chemicals, energy use, and difficulty in recycling.  Many innovative processes
              for tasks such as, molding and coating seem to be economically viable with a
              smaller environmental impact.  

However, industry is often reluctant to
              adopt many of these techniques primarily due to a lack of comprehensive studies
              and tools to compare and evaluate the technical, environmental and economic
              aspects of various composite-manufacturing processes.  The need for such
              research is identifies in the recent NSF/DOE report on chemical industry.  This
              proposal brings together investigators from different engineering departments
              and universities with complementary skills.  The industrial partners, Omnova
              and Honda, will help in obtaining the required data for this work. 
              Furthermore, through the university's Center for Advanced Polymer and Composite
              Engineering (CAPCE) the proposed work will have access to 27 industrial members
              and state-of the art facilities while providing access to undergraduate and
              graduate students.

