Title       : PREMISE: Exploratory Research: An Alternative Process Model for Printed Circuit
               Board Recycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0225927

Award Number: 0225927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong-Chao Zhang hzhang@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory B. McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Korzeniewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing
              Innovative Systems (PREMISE) Exploratory Research project are: (1) To conduct
              exploratory research into the feasibility of an alternative PCB recycling
              process based on cryogenic decomposition of the PCBs; (2) To establish an
              interdisciplinary research team that can develop a long-term collaboration that
              builds on the understanding developed in this project; (3) To evaluate the
              proposed recycling process against traditional PCB recycling processes in terms
              of recycle rate economics, energy consumption, and environmental performance;
              and (4) To examine the feasibility of reusing plastics in the proposed
              recycling process.

The proposed recycling process is cryogenic decomposition
              of the PCBs. The process takes advantage of the fact that at very low
              temperatures, polymeric materials become highly brittle. In addition, the
              residual stresses set-up in the PCB resins due to thermal expansion mismatch
              between the polymers and other materials on the PCB is expected to lead to a
              better separation than might otherwise be possible simply due to the
              embrittlement of the plastics. Actual laboratory experiments will be performed
              using a cryogenic test system.

Wide diffusion of electronic equipment and
              shortening of product lifecycles have caused a serious problem: how to deal
              with large quantities of end-of-life or obsolete electronic equipment. While
              there are various technical challenges for electronic product recovery and
              recycling, this research focuses on printed circuit boards (PCBs) or printed
              wiring boards (PWBs). PCBs are primary components in many electronic products
              built for both military and commercial applications. Due to their complex
              construction and the consequent complicated mixture of materials, PCB recycling
              presents a serious challenge to today's industry. The rich content of precious
              metals provides a strong economic justification for materials recovery and
              recycling. On the other hand, large amounts of toxic components and
              fiber-reinforced polymers create difficulties for recycling and adverse
              environmental impact.
