Title       : PGE/DEM An Integrated Approach To Change Attitudes Of College Freshmen Toward
               Female Participation In SME&T
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0225210

Award Number: 0225210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anu A. Gokhale aagokha@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenton Machina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Illinois State University will shape the awareness, attitudes and knowledge of
              all freshman students and their parents by enhancing learning about gender
              issues in STEM before and during the freshman year.  The interventions will be
              conducted within three overlapping spheres -- the family context, the peer
              context, and the University's curricular and co-curricular structures. It is at
              the nexus of these three spheres that students make educational choices that
              affect their careers for decades.

Within the family context, there will be a
              half-day or four-hour workshop that addresses gender equity in STEM, as part of
              the two-day Summer Orientation sessions for incoming 900 freshmen and their
              1500 parents. All the 150 undergraduate advisors at the University will also
              participate in the workshop.

Within the peer context, learning communities
              will be formed to provide a support group that nurtures freshmen females who
              express interest (or even mild enthusiasm) in STEM. The learning communities
              will be modeled on the existing Connections program at the University. Each
              learning community will consist of a maximum of 30 students (females and
              males), a science, mathematics, or technology professional on or off campus,
              who will serve as a role model, and a student leader (university junior or
              senior in one of the STEM fields) to help guide the students through their
              first year at the University.

Within the context of the University's
              curricular and co-curricular structures, a four-week "topical excursion"
              (learning module) will be part of an existing general education course,
              Foundations of Inquiry (FOI), which all freshmen take during their first
              semester at the University. In that "topical excursion", the approach to
              Science/Technology/Society -- current issues in which the science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology play major roles -- will be combined with a more
              gender-related subtext -- choosing female scientists as authors, showing female
              scientists, engineers, and technologists at work, or raising the issue of
              gender bias in science research.

The model exemplified in this project has
              the potential for replication at comparable institutions since many
              universities have some form of a summer orientation session for incoming
              freshmen and their parents, an introductory course that most freshmen take
              during their first year at the university, a structure for peer support, and
              undergraduate student advisement. 

Gender-role attitudes of society are
              widely thought to deter college age women from STEM college courses, majors,
              and subsequent career paths.  Experiences during the transition to adulthood
              are particularly strong.  The goal is to challenge traditional concepts and
              definitions of femininity and its relationship with STEM disciplines taking a
              "whole community" approach at this critical stage in education -- getting male
              and female students, their parents, student advisors, and faculty involved.
