Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Computational Learning and Discovery in Biological
               Sequence, Structure and Function Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0225636

Award Number: 0225636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1954500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Klein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ivet Bahar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hagai Meirovitch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1655,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0225656
Reddy, Raj
Carnegie Mellon University

Title:  Computational
              Learning and Discovery in Biological Sequence, Structure and Function
              Mapping

Computer scientists, together with biological chemists will
              collaborate using statistical and computational tools and methods that the
              computer scientists have been developing for dealing with human language to
              better understand the function of proteins. Proteins are major players in the
              functioning of human and all other living cells. 
As in languages, where
              sequences of letters determine patterns of words and sentences, sequences of
              amino acids in proteins determine protein structure, dynamics and function. 
              Such sequences and their constituents can be thought of as syllables or words
              that have particular properties. Given these sequences, scientists want to be
              able to predict their geometrical structure and dynamics, and hence their
              function. A deeper understanding of the relationship between these is required
              so that the information hidden in the DNA sequences of genes can be used to
              develop drugs to fight disease. In particular, there is great societal demand
              to understand and treat degenerative diseases, many of which are based on
              defective triggers for protein shape and interactions. Work toward these goals
              requires deep knowledge both in computer science and in biological chemistry,
              and must therefore be collaborative in nature. Carnegie Mellon computer
              scientists will therefore be partnering with colleagues with expertise in
              Biological Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh, the Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology (MIT), Boston University and the National Research
              Council of Canada. Industry collaborators include Mathworks, Inc., and medical
              bioinformatics company, Medstory, Inc. 
Using tools like statistical language
              modeling, machine learning methods and high-level language processing for
              understanding how proteins work inside cells is a relatively new field called
              computational biolinguistics.  At this point, the researchers have been able to
              detect protein fragment signatures from pathogens by application of statistical
              language modeling technologies to genome sequences, promising novel strategies
              in identifying and targeting such pathogens. 
. 



