Title       : Non-Equilibrium Effects in High Pressure, High Intensity Arcs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a0225962

Award Number: 0225962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim Heberlein jvrh@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emil Pfender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9178,9251,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It has been discovered that a cold gas flow parallel to the anode surface can
              lead to a stable attachment with an enlarged non-equilibrium region between the
              luminous arc plasma and the anode surface. The current flow to the anode
              appears to be distributed over a relatively large area, thus drastically
              reducing the anode heat flux.  In this study, this type of arc attachment, in
              which a constrictor-stabilized arc attaches to an anode perpendicular to the
              arc axis with a cold gas flow parallel to the anode surface, is investigated.
              The enlarged non-equilibrium region between the anode and the arc column is
              characterized with a newly developed data analysis technique using Thomson
              scattering of laser radiation to determine the electron temperature and density
              distributions.  Measurements with a Langmuir probe imbedded in the anode
              provide values for the same quantities at the anode surface allowing
              determination of the current density distribution, and heat-flux probe
              measurements give the heat-flux distribution at the anode surface.  A parallel
              modeling effort using a three-dimensional finite-volume code for a
              non-equilibrium plasma provides insight into the physical processes in this
              non-equilibrium region including a mapping of the electric field strength. Both
              kinetic and composition non-equilibrium are considered, and a self-consistent
              treatment for diffusion is used.

Broader impact

High intensity arcs have
              attracted considerable interest for materials processing because they can
              provide high fluxes of electrons, ions, or other radicals. However, because the
              arc plasma is usually close to equilibrium, these fluxes are usually coupled
              with high heat fluxes, limiting their usefulness for processing applications. 
              Furthermore, electric arcs frequently operate in an unstable manner, and the
              high heat fluxes lead to erosion of the electrodes, limiting the life of arcing
              devices.  This study addresses the problems of the high heat fluxes associated
              with the benefits of high electron densities in electric arcs.  Two aspects of
              this investigation are expected to lead to results of practical importance. 
              One is the generation of larger non-equilibrium plasma volumes that can be used
              for surface treatment or bulk chemical processing.  The second is the existence
              of a wide-area diffuse attachment for high-intensity arcs with apparently low
              heat-flux densities and, consequentl

