Title       : Role of Disorder in Strongly Correlated Low-Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0225698

Award Number: 0225698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kun Yang kunyang@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports research and education that aims to elucidate the interplay
              between electron-electron interaction and disorder in low dimensional
              electronic systems. This remains a major and difficult problem in modern
              condensed matter physics. This award supports studies of: edge states of
              fractional quantum Hall liquids, especially in the presence of edge
              reconstruction; bulk fractional quantum Hall liquids in the presence of
              disorder, focusing on the effects of disorder and interaction on their
              transport properties and critical behavior near the quantum phase transitions
              between different quantum Hall phases; quasiparticle transport properties in
              two-dimensional non-s-wave superconductors in the absence of time-reversal
              symmetry, with the cuprates as the prototype; and magnetic and superconducting
              properties of quantum dots and nano-size metallic grains. The PI will combine
              numerical and analytical methods in these investigations. Specific methods
              include mapping to an effective field theory, exact diagonalization, and
              quantum Monte Carlo simulation. Numerical studies will elucidate the
              topological properties, such as Chern numbers, of many-electron wave functions
              and quasiparticle wave functions in the PI's investigations of bulk fractional
              quantum Hall liquids and quasiparticle transport properties in superconductors.
              Calculations will focus on physical quantities that can be directly measured
              experimentally, and compare our results with experiments whenever possible. The
              broader impacts of this award are primarily educational; the work involves
              training the next generation of condensed matter theorists.

This award
              supports fundamental research and education that seeks to advance our
              understanding of strongly interacting electrons confined to one or two
              dimensions and disrupted by imperfections. The PI will study the combined
              effect of strong correlations and disorder in a variety of materials and
              systems including quantum Hall systems and nanoscale ferromagnets and
              superconducting grains. This basic research helps improve understanding of
              fundamental and novel electronic states and phenomena that occur in materials
              and contributes to the intellectual underpinnings of potential future
              electronic device technologies. This award also supports training the next
              generation of condensed matter theorists.
              



















