Title       : Integrated Sensing: High-speed 3D Microscopy by Hybrid Optical-Digital Encoding
               and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0225533

Award Number: 0225533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafael Piestun piestun@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol J. Cogswell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yoav Schechner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to develop a novel paradigm for
              high-speed,
three-dimensional (3D) image scene acquisition and rendering. This
              project
is especially directed at imaging 3D dynamic microscopic scenes at
              video
rates that can be further visualized off-line at variable speeds and
              from
multiple viewpoints with stereoscopic display systems. As of today,
              no
other technique can offer simultaneously the high temporal and
              3D-spatial
resolution of the proposed system. The new microscope is expected
              to
acquire images simultaneously containing large depth of field,
              high
resolution, and 3D-range information.

The optical-digital system is
              based on a novel approach in which a) the
optical, b) the digital
              computational, and c) the rendering parts of the
system are simultaneously
              designed.  The microscope will combine, for the
first time, the rotating
              point-spread-function and the wavefront coding
technologies. The system will
              be oriented to surface relief applications
where very fast dynamical processes
              affect the microscopic 3D scene. In
particular, it will be tested for MEMS
              inspection.

The proposed system will be extremely valuable in micro-nano
              pattern
recognition and inspection for advanced manufacturing, remote
              microscopic
information sharing, biological imaging, and other applications
              that
require the acquisition and visualization of 3D miniature
              scene-mappings
at very high speeds.

Graduate and undergraduate students
              will be actively involved in the
analysis, design, and experiments. The
              instrumentation developed will be
available for education in the area of
              microscopic visualization in
subsequent years.
