Title       : PREMISE: Environmental/Energy Comparative Analysis of Polymer Powder Coating
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0225852

Award Number: 0225852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marino Xanthos xanthos@admin.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The technical approach in this Product Realization and Environmental
              Manufacturing Innovative Systems (PREMISE) project involves the selection of
              conventional batch polymerization processes in solvent media and comparison
              with alternative solventless continuous processes. Application of the produced
              solid powders will be compared by considering:  a) conventional high
              temperature curing and b) lower temperature curing by UV radiation. The
              research plan includes detailed engineering calculations; cost comparison and
              application of life cycle analysis (LCA) principles and Design for Environment
              (DFE) methodologies to identify the potential advantages of the alternative
              systems as well as initiation of experimental work towards developing UV
              curable powder formulations in continuous solventless reactors.  

Polymeric
              powder coatings provide environmental and corrosion protection to a variety of
              substrates for civilian and military applications. By comparison to solvent
              based coatings whose application is often associated with significant VOC
              emissions, the production of powder-coated items is sometimes considered as a
              "green" process.  However, there are still many elements in the lifecycle of
              conventional powder coated products, from manufacturing of the powder by
              polymerization to its subsequent application and curing, which are excessive in
              energy and solvent usage.  Systems based on continuous bulk polymerization
              processes in the absence of solvents, followed by UV initiated curing at low
              temperatures appear to be excellent candidates for reduced energy usage and
              lower environmental impact versus conventional systems. 

This research is
              highly relevant to the R&D priorities of the coating industry, i.e. lower
              overall cost and lower curing temperatures along with low VOCs and hazardous
              air pollutants (HAPs).  It is also relevant to the growing need in polymer
              engineering academic curricula to incorporate case studies related to
              industrial ecology and environmental issues in process/product design.
