Title       : Neural Plasticity and Functional Adaptation in the Human Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0225611

Award Number: 0225611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $838250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Schieber mhs@cvs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angela Sirigu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Neural Plasticity and Functional Adaptation in the Human Brain
Abstract

With
              National Science Foundation support, Drs. Scheiber and Sirigu and colleagues
              will conduct a three-year investigation of adult human amputees who will
              undergo bilateral hand transplantation.  Brain imaging, stimulation, and
              recordings of muscle activity underlying finger movements-all will be applied
              longitudinally before, and at intervals after, hand transplantation to address
              the following experimental questions.  (1) Is reorganization limited to the
              cortical representation of the grafted hand, or does it involve additional body
              segments?  (2) Is reorganization observed in the primary motor cortex
              correlated with changes occurring in the homologous regions of the primary
              sensory cortex?  (3) Upon loss of the hands, does use-dependent reorganization
              in the sensorimotor cortex result in a loss of motor skills, which must be
              reacquired when the hands are restored?  (4) Does re-expansion of the motor
              cortex hand representation correlate with the return of motor skill?  The parts
              of brain studied in this project are the primary somatosensory and primary
              motor cortices, which contain the most detailed maps of bodily sensation and
              movement in the brain. These representational maps undergo considerable
              reorganization, however, in response to altered sensory stimulation, behavioral
              use, or amputation of a body part, such as the hand.  After amputation, the
              cortical territory that has been deprived of its specific body part reorganizes
              to represent remaining nearby body parts. Amputation-induced reorganization
              occurs even in adult humans, and can occur rapidly and reversibly.  Little is
              known, however, about the reversibility of such plastic reorganization months
              to years after amputation, when structural changes in nerve cells and their
              interconnections have had time to occur.  Transplantation to replace amputated
              body parts offers the opportunity to study the reversibility of reorganization
              in the primary somatosensory and motor cortex after such long-term changes. 
              The results of these studies will expand our basic understanding of how
              representations of bodily movement in the sensorimotor cortex are shaped and
              re-shaped by plastic reorganization.


