Title       : Integrated Sensing: Collaborative Research: Development of Multifunctional
               Wireless Sensory Microsystems with Integrated Nanoelectromechanical Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0225496

Award Number: 0225496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjay Raman sraman@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in nanometer scale science and technology offer novel approaches
              for the development of ultra-miniature low-power sensor nodes for distributed
              wireless sensor networks in applications such as environmental monitoring,
              civil infrastructure monitoring, condition-based maintenance, security and
              surveillance. The reduced dimensions and masses of nanoelectromechanical
              systems (NEMS) are of great interest for highly-sensitive force- and
              mass-sensing. We propose a novel technology based on assembly of nanostructured
              nanomechanical sensors rather than their direct machining from the substrate
              material. Nanomechanical sensing structures will be produced using "bottom-up"
              synthesis, then surface assembled and integrated with foundry-fabricated
              monolithic circuits through electrofluidic assembly, allowing on-chip
              integration of nanomechanical sensors with transduction, readout, processing,
              and communications circuitry. This approach also offers flexibility and
              scalability, enabling the assembly of a larger range of functional structures.
              Leveraging our core competencies in NEMS device development and
              analog/RF/microwave IC design, we will develop a micropower nanosensor-based
              microsystem containing nanosensor assembly/integration sites, sensor-specific
              transduction, and read-out electronics.

These research activities are
              complemented with related education/outreach goals. These include the
              groundwork for Summer Microelectronics Workshops that will provide cleanroom
              research experiences to local high-school teachers. This pilot program offers
              the promise for substantial impact in K-12 science and mathematics education.
              The combination of these pedagogical and research activities will enable a
              complete academic program that bridges the gap between "bottom-up"
              nanotechnology and microsystems. More specifically, the proposed integration of
              electrofluidic assembly of nanosensors with prefabricated functional circuits
              represents realistic possibilities for the development of Integrative
              Nanosystems that can "sense, think, or communicate".

