Title       : Interregional Interaction and Sociopolitical Change on the Peruvian Far North
               Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0225469

Award Number: 0225469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Izumi Shimada ishimada@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Jorge Montenegro will conduct one
              year dissertation research to define the sociopolitical organization of local
              polities and the nature and dynamics of interregional interaction in the Upper
              Piura Valley on the Peruvian Far North Coast.  Previous archaeological studies
              of culture contact have often emphasized the strategies and perceptions of
              dominant external "core" polities while ignoring those of the subjects or
              "peripheries".  There is evidence of powerful Mochica (AD 300-750) and the
              Middle Sican (AD 900-1100) "core" polities, from coastal valleys to the south,
              in the study area.  Yet the significance of this evidence and the nature of
              interaction between the local and these foreign polities are poorly understood.
               For example, was this interaction coercive or peaceful and/or negotiated?  Was
              it politically or economically motivated?  Was it continuous or discontinuous
              in time and space?  Did it involve only a specific social segment or a broader
              segment?  What led to their interaction?  These research questions will be
              answered through a characterization of the local polities as reflected in their
              sociopolitical and economic structure, and testing of different scenarios and
              their expected material evidence.  The first possibility is that interaction
              was coercive; a second scenario considers interaction as a more peaceful and/or
              negotiated process; and the last scenario is a potential situation of physical
              coexistence without much or any interaction.  

Settlement/land use pattern
              survey, test excavations, and pottery and architecture stylistic analysis are
              the methods proposed for data collection.  Systematic surface survey will
              localize and determine the nature and patterns of site distribution and its
              surrounding environment.  Aerial photographs and topographic, soil,
              hydrological, and vegetation maps will be used for this purpose.  A total of
              ca. 100 sq-km is the estimated survey area.  Sites thus discovered will be
              described, recorded, and mapped, and dimensions and locations will be measured
              and determined using a GPS receiver.  A purposive collection of artifacts found
              on surface will give a good idea of the range of variation within a site's
              surface artifact assemblage.  Finally, small test (2 x 2 or 4 x 4 m) pits will
              be excavated at some of the sites to collect radiocarbon samples, stratigraphic
              and site formation data.  The data collected will be used to create a GIS
              database and perform spatial analysis.  Laboratory analysis will be focused on
              a detailed observation of pottery recovered.  A technological, stylistic, and
              morpho-functional classification and analysis will be carried out to better
              define the local polities' traditions and their relationship to those of
              foreign polities.  

This research is important for several reasons.  It
              offers an excellent opportunity to study culture contact and to test and/or
              refine competing models of interregional interaction.  It will establish a
              sound and necessary foundation for the planned long-term project investigating
              interactions between: 1) the Far North Coast and North Coast, and 2) these
              regions and the North Andes.  Finally, this investigation will yield new
              information on an area that is relatively unknown archaeologically.  

