Title       : The Ecomorphology of Mammalian Frugivores: A Test of Congruence Between Cranial
               Morphology and Feeding Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0225058

Award Number: 0225058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth R. Dumont bdumont@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
     Ecomorphology is the study of how an organism's anatomy is associated
              with its ecology.  Behavior, or how animals use their anatomy, is an important
              bridge between animals and their environments.  Specifically, comparing animals
              abilities to perform certain tasks can provide information about the ecological
              roles those animals play.  Modern ecomorphology studies combine analyses of
              anatomy, performance and relationships among animals to understand the factors
              underlying the diversity of organisms in the world today.  Scientists studying
              birds and fish have found a strong association between the anatomy of the skull
              and feeding behavior.  This study investigates whether this same strong
              association is typical of mammals.  By investigating this relationship, this
              study will test fundamental associations between skull form and skull function
              and shed light on the basis of ecological diversity within one group of modern
              mammals. 
     The subjects of this study are two distantly related groups of
              fruit bats - New World fruit bats and Old World fruit bats. These groups were
              selected for this study because they each contain an array of species that
              divide the fruit resources available to them in similar ways.  The anatomical
              and behavioral diversity within these two groups make them an ideal test case
              for studying the interplay between skull morphology, behavioral flexibility and
              feeding performance. 
     The goal of this study is to explore the
              relationships among cranial morphology, feeding performance, and diet, and
              evaluate the roles that these factors play in the ecological diversity of fruit
              feeding mammals. This study will: 1) provide an assessment of flexibility in
              feeding behavior within and between species, 2) identify peaks in feeding
              performance within species, 3) test fundamental associations between skull
              morphology and dietary habits; 4) evaluate the role of body size in feeding
              performance, and 5) test the hypothesis that skull morphology and feeding
              behavior are tightly linked and reflect variation in diet more than
              evolutionary history.  Each of these five areas will be explored through
              testing explicit hypotheses using specific statistical and systematic
              techniques.  
     The importance of this study lies in testing the
              proposition that skull morphology and feeding behavior are tightly linked in
              mammals.  Although mammals are generally well studied, the relationship between
              variation in feeding performance and ecological diversity has not been
              investigated.  This study will assess the correlation of morphology, behavior,
              and performance in two ecologically similar but distantly related linages - a
              design that provides a natural test of the strength of association among these
              factors. 

