Title       : PREMISE/Collaborative Research: Integrated Drag-out and Dynamic Water Allocation
               for Maximum Reduction of Waste and Energy in the Electroplating Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0225844

Award Number: 0225844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yinlun Huang yhuang@wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this Product Realization and Envrionmental Manufacturing Innovative Systems
              (PREMISE) project, Wayne State University and Lamar University plan to jointly
              develop a comprehensive profitable pollution prevention (P3) theory, with a
              specific focus on the development of an integrated reversed drag-out and
              dynamic water allocation methodology for maximum waste and energy reduction in
              general cleaning, rinsing, and plating systems in electroplating.  The dynamic
              waste and energy reduction will capture all-time details of product and
              environmental quality and economics in the entire production system.  This
              distinguishes it from commonly practiced approaches that focus on: (i) a solely
              steady-state result of waste reduction, (ii) individual units, and (iii)
              end-of-plant, rather than end-of-line waste.  In this development, the PIs will
              conduct three types of integration: (i) the integration of cleaning, rinsing,
              and plating, (ii) the integration of design (modification) and control
              (operation), and (iii) the integration of economics and environmental concerns.
               In system design, the basic approach of the methodology is to pump cleaning,
              rinsing, and plating solutions back (seemingly very risky), to maximize the
              dirt residue on parts to the upper limits of dirtiness (seemingly not
              acceptable), to increase drag-out in certain operations (seemingly against
              convention), and to dynamically switch water allocation (seemingly very
              difficult).  The methodology will be tested in a real industrial setting.  The
              preliminary results will justify the initiation of the second phase of the
              project.  The joint effort will also benefit the graduate education in the two
              universities as students will not only be co-advised by the professors with
              different strengths, but also have opportunities to work with collaborating
              engineers.

As the second most environmentally regulated industry, the
              electroplating industry is facing tremendous challenges in achieving
              increasingly stringent environmental and energy goals and maintaining global
              economic competitiveness.  An urgent need for the industry is the methodology
              that can substantially improve pollution prevention (P2) practice and gain
              economical benefits simultaneously in electroplating plants.
