Title       : High-Bandwidth Memory Pipeline for Wide-Issue Processors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0225561

Award Number: 0225561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gyungho Lee ghlee@ece.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Proposal: 0073259
PI: Gyungho Lee
Title: High-Bandwidth Memory
              Pipeline for Wide-Issue Processors 
	
Technological and architectural
              innovations have enabled development of powerful microprocessors that can issue
              several instructions concurrently at a very high clock rate. In future
              processors with aggressive speculation techniques, an even larger number of
              instruction issues per cycle are expected. Efficient handling of memory
              references for data access is one of the keys to achieving high performance in
              future processors. This research addresses methods to provide sufficient
              bandwidth at fast latency for data access in wide-issue processors issuing tens
              of instructions per cycle. The methods are based on the concept of "data
              decoupling". Data decoupling divides the memory reference instructions into
              multiple independent streams before the actual addresses of the data they
              access are known. Partitioned memory reference instructions are then fed into a
              separate memory pipeline. This research investigates the issues in effective
              and efficient hardware and software support for multiple memory pipelines based
              on data decoupling. The data decoupling approach of providing multiple memory
              pipelines can provide two crucial advantages over a conventional design. First,
              the cost and the complexity of building a large cache with many ports are
              reduced. Second, partitioning memory references can facilitate more specialized
              handling of each partitioned stream. 


