Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Daily Life and the Development of the
               State in the Moche Valley of North Coastal Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0225011

Award Number: 0225011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian R. Billman bbillman@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Brian Billman, Ms. Celeste Gagnon will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct an analysis of skeletal remains
              of approximately 900 individuals recovered from the site of Cerro Oreja,
              located on the north coast of Peru. Isotopic determinations will also be made.
              Cerro Oreja documents the development of the Moche state and provides insight
              into the emergence of a society which incorporated large numbers of people
              under centralized control. This process took place independently in many parts
              of the world and thus forms an important topic for anthropological research.
              Ms. Gagnon wishes to understand the effect of political centralization on
              individual health and nutrition and hypothesizes that positive benefits result.
              Because the occupation of Cerro Oreja spans almost 2000 years - from 1500 BC to
              AD 400 it will be possible to correlate social and biological change.
              

Bioarchaeological data to be collected include frequencies of dental
              caries, periodontal disease, dental abscesses and antemortum tooth loss. In
              addition, measures of stable isotopes, rates and types of dental wear and
              identifications of microplant remains from dental calculus will be analyzed.
              The bioarchaeological data will also address issues of class, gender and age
              and the effects these had on access to specific foods.  This research is
              important because it will provide insight into the relationship between social
              and biological change and assist in training a promising young scientist.

