Title       : A Mathematical Logic for Physically Feasible Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0225063

Award Number: 0225063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Lindell slindell@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Two years of support are being requested if at all possible. The reason for this
              is 
because it is necessary to complete several key steps before submission as
              a regular 
proposal.  The first summer is to prepare papers for presentation
              and/or appearance in 
conferences and/or journals.  During the ensuing
              academic year, the intellectual content 
of this potentially controversial
              material will be circulated for comment, both publicly in 
talks and privately
              among colleagues.  Based on the feedback received, the ideas put forth 
will
              be modified and corrected. Only then does it make sense to use the following
              
summer to involve an undergraduate student in implementing the salient
              features of the 
proposed work for both a greater depth of understanding and
              demonstration purposes.  
  By this point in time, that would mean there
              should be preliminary results 
appearing in print, with supporting
              documentation on the web explaining this material.  
In addition, more capable
              assistive computing technology will be available by then (to 
help me overcome
              my hand disability), so that I might be able to more actively 
participate in
              the implementation details of that work.  When all of this is readily in place,
              
then it will be possible to submit a competitive regular proposal. 
