Title       : PREMISE: Design and Engineering of Green Compsites From Bio-Fibers and Bacterial
               Bio-Plastics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0225925

Award Number: 0225925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98530              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence T. Drzal DRZAL@EGR.MSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce E. Dale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amar Mohanty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Satish Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen Ravenswaay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              There is a growing urgency to develop novel biobased products and innovative
              technologies that can reduce the US dependence on fossil fuel. This PREMISE
              project seeks to replace existing petroleum-based glass fiber-nylon composites
              with sustainable, eco-friendly, 'green' composites produced from a combination
              of engineered natural/bio-fibers and a new, emerging bacterial-based
              bio-plastic (polyhydroxyalkanoate, PHA) for automotive applications. This
              'green' composite material has the attributes of recyclability and 'triggered'
              biodegradability i.e. (stable during intended life but biodegradable only under
              composting conditions) to qualify it as a sustainable material. The objective
              is to strengthen the connection between "DESIGN" and "MANUFACTURING" of this
              novel 'green' composite so that they can have a positive impact upon industrial
              applications. 

This project will address research issues related to the
              development of ideas and creation of tools for sustainable product development
              in the manufacturing enterprise. In order to achieve 'sustainability', all the
              components such as environment, economics, life cycle analysis, energy and
              education are included in this project. Product realization for industrial
              application of biocomposites requires complete Life Cycle Assessment, from
              production of bio-fibers and bio-plastics, to design and engineering of green
              biocomposites to their ultimate disposal or recycling. Energy calculations for
              the entire manufacturing system will be calculated from fiber/plastic
              production to their processing and manufacturing based upon the existing
              scientific literature and preliminary experimental data collected from the
              pilot-scale experiments. A strong collaborative partnership with representative
              industrial participants, METABOLIX (manufacturer of bioplastic), FLAXCRAFT
              (natural fiber company) and FORD (automotive OEM) insures relevancy and a high
              potential for industrial implementation in the future.


