Title       : WCR: A New Technique for Mapping Recharge Fluxes to Groundwater at a Regional
               Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0225782

Award Number: 0225782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Allen G. Hunt                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15120              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jozsef Szilagyi jszilagyi1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,7241,9150,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0225782
Szilagyi 
Naturally occurring long-term mean annual recharge to
              groundwater over a large region (i.e. the state of Nebraska) will be estimated
              with the help of a water balance approach coupled with an automated
              baseflow-separation technique. Evapotranspiration is to be calculated with the
              WREVAP model at the Solar and Meteorological Surface Observation Network
              (SAMSON) sites. Mean annual base recharge will be obtained by the product
              of
Long-term mean annual runoff (the difference between precipitation [about
              400 stations] and evapotranspiration) and the Baseflow Index using discharge
              data from the USGS gaging stations (about 130 stations) in Nebraska. Base
              recharge will be augmented by the amount
of evapotranspiration that comes
              directly from groundwater and will be obtained by using satellite-derived
              multi-year Normalized Difference Vegetation Indices to locate the areas where
              this happens. Mapping will be achieved using Geographic Information Systems
              technology and geostatistics. 

This work builds upon recent advances in
              hydrology (the WREVAP model using Bouchet's complementary hypothesis which
              proved to be pivotal in explaining climate-induced changes in the hydrologic
              cycle [see this author's works on evaporation trends: http://csd.unl.edu/csd/
              staff/szilagyi/szilagyi.html], and the automated baseflow separation algorithm)
              while making use of remote sensing and GIS. The present approach can easily be
              extended to continental scales to define fluxes to the groundwater which may
              become important in the understanding of the global hydrologic cycle as it
              relates to climate change.

 Currently there is no standard approach in
              estimating recharge fluxes to the groundwater, especially at a regional scale.
              The existing approaches generally build upon the use of complex water balance
              and/or hydro-geological models, with typically large number of parameters
              related to: soil and vegetation type and status, and diverse aquifer properties
              (permeability, saturated thickness, etc.), many of which must be optimized.
              Instead, the proposed approach utilizes measured data of streamflow,
              precipitation and a state-of-the-art evaporation estimation technique enhanced
              by satellite remote sensing images without the need of complex modeling and
              parameter optimization.

