Title       : Establishing an I/UCRC Center Site for Microcontamination Control at
               Northeastern University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0225178

Award Number: 0225178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed A. Busnaina busnaina@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sinan Muftu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George G. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Hopwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan E. Israeloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center research site at
              Northeastern University will work jointly with the industrial members and the
              existing Microcontamination Control center at the University of Arizona and
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute to develop solutions that will improve the
              industry's yield and contribute to their competitiveness.  The industrial
              members at all three sites will share the research results of all the
              sites.

The research focuses on the fundamentals of surface cleaning and
              preparation, particle adhesion and removal mechanisms, reduction of the use of
              chemicals through dilute chemistries, cryogenic aerosols and supercritical
              fluids (such as supercritical CO2) and reduction of water use through increased
              cleaning efficiency.  Contamininants in gases will also be addressed through
              physical modeling of particle generation, transport, deposition resulting in
              contamination in thin film process.  The center will also work toward the
              development of micro-sensors that can be used to detect impurities insitu in
              ultra pure gases used in semiconductor and other processes.

