Title       : PGE/DIS Women and IT Video Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0225079

Award Number: 0225079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Korenman korenman@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Spence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia Morrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Shewbridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Women and Information Technology (CWIT) at the University of
              Maryland, Baltimore County UMBC) will:

1) Create a four-minute, high quality
              video presenting diverse images of successful women in science and technology
              careers and targeting girls and young women ages 12 - 20.
2) Develop a
              speakers program involving female UMBC students and faculty and representatives
              from the business community, who will use the video as an exciting entree to a
              discussion of women's opportunities in science and technology careers.
3) Once
              the video is completed, evaluate a speaker's success, with and without the
              video, in educating a total of 1500 middle, high school, and community students
              about the opportunities for careers in IT and related science
fields, with a
              focus on women.
4) Develop guidelines for integrating the video and speaker
              into any venue, including classrooms, after-school and
summer programs,
              assemblies, career fairs, programs for college freshmen, and other programs for
              young people.

Unlike the traditional videos currently available on the
              topic, this brief, high-intensity video will engage the emotions and interests
              of young people. Rather than presenting talking heads, this video will combine
              vibrant rock or pop music, striking color, and flash images and text to create
              energy and excitement around the topic of women's career possibilities in IT.
              The video is modeled upon a high-quality, four-minute music video developed by
              General Motors and used, with permission, as a template for feedback and
              evaluation by a diverse group of 102 middle school, high school, and community
              college students ranging in age from 13 to 26. Over 90% of these students, both
              male and female, believed creating a short video about women and IT modeled on
              the GM video was an excellent idea.

Video Press, a small for-profit arm of
              the University of Maryland, College Park, and winner of an Oscar for its
              production "King Gimp" will develop the video under the guidance of the Video
              Project Committee (VPC). The VPC members represent UMBC faculty and staff and
              the video project subcommittee of Center's advisory board.

Once the video is
              completed, the project team will work with an external evaluator to assess the
              effectiveness of the video in enhancing a speaker's success in educating
              students about career opportunities for women in IT and related fields. A
              booklet will be developed to support the use of the video and be distributed
              with 100 videos statewide for additional evaluation.

VPC members will
              disseminate the video and guidelines for use nationally and internationally
              through the Maryland public school system, Maryland community colleges,
              national and international listservs, journals, radio and television, local and
              national conferences, and an internationally recognized website.

The
              External Advisory Board is composed of high level executives from the following
              companies: T. Rowe Price Investment Technologies; Maryland Department of
              Business and Economic Development; Maryland State Department of Education;
              Northrop Grumman; Saraf Software Solutions; Hewlett Packard's Digital Village
              Project; SM Consulting; Allfirst Bank; the Community College of Baltimore
              County (CCBC); and an entrepreneur and Founder/CEO of WomenCONNECT.com.
              Maryland Public Television will serve in an advisory capacity on this
              project.

Additional partners in this project include Meade Middle School,
              Pine Grove Middle School, Parkville High School and Center for Science,
              Mathematics, and Computer Science, and the Community College of Baltimore
              County. The Maryland Association of Community Colleges will support the program
              through the dissemination and assessment of the video project to all 16
              community colleges in the state. Summer Days Math and Science Camp for Girls,
              Inc. will assess the video as a recruiting tool. The Director of the Center for
              Social and Community Research at Loyola College in Maryland will independently
              evaluate the project.

