Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Spin and Charge Dynamics in Conducting Polymers
               by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0225578

Award Number: 0225578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Gilbert Clark clark@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0225578
W. Gilbert Clark

Description:  This award supports a US-India
              cooperative research project entitled Spin and Charge Dynamics in Conducting
              Polymers by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Studies.  US PI W. Gilbert Clark,
              University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) will collaborate with Reghu Menon
              and two other researchers from the premier Indian Institute of Science (IISc),
              Bangalore.  The objective is to investigate the dynamics of charge carriers in
              electrically conducting polymers by NMR measurements.  They will carry out
              related electrical transport and electron spin resonance studies and synthesis
              of the appropriate samples.  This research will address many key questions on
              the mechanisms for electron transport in conducting polymers that are of
              current interest such as the length scale of disorder and nature of the
              metal-insulator transition.  The ultimate research goal is to increase
              understanding of the mechanisms for electron transport in these materials. 
              

Scope:  Professor Clark is a well-known expert in applying the NMR
              technique to study properties of conducting molecular crystals and solids.  He
              has extensive experience with NMR, electrical transport, and measurements at
              ultra-low temperatures and high magnetic fields.  His Indian collaborators, who
              have complimentary expertise, will carry out sample synthesis and well-defined
              transport measurements at the IISc, Bangalore.  The PIs will use UCLA
              facilities, the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in  Tallahassee, and
              the Grenoble High Magnetic Field Laboratories in France.  This collaboration
              takes advantage of a synergy between Clark and Menon first established during
              Menon's tenure at UCLA as a post doc.  This project will provide an
              international experience for a UCLA postdoc and graduate student, and will
              enhance collaboration between UCLA and the IISc.  This project is jointly
              supported by the Indian Department of Science & Technology (DST) under the
              NSF/DST program.     




