Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Microbial Production of a Biosurfactant
               Exhibiting Excellent Emulsification and Surface Active Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0225983

Award Number: 0225983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Zinder shz1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 5944,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0225983
Zinder

Description:  This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Stephen Zinder, Department of Microbiology at Cornell
              University, Ithaca, New York and a team of Egyptian scientists that includes
              Dr. Hany Hussein, Dr. Ahmed Gaballa, and Dr. Yasser Abd Elfattah, of Mubarak
              City for Scientific Research and Technology Applications in Alexandria, Egypt. 
              The main objective of this research is to isolate the most potent microbial
              cultures capable of producing bioemulsifier.   The investigators plan also to
              study methods for optimization of the production process through the study of
              the different environmental conditions and by assessing the influence of
              different carbon and nitrogen limitations on surfactant productivity. The
              investigators will isolate the most potent microbial cultures capable of
              producing biodegradable surfactants from the ecosystem.  Samples will be
              collected from different parts of Egypt and the microbes capable of producing
              biosurfactants will be isolated and characterized. They also plan to examine
              the use of these optimized production processes to produce the biosurfactant on
              a large scale. It is expected that a fermentation process will have a key role
              in improving the economics of the overall process in biosurfactant
              production.

Scope: Surfactants are surface-active compounds capable of
              reducing surface and interfacial tension at the interface between liquids,
              solids and gases, thereby allowing them to mix or disperse readily as emulsions
              in water or other liquids.  The topic of biosurfactants is highly relevant to
              Egypt where sustaining the environment is a high priority.  Discovering
              microbes that produce surfactants would have a very desirable impact on society
              and on the environment.  A number of experiments are proposed, calling for
              expertise over a wide area.  Drs. Zinder, Hussein, Gaballa and Abdel Fattah
              have the disciplinary experiences needed for this research. This project is
              being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities.

