Title       : Protecting the Electrical Power Supply at the Whitney Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0225268

Award Number: 0225268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96839              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. V. Anderson paa@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

	A grant has been awarded to the Whitney Laboratory, University of
              Florida, under the direction of Dr. Anderson, to protect the electrical power
              supply of the Whitney Laboratory. Because of its location in on the north east
              coast of Florida, a region traversed by tropical weather systems, the
              Laboratory is extremely vulnerable to disruptions of its power supply. Long
              term interruptions of the power supply can result in the loss of valuable and
              sometimes irreplaceable stocks of cells, antibodies and other supplies, and
              would put animals in the Laboratory's aquarium at risk because of a lack of
              flowing sea water and aeration. Furthermore, when power to the air conditioning
              system is lost, the Laboratory's sensitive cell and molecular biological
              equipment is be extremely vulnerable to damage from the high humidity and salt
              air that accumulates in the Laboratory. The Laboratory is also very vulnerable
              to short term outages and power surges caused by the many lightening strikes
              that typify weather pattern in the region. These can and have damaged equipment
              and cause unnecessary interruption to on-going research. While small items of
              equipment (i.e. computers) can be protected by commercial surge suppressors,
              large items such as ultracold freezers cannot be protected in this manner and
              are frequently damaged by power surges, putting frozen stocks and supplies at
              risk of thawing and subsequent loss. 
	The Laboratory currently uses a 25 year
              old generator to provide emergency power. However, this unit, which was
              installed when the Laboratory was established and minimally equipped, supplies
              less than 50% of its rated power. Consequently, it is insufficient for the
              current needs of the Laboratory, to the point at which much of the critical
              equipment, including freezers, cannot be served by this unit. Furthermore,
              during prolonged operation it overheats and must be turned off to cool down
              every few hours. To correct this deficiency, the Laboratory will use the funds
              provided by this grant to purchase and install a replacement generator that
              will meet the current and projected needs of the Laboratory. To protect against
              power surges from lightening strikes, central surge suppressors will be
              installed in the Laboratory's electrical system.
	The Whitney Laboratory is
              recognized as one of the leading marine biomedical institutions in the country
              that has and continues to make significant contributions to our understanding
              of basic biological mechanisms, many of which directly affect mankind. To
              support this research, the Laboratory possess a diverse array of very sensitive
              instrumentation such as a DNA sequencer, numerous microscopes, including a
              laser scanning confocal microscope, a capillary electrophoresis systems,
              ultracentrifuges and electrophysiological equipment.  In addition to its
              research mission, the Laboratory has developed a variety of training programs
              for college students, including a very active REU program, and a very active
              and well received program of outreach education to all age groups in the
              surrounding community. The funds provided by this grant will ensure that these
              activities are not jeopardized by short and long term power interruptions that
              are a common feature of the coastal environment that is so critical to the
              Laboratory's mission and success.

