Title       : NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - "The Web of
               Modularity"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0225759

Award Number: 0225759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Ahlgren ahlgren@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce C. Berndt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will fund an  NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference entitled ``The
              Web of Modularity''
to be held at the University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign in the summer of 2003.  The conference lecturer will be
              Professor Ken Ono of the University of Wisconsin at Madison; Professor Ono will
              give 
ten lectures centered around the diverse roles which the theory  of
              modular forms plays in various areas of mathematics related to Number Theory. 
              The conference will focus on a wide array of problems which can be addressed
              through the use of modular forms.  These include, among others, problems from 
              representation theory, partition theory, arithmetic geometry, the theory of
              L-functions, hypergeometric series,  and  combinatorics.  Although these
              comprise a very broad  array of topics in active areas of mathematical
              research, they share the feature that they can be understood using a unified
              set of techniques from the theory of modular forms.

The  main  goals of the
              conference are:

1) To present an organized and motivated description of the
              important and diverse role which  modular forms play in Number Theory and other
              areas of mathematics.

2) To provide young mathematicians  and newcomers to
              the field (particularly graduate students and post-docs)with an accessible
              account of important techniques, theorems, and open problems at the forefront
              of this area of research.   

3) To provide established researchers an
              opportunity to share their expertise and to interact with each other and with
              junior mathematicians.

4) To strengthen regional ties among researchers
              working in areas connected to the themes of the meeting.

5) To plan a
              scientific program which will lead to a published monograph of lasting
              importance to the wider mathematical community.

