Title       : SGER: Performance Enhanced Organic FETs by Built in Strain in Organic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0225025

Award Number: 0225025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75809              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall I. Nathan nathan@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P.Paul Ruden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project explores a unique materials science approach to understand and
              improve transport processes in organic semiconductor materials suitable for the
              fabrication of electronic or opto-electronic devices. The specific objective of
              the project is to explore and demonstrate an approach to substantially increase
              carrier mobility under ambient conditions in organic semiconductors by
              designing, fabricating, and analyzing structures with built-in strain. The
              proposed research is motivated by recent experimental results with pentacene.
              Despite recent progress in organic semiconductor materials research, electronic
              devices fabricated with pentacene have a primary impediment-a relatively low
              charge carrier mobility which appears to be limited by intermolecular charge
              carrier transfer. With decreasing intermolecular distances, as happens under
              compressive stress, and demonstrated utilizing high pressure, charge carrier
              mobility in organic materials increases. The research proposed here addresses
              this critical limitation of low mobility by exploring built-in strain
              enhancement under ambient pressure conditions. The approach is to deposit
              pentacene on bent, thinned-down Si/SiO2 substrate wafers. When the substrate is
              allowed to relax, compressive strain is built into the active pentacene layer.
              Field effect transistors will then be fabricated on this material and tested
              for enhanced mobility. The proposed research will explore the feasibility of
              such an approach through a coordinated effort involving experiment and
              modeling. 
%%%  
The project addresses fundamental research issues in a
              topical area of electronic/photonic materi-als science having technological
              relevance. An important feature of the project is high risk/high payoff
              potential with strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research
              and educa-tion.
***     

