Title       : Theoretical Studies in Aeronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0225256

Award Number: 0225256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Guberman slg@sci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for Sci Rsch Inc
	      22 Bonad Road
	      Winchester, MA  01890    781/368-9080

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The continuation of NSF supported research on the DR of N2+ is proposed. Values
              for the DR rate coefficients of the lowest three vibrational levels of N2+ ,
              calculated under prior support using theoretical quantum chemical methods, will
              be improved by including core excited Rydberg states in the calculation of the
              rate coefficients. For the excited vibrational levels, these will be the first
              results for the total DR rate coefficients. Additional electronic widths will
              be calculated in order to compute the rate coefficients for DR of the fourth
              and fifth vibrational levels. The atomic products of DR can be in excited
              electronic states. The calculation of the yields of ground and excited state
              atoms using wave packet methods will be carried out. The yields will be
              calculated as a function of ion vibrational level and electron and rotational
              temperatures. Because of a lack of data, vibrational excitation and
              deexcitation reactions have been ignored in ionospheric models. However,
              theoretical work indicates that the rate coefficients for vibrational change
              may be competitive with those for DR. If so, these reactions will be of the
              greatest importance to aeronomic models. The first theoretical studies of
              electron impact state to state vibrational change in N2+ will be done. These
              reactions can proceed by using the same intermediate states as those involved
              in DR reactions. State to state rate coefficients will be calculated for
              vibrational change within the ion ground state and for excitation from the ion
              ground state to two low lying excited electronic states. There are no
              experimental measurements of these state to state rate coefficients.

All the
              results developed under this project will be made available on the internet and
              published in scientific journals.
