Title       : Integrated Sensing: Integrated Smart Wireless SAW Sensors and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0225427

Award Number: 0225427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Massood Z. Atashbar massood.atashbar@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley Bazuin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sensors and sensor systems are used in a wide range of industrial and consumer
              applications, providing real-time information that allows decisions to be made
              when and where required. Sensors allow industrial processes and applications to
              be more cost effective, reliable, and safe. In many applications, sensors and
              data collection processing must be distributed and placed in inhospitable or
              inaccessible environments. This complicates sensor and system design by
              requiring devices with small size, rugged construction, an efficient power
              supply for active components, communications for derived information, and
              simple installation with a minimum amount of infrastructure and overhead.
              

Integrated Smart Wireless surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensors and systems
              composed of distributed wireless SAW sensors, sensor communication
              transceivers, and a centralized host. New generations of SAW microsensors
              promises to provide measurements of a wide range of physical and chemical
              parameters, including: temperature, pressure, chemical concentration, gas
              concentrations, etc. Compatible with integrated circuit-processing techniques,
              SAW devices can and will be combined with active circuitry into integrated
              smart SAW sensors.

For Western Michigan University, this project will
              provide a basis for the development of laboratory facilities for SAW design and
              fabrication and the expansion of our wireless communications capabilities. It
              will provide student research opportunities and demonstrate technology and
              results that are widely applicable to a broad range of electrical and computer
              engineering classes. This project will provide a range of distributed wireless
              sensors while significantly advancing WMU's goal of being a "student centered
              research institution". 

