Title       : PGE/DEM - Seeing Gender: Tools for Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0225184

Award Number: 0225184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $872231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline D. Spears jdspears@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane McGrath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda P. Thurston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Kansas State University is developing an interactive CD-ROM/DVD set for use with
              pre-service and in-service high school teachers, teacher education faculty and
              college faculty in SMET fields. The set will: (1) introduce the user to the
              research base on gender and gender socialization, (2) sensitize these educators
              to the inadvertent gender bias that operates in SMET classrooms and programs,
              (3) provide classroom strategies and interventions designed to reduce bias, and
              (4) present school-wide or department-wide efforts to increase the presence of
              women in SMET classes and programs.

Components of the CD-ROM/DVD include:
              (1) classroom segments or dramatizations of bias, research, or interventions;
              (2) interviews with female high school and college students about their
              experiences in SMET classrooms; (3) interviews with high school teachers and
              college faculty members about the process by which they became sensitized to
              gender issues and began working towards change; (4) interviews with researchers
              familiar with the research on gender bias conducted in both psychology and
              education; (5) abstracts of relevant journal articles; and (6) essays that
              invite further reflection.

The CD-ROM/DVD will be field-tested with the
              target population and disseminated through existing professional organizations.
              In addition, guidelines will be prepared for introduction of the CD-ROM/DVD in
              classroom settings for pre-service teachers as well as in professional
              development seminars for in-service teachers and college faculty.

The
              project is innovative in its use of an interactive CD-ROM/DVD to provide
              instruction, in its integration of presentations of gender bias in education
              with a solid research base, and in its use of student and teacher/college
              faculty members' voices to explore their own experiences in SMET classrooms and
              the processes by which change is implemented. Because it can be used both
              individually and as part of a classroom or seminar, the CD-ROM/DVD has the
              capacity to reach thousands of pre-service and in-service teachers, teacher
              educators, and college faculty who work in SMET disciplines. This potential for
              reaching a broad audience makes this project a cost-effective and efficient
              method of strengthening the social infrastructure in SMET education in ways
              that ultimately increase the number of women working in SMET fields.

