Title       : PGE/RES/PLN: How does Technology Affect Gender Equity in Science Education? A
               Retrospective and Prospective Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0225215

Award Number: 0225215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Kashy kashyd@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerd Kortemeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For the past decade, a variety of courses at Michigan State University (MSU)
              have used the Computer-Assisted Personalized Approach (CAPA) system, a network
              tool designed to facilitate and improve the way assignments, quizzes, and
              examinations are delivered and graded in large enrollment courses (E.Kashy et
              al., 1993). An instructor uses the system to generate unique assignments for
              each student in a class. The system then provides immediate feedback to
              students (and instructors) on conceptual understanding and correctness of
              solutions and allows students to rework incorrect solutions. Recent analyses of
              data from introductory physics courses suggest that women are particularly
              likely to benefit from the broader use of such systems (D. Kashy, Albertelli,
              E. Kashy, & Thoennessen; 2001).

MSU will conduct a planning study with two
              objectives:
1. Examine the vast database from courses in many areas of the
              sciences that have used the CAPA system in the past to see whether and to what
              degree the gender differences found in physics are found in other science
              fields.
2. Plan a comprehensive study that will attempt to identify the
              critical elements that promote gender equity in science, mathematics, and
              engineering education when using this technology.

The courses in the study
              make use of the LON-CAPA system (Learning Online Network with CAPA), an
              integrated tool that uses network technology for learning and assessment. In
              addition to providing improved versions of the tools in CAPA, it includes a
              content authoring and management system that allows new and existing materials
              to be broadly
and easily exchanged among instructors and institutions, an
              extensive data collection and retrieval system, and a content delivery system
              that will provide gateways to and from NSF's National STEM Digital
              Library.

The study will investigate whether the use of this widely available
              and free technology is also a tool for enhancing the success rate of women in
              science courses.

