Title       : U.S.-Hungary Materials Research: Liquid Crystalline Mesophases of Bent Core
               Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0225963

Award Number: 0225963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Palffy-Muhoray mpalffy@cpip.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antal I. Jakli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Gleeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5916,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This US-Hungarian research project headed by Peter Palffy-Muhoray of Kent State
              University and Agnes Burka of the Hungarian Institute for Solid State Physics
              and Optics Budapest examines a new class of liquid crystals consisting of
              bent-shaped molecules.   These ester type bent core liquid crystals range from
              low molecular weight materials to elastomers. The collaborative research plan
              involves synthesis, characterization, and modeling of such bent-core, or
              banana-shaped, molecules. Junior researchers from Kent State University are
              part of the distinguished US-Hungarian team.

To determine the mesophases and
              physical properties of bent-core liquid crystals, the research partners will
              employ three experimental techniques:  1)Mechanical studies of thin films
              including linear electro-mechanical and rheological measurements of banana
              liquid crystal systems, where the overall chirality is set by surface
              interactions. 2)Electrical measurements which include determination of the
              polarization and dielectric spectroscopy.  3)Optical observations consisting of
              polarizing and confocal microscopy as well as electro-optic measurements and
              laser spectroscopy.  The goal is to resolve a number of fundamental questions
              concerning the correlation between material parameters and pattern forming
              instabilities.  For example, the researchers hope to explain observed achiral
              symmetry-breaking mechanisms and to understand how the structures form helical
              filaments in an isotropic melt.  If successful, their results may help identify
              novel synthetic materials with optical and pyroelectric properties that have
              practical applications in information technology and biotechnology. 

This
              research project in experimental condensed matter physics fulfills the program
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
              States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. 
