Title       : Ad Hoc Networks of Embedded Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0225265

Award Number: 0225265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Lemmon Michael.D.Lemmon.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaobo S. Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Haenggi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Panos J. Antsaklis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project evaluates the extent to which ad hoc networks of embedded systems
              (NESTs) may be used to implement feedback control systems.  Ad hoc NESTs are
              inexpensive and easy to deploy, but their ad hoc nature makes it impossible to
              realize feedback controllers in hard real-time.  NEST feedback control systems,
              therefore, are soft real-time systems in which feedback measurements are
              delayed or dropped.  Maintaining specified levels of overall closed loop
              performance in such a soft real-time environment is extremely challenging. 
              This project will develop methods for assuring overall closed loop performance
              in NEST systems.  This goal will be achieved by adopting a cross-disciplinary
              approach that integrates
research efforts in control, real-time systems,
              computer systems, and communications.  In particular, the project tackles this
              problem by 1) the dynamic re-routing of connections using a polynomial
              extension of minimum hop routing schemes, 2) the development of novel soft
              scheduling methods whose behavior can be directly related to closed loop
              controller performance, and 3) the dynamic re-allocation of link capacities
              through the use of combined channel coding and ARQ methods.

The project's
              broader impacts will be expressed through an undergraduate level course that
              integrates control theory concepts with embedded system principles.  Futher
              project impacts will be realized by coordinating this work with an existing
              DARPA contract that is developing middleware technologies for NEST-type
              systems.

