Title       : Integrated Sensing: Generic Autonomous Platform for Sensor Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0225528

Award Number: 0225528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franco Maloberti franco.maloberti@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jin Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murat Torlak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea Fumagalli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0225528
Maloberti

The generic autonomous platform for sensor systems, GAP4S,
              project aims at the development of a basic platform for sensor systems with
              on-board micro-battery remotely rechargeable via a MicroWave (MW) signal,
              full-duplex wireless Radio Frequency (RF) and MW communications, power-aware
              and reliable protocols. The sensing modules will ensure mobility without
              demanding huge communication and processing bandwidth. Moreover, the wireless
              interconnection shall be responsible for getting and supplying data and power
              in a reliable, secure, programmable manner. Power will be wireless received
              (microwaves) by the module, transformed, stored in an integrated battery. Power
              consumption of all the electronics will be reduced significantly with respect
              to present levels and the functionality will be managed on the basis of the
              amount of energy available and received. The sensor nodes will be in the
              footprint (with medium radii, e.g., 100 m) of a (mini) base-station that will
              be the entry point of a wider communication network.

The project will
              experimentally demonstrate the co-integration of multi-sensors (optical and
              humidity) with a general-purpose analog interface, a digitally programmable
              data converter, and a smart power management section. Moreover, the project
              will integrate a SiGe RF uplink module with optimum control of the transmission
              power and with data recovery from the MW powering flow. Also, the project will
              identify and implement power-aware and reliable protocols that span across the
              wireless sensor network and the existing network infrastructure, namely the
              Internet. The feasibility of on-board multi-GHz antenna will be
              verified.




