Title       : SGER: A New Method for Landmine Detection and Minefield Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0225424

Award Number: 0225424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64324              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Brown randem@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0225424
Brown

This proposal is being submitted under the Small Grants for
              Exploratory Research (SGER)
program and it focuses on answering critical
              feasibility questions pertaining to a new
technique for the detection and
              location of buried landmines and unexploded ordnance. The
subject technique
              comprises a standoff, ground based, pulsed radar that launches
electromagnetic
              energy into the Norton surface wave mode of propagation. The Norton
surface
              wave travels along the air-ground surface at the speed of light in a vacuum
              and
exponentially decays into the ground due to the losses in the ground. By
              selecting the
frequency properly, sufficient energy will be scattered by the
              landmine back along the
same propagation path and then received by the radar.
              This energy is usually insufficient
to be above the system noise level so
              return pulse averaging is carried out using coherent
techniques. If N return
              pulses are averaged coherently the signal-to-noise power ratio
will increase
              by a factor of N rendering the signal scattered from the landmine
detectable.
              Location of the mine is achieved by using the pulse width to
              accomplish
resolution in the range coordinate and the radar antenna to achieve
              resolution in the
azimuth angle. In order to achieve area coverage and the
              best possible angular resolution
close to the antenna, it is proposed to
              simultaneously employ both beam steering and near
field focusing techniques.
              The critical study, to establish feasibility, is the
determination of the
              highest operating frequency for which the Norton surface wave can
propagate on
              the surface and penetrate sufficiently deep to detect antipersonnel
              and
antitank mines. It is also proposed to develop the appropriate radar range
              equation for
the Norton surface wave, investigate techniques for maximizing
              the coupling of the radar
antenna to the Norton surface wave, determine the
              variation of soil conductivity and the
radar cross section values for typical
              nonferrous landmines, and investigate the maximum
range and angle resolution
              or the acceptable frequencies of operation. Having answered
these questions,
              it should be possible to establish the viability of such a radar subject
only
              to the need to compute the effects of surface roughness and buried debris on
              the mine
scattered signal strength, i.e., the low signal-to-clutter ratio
              problem.

