Title       : Integrated Sensing: Non-Invasive Ultrasound-Based Micro-Flow Imaging System for
               Biomedical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0225405

Award Number: 0225405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin Shandas robin.shandas@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The non-invasive imaging and quantitation of micro-scale flow within the body is
              still a challenge for current clinical imaging systems.  The development of an
              ultrasound-based imaging system for detection and quantitation of micro-scale
              flows is proposed here.  
Two sets of commercially available phased-array
              broadband transducers will be used.  These will be coupled to custom
              electronics and analysis systems to image gas-filled micro-bubbles (diameters:
              3 - 8 microns) within the flow field.  The first part of this problem is
              precise particle detection and tracking.  The second part is the development of
              an imaging system that reveals local flow characteristics.  The non linear
              components of backscatter from the highly reflective micro-bubbles will be
              analyzed in the RF domain to detect particles.  Once the particle is detected,
              a particle tracking algorithm will be employed to track the particles over a
              specified distance.  This will allow calculation of local particle velocity. 
              The project aims are:
1)	Characterize the design specifications for an
              ultrasound-based micro-flow imaging system.
2)	Build a prototype version of
              this system using a combination of existing broadband ultrasound transducers,
              coupled with custom electronics and algorithm development.
3)	Validate the
              performance of this prototype system using a mock circulatory flow loop with
              velocity and flow quantified using independent reference techniques.
At the
              end of this project, significant work toward the development of an
              ultrasound-based micro-flow imaging system will be complete.  The work can then
              move toward implementation of the system in hardware for testing under in vivo
              conditions.

