Title       : Integrated Sensing Volumetric Compression for Local and Distributed Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0225332

Award Number: 0225332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Marcellin marcellin@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Neifeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The existence of volumetric imagery is a natural consequence of distributed
              imaging and is a significant potential benefit of the sensor-network paradigm.
              Volumetric image data is important for many commercial, scientific, and
              military applications. Security-related imaging applications in both the
              military and commercial sectors are now receiving heightened attention, and
              volumetric imagery is expected to play an ever-increasing role within these
              important application domains. 

This proposal is concerned with novel
              methods for compressing volumetric imagery. We will focus primarily on
              volumetric data that has been generated by range sensors (e.g., ladar) and
              arrays of range sensors; however, many of the approaches will be extensible to
              more traditional imaging sensors and sensor arrays. The goal of the proposed
              work will be the efficient compression of volumetric image data: an issue that
              is expected to be especially critical for wireless and/or mobile sensor
              applications, in which power constraints become severe. 

The project will
              assume a distributed sensing environment and will focus on balancing
              inter-sensor against downlink communication costs. When inter-sensor
              communication is not allowed each sensor must rely on its own measurements
              along with prior knowledge of the sensor constellation to predict which aspects
              of its measurements are unique and thus warrant transmission. We will pursue
              techniques for both prediction and compression of this unique sensor data. When
              limited inter-sensor communication is allowed, it is important to identify
              maximally informative data to exchange so as to optimize both inter-sensor and
              downlink efficiency. 

