Title       : Integrated Sensing: ScalableSensorSim - A Simulation Environment for Large-Scale
               Sensor Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0225417

Award Number: 0225417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249876             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Riley riley@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Blough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, we will extend and advance the state--of--the--art
in the
              field of sensor network research in two important ways.
First, we will design,
              implement, and distribute a simulation environment
designed specifically for
              sensor networks of hundreds of thousands of
network elements.  The basic
              simulator will be designed from the beginning
with scalability in mind, and
              will use distributed simulation methods
to increase the available memory and
              CPU power that and be utilized
to conduct the simulation
              experiments.

Secondly, we will design and demonstrate a set of protocols
              designed
specifically for data dissemination in a very large--scale
              sensor
network environment.  These protocols will be power and bandwidth
              aware,
allowing a maximization of data throughput while at the same
              time
extending the overall life of the network by limiting energy costs
at
              individual network elements.  The protocols will be designed to
support a
              hierarchical view of the network, and will support primitives
for data
              aggregation methods and selective attention of
              high--priority
measurements.

Our simulation environment will be freely
              available to all
researchers working on large--scale wireless networks, and
              will foster
increased attention to network performance as the network scales
              to
tens or hundreds of thousands of elements.
Our power and bandwidth aware
              protocols
will encourage deployment of inexpensive environmental sensing
              devices
that interact in a cooperative manner to insure sensor data is
              reliably
delivered to the end--user on a timely basis.

