Title       : PGE/PLN -- Coupling Assessment with Organizational Change Strategies: A Fresh
               Approach to Promoting Gender & Racial Diversity in Undergrad. Physical & Comp.
               Science & Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0225369

Award Number: 0225369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31793              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda G. Basch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natnl Cncl for Res on Wom
	      530 Broadway at Spring Street
	      New York, NY  100123930    212/274-0821

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Council for Research on Women (NCRW) proposes a 12-month planning
              project to design a multi-site three-year project aimed at improving the
              recruitment and retention of undergraduate women students in selected physical
              and computer science departments, and engineering disciplines. The larger
              project will focus on women students of color, who are severely
              under-represented in these fields. The fields that will be encompassed in this
              project are all areas in which there are increasing opportunities, given the
              ways technology is transforming whole sectors of the world economy and
              increasing demands for scientific and technological expertise to extend
              knowledge and capacity.

NCRW will draw on its 95 member centers, and
              specific SMET departments representative of a wide range of racial and ethnic
              diversity, where a base of institutional support for such an approach is
              present. Its aim will be to develop fresh approaches to assessing environments
              and implementing strategies for change in specific SMET institutions and/or
              departments through partnerships with women's research centers, and its
              methodology will focus on the development of assessment protocols and change
              strategies by the project's partners on each campus.

The innovative emphases
              are: intersections of race, gender; assessment tools and institutional change
              across a wide range of undergraduatel environments; and partnerships for change
              across campuses. 

This project will build on the findings and
              recommendations of the recent NCRW report Balancing the Equation: Where are
              Women and Girls in Science, Engineering and Technology?, roundtables and
              convenings sponsored by NCRW, and on the work of its centers engaged in work on
              issues related to women and girls in the sciences.

