Title       : Imaging Mechanisms of Action in Motor Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0225711

Award Number: 0225711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $739313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jinhu Xiong xiong@uthscsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter T. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack L. Lancaster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shalini Narayana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC San Antonio
	      7703 Floyd Curl Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782293900    210/567-2333

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Xiong will develop imaging and
              modeling strategies to study mechanisms underlying adaptive changes of the
              human brain. The focus of this proposal is to explore the mechanisms underlying
              motor learning. Learning-induced neural plasticity and functional
              reorganization are well-established and well-documented, but not
              well-understood. Current neuroimaging studies investigate neural mechanisms
              underlying learning by exploring the changes in regional neural activity and
              inter-regional activity of task-performance.  Little effort has been given to
              studying the more fundamental changes of neural connections and synaptic
              weighting. On the technical front, human functional imaging research sorely
              needs more rigorous approaches, as can be provided by mathematical modeling.  A
              modeling framework - Structural Equation Modeling - is now accepted as
              appropriate for human imaging data.  Structural equation modeling however, is
              currently performed with anatomical constraints based on neuroanatomical
              studies in non-human species.  The performance of structural equation modeling
              might be greatly enhanced if anatomical constraints are individually optimized
              using the same subject's task-independent anatomical connectivity data.  To
              date, this strategy has not been reported by any laboratory. The present
              proposal seeks to develop system-level modeling strategies for neuroimaging and
              to apply these novel strategies to mechanisms of action of motor learning. The
              overall goal of this proposal will be accomplished through the following four
              goals. First, developing and optimizing imaging strategies for detecting
              anatomical connectivity for each individual subject.  Second, developing a
              structural equation modeling strategy by incorporating individual anatomical
              constraints to enhance those models' performance.  Third, investigating changes
              in regional neural activity and inter-regional activity of task-performance
              induced by motor learning using the enhanced modeling strategy.  Fourth,
              investigating synaptic plasticity by applying the enhanced modeling and
              demonstrating that synaptic plasticity is an underlying mechanism of action of
              motor learning.  When completed, this research project will increase the
              understanding of mechanisms of adaptive learning and has the potential of
              defining a new strategy by which functional imaging can be applied to study
              mechanisms of action and disease pathophysiology.
