Title       : Integrated Sensing: Communication Protocols and Testbed Development for Ad-Hoc
               Sensor Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0225497

Award Number: 0225497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raghupathy Sivakumar siva@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian F. Akyildiz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              022597
Sivakumar

The convergence of micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS)
              technology, 
wireless communications and digital electronics have enabled the
              development 
of low cost, low power, multi-functional sensor nodes that are
              small in size 
and communicate un-tethered in short distances. They can
              perform tasks, which 
traditional stand along sensors are hard to match.
              Although sensor networks 
have some similarities with another class of
              wireless networks called ad-hoc 
networks, they have several distinguishing
              characteristics that necessitate 
dedicated communication protocols.

The
              PIs overall objective in the proposed project is to develop a system
              
architecture, which includes new protocol entities and interfaces. Their
              focus 
will be on the integration of the proposed algorithms into an efficient
              
overall system. While they propose to develop new algorithms and protocols
              for 
the transport and network layers, specifically, their deliverables will
              
include: (a) a new transport protocol called SNTP (Sensor-Nets Transport
              
Protocol) that is designed specifically for a sensor network environment,
              
and (b) a power aware and scalable routing protocol that allow an end-user
              
to control the sensors and reconfigure the interconnection of the sensor
              
network. 

The PIs will evaluate their proposed protocols in a ns2 network
              simulator based 
simulation environment, and make available for public use any
              protocol 
simulation software. Since the ns2 simulator currently does not
              extensively 
support the simulation of sensor network environments, they will
              also develop 
such support and make it available for public use. 


