Title       : ITR: Foundations of Hybrid and Embedded Software Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0225610

Award Number: 0225610
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Shankar Sastry sastry@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This ITR project is aimed at developing the foundations of a modern systems
              science that is simultaneously computational and physical; it remarries time,
              concurrency, robustness, continuums, and resource management to computation.
              This project, because of its focus on foundations, will provide a fundamentally
              new paradigm, based on hybrid systems, for modeling and analysis of many
              complex phenomena that occur in the physical and biological sciences on both
              microscopic and macroscopic levels. These outcomes of the project are
              prerequisites for the deployment of embedded, autonomous computing in many
              safety-critical applications, from medical devices to transportation to
              national security needs in avionics.  The attention to a new education model
              will create a new generation of engineers who will be able to master the design
              of complex, heterogeneous systems that will be the backbone of the future IT
              industry.

The proposed ITR has four focus areas of research. (a) Hybrid
              systems theory. The focus here is on scaling up pioneering approaches that
              integrate physical modeling with computational systems. (b) Model-based design.
              The main effort here is to develop a set of models with solid mathematical
              foundations that allow for the systematic integration of diverse efforts in
              system specification, design, synthesis, analysis and validation, execution,
              and design evolution (c) Advanced tool architectures. The deliverables from
              this project will be a set of reusable, inter-operating software modules,
              freely distributed as open-source software. (d) Experimental research. The
              program will leverage existing system-building efforts involving avionics,
              anti-terrorism technologies, vehicle electronics, and autonomous robots. In
              addition we will apply our methods to networks of embedded systems for
              applications such as environment monitoring, building protection, and emergency
              response. 

The impact of this change on teaching and research is profound,
              and will not  be confined to the graduate level. Based on the ongoing,
              groundbreaking effort at UCB, we propose to deliberately re-architect and
              retool undergraduate teaching at the participating institutions, and to engage
              in course development at a set of California community colleges with which UCB
              has established relationships and which have a high enrollment of Hispanic and
              African American students. Faculty and graduate student researchers from
              minority and other institutions will be recruited each summer to participate in
              a program called SIPHER (Summer Internship Program in Hybrid and Embedded
              Software Research).

