Title       : Integrated Sensing: An Integrated Biosensor System for Cellular Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0225436

Award Number: 0225436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin H. White mhw0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In biological research, the study of cellular functions in vitro is basic to
              other fields, such as clinical diagnostics, therapy, pharmacological drug
              screening, and environmental monitoring.  In our proposal, biotechnology,
              silicon micromachining, microelectronics sensor and signal processing
              technology are used to realize a multi-purpose biological sensor with
              integrated lownoise signal processing. We research program to for culture,
              characterization and manipulation of biological cells in silicon chips. In
              particular, the proposed integrated biosensor system structure can be used as a
              planar patch-clamp setup for the experimental testing and evaluation of the
              effect of drugs on prepared ion channels. The proposed device can also act as a
              miniaturized platform for cell culture and characterization of a cell
              population together with counting and sizing within the culture chamber. The
              basic biosensor is a 2D planar 'patch-clamp', which can be employed for sensing
              the ion-transport through ion channels, the count and size of biological
              particles, and culturing or sorting cells. We believe the proposed biosensor
              will enable eventually electronic DNA sequencing through the measurement of
              ionic current changes as a sequence single-stranded DNA bases pass through a
              nanoscale pore, which is fabricated and sized to electrically control the
              single-stranded DNA. A major objective of our proposal is to develop a
              bio-electronic interface that integrates biological ion channels into a
              'nanowell' with associated integrated electronics. The biosensor combines
              control electronics into a low noise, correlated-double-sampling (CDS)sensitive
              signal readout with a switched capacitor 'headstage' preamplifier. On-chip
              electronics will reduce the recording impedance levels, minimize the output
              leads, prevent crosstalk, and amplify the low-level ion-channel signals. In
              addition, the biosensor system will enable rapid, computer-aided, automated
              testing and characterization of ion-channels and their interaction with drugs.
              The biosensor will also enable experimental verification of ion channel models
              as well as provide data, which can be analyzed with various algorithms to
              extract information regarding time and frequency response of the ion channels
              and their relationship to pharmacological drug investigations. This effort will
              also explore the use of 'on-chip' adaptive signal processing to electrically
              model biological cells in real-time with voltage-clamp stimuli applied to the
              cells.
