Title       : ITR Collaborative Research: GEON: A Research Project to Create
               Cyberinfrastructure for the Geosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0225546

Award Number: 0225546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410387             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mian Liu lium@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1652,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0225546
Liu

The GEOscience Network (GEON) project seeks to bring
              leading-edge information management research to bear on creating a
              cyberinfrastructure for the solid earth geosciences to interlink
              multidisciplinary geoscience data sets in 4D space.  The need to manage the
              growing amounts of diverse Earth science data has been recognized through a
              series of NSF-sponsored community meetings on Geoinformatics.  The GEON
              collaboration between IT researchers, who represent key technology areas
              relevant to GEON, and Earth science researchers, who represent a broad cross
              section of Earth science sub-disciplines, will provide the foundation for a
              national Geoinformatics program.

There is a pressing need in the Earth
              sciences for a national information infrastructure that enables the community
              to share databases and tools to enable interdisciplinary analysis of networked
              data sets in studying a wide range of phenomena including the interplay between
              tectonics and the evolution of sedimentary basins;  the role of mountain
              building in the evolution of climate and life;  broader predictive
              understanding and modeling capabilities of geologic hazards, such as
              earthquakes and volcanoes;  the 4D reconstruction of  the Earth through time; 
              and, managing the natural resources of our planet. Each of these problems
              requires interdisciplinary research to discover relationships among Earth
              science disciplines, and depends on the community's ability to construct an
              integrated geoscience information system.  The goal of GEON is to develop the
              necessary IT foundations and create such a system.

Many past and on-going
              projects in the geosciences have produced valuable sub-disciplinary and
              disciplinary databases.  Numerous national centers and organizations such as
              IRIS, UNAVCO, the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis
              (NCEAS), the Southern California Earthquake Center  (SCEC), as well as
              government agencies such as the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), are contributing
              research and data to the community.  Building on this base, the imperative now
              is to take a step beyond research resulting in disciplinary databases, towards
              a new paradigm for interdisciplinary information integration and tool sharing
              via the creation of the GEON cyberinfrastructure.  The research products and
              services arising from GEON will be available to the entire scientific community
              and will transform the way in which geoscience research is conducted, opening
              unprecedented avenues for research and collaboration and providing the
              foundation for creating geoscience collaboratories.
***

