Title       : PREMISE: Product Realization by Closed Loop Direct Metal Deposition:
               Environmental and Energy Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0225928

Award Number: 0225928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jyotirmoy Mazumder mazumder@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debasish Dutta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Skerlos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The overarching goal of this Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing
              Innovative Systems (PREMISE) research project is to develop supporting
              technology and knowledge to facilitate the diffusion of Closed Loop Direct
              Metal Deposition (DMD) technology as an energy, cost, and environmental
              improvement relative to traditional mold and die manufacturing processes. 
              While the technological viability of DMD is proven, and the technology is
              poised to have a major impact on the metals and plastics industries, DMD must
              be evaluated for its economic, energy, and environmental impact before the
              technology diffuses into the standard practice. As experience has shown, once a
              technology has diffused widely and a standard practice is established around
              it, it is difficult to improve its environmental characteristics, especially if
              environmental improvement requires a change to the supply chain infrastructure.
              Therefore it is important to launch DMD at the outset with all of its potential
              environmental impacts, costs, and energy consumption minimized, and to develop
              an end-of-life recycling and re-use infrastructure that is prepared to handle
              pants generated by DMD operations.  During Phase I of the proposed PREMISE
              research and education program following major tasks will be addressed to
              achieve the above-mentioned goals: 1) DMD and traditional mold manufacturing
              will be compared with respect to their energy consumption, environmental
              emissions, and costs to identify' improvement opportunities; 2) CAD/CAM-based
              design tools will be formulated for DMD that integrate design and manufacturing
              considerations (including eco-design and manufacturing); 3) An "environmental
              thread" will be established for the design and manufacturing curriculum of the
              Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Michigan.

In
              today's fast-paced, environmentally conscious society, the cycle of consumer
              taste for products is becoming shorter and shorter, necessitating manufacturers
              to go to market with shorter and shorter lead times while continuously reducing
              cost. However, the long-lead time currently required to design and fabricate
              molds and dies in the manufacturing industry does not always support this
              urgency to move products to market quickly. In fact, it is not unusual for
              large, complicated molds and dies to take up to a year before they are ready to
              manufacture a product. Solid Free Form technologies such as Closed Loop Direct
              Metal Deposition (DMD) offers a viable alternative. DMD produces
              three-dimensional components including molds and dies with nearly full density
              and controlled macro- and microstructure directly from CAD software using one
              or more materials.
