Title       : NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference, Free boundary problems in partial
               differential equations and applications, May 18-22, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0225758

Award Number: 0225758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guozhen Lu gzlu@math.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pao Liu Chow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Mathematics Department of Wayne State University is hosting a National
              Science Foundation--Conference Board of Mathematical Sciences (NSF-CBMS)
              Regional Research Conference during the period of May 18 to May 22, 2003. The
              conference topic is ``Free boundary problems in partial differential equations
              and applications.'' This five-day-long conference is intended to stimulate
              further interest in this important mathematical research area. The aim of this
              conference is to highlight the new methods, directions and most recent
              developments in variational and nonvariational free boundary theory.  It will
              focus on the existence and regularity of solutions of free boundary problems
              and applications to problems arising in science and technology.

Professor 
              David Jerison from MIT will present ten lectures in this focused area along
              with additional invited speakers including  Luis Caffarelli (UT, Austin), 
              Avner Friedman (Ohio State University),  Carlos Kenig (University of Chicago)
              and Fanghua Lin (Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences), each of whom will
              give one hour lecture.  These additional lectures are meant to complement the
              ten lectures given by the principal speaker and motivate more active
              discussions among the participants. The format of the conference will be
              intensive lectures by the featured speaker and four invited speakers along with
              semi-structured discussion sessions following the invited talks.  To meet the
              requirement of CBMS meetings, we will not schedule any contributed talks by the
              participants.  Anticipated participants shall include not only well established
              researchers, but also graduate students, postdoctoral and young researchers. 
              In particular, the conference will encourage the participation of women,
              persons with disabilities and people from
underrepresented groups.
