Title       : Patterns and Processes: Dynamics of the Erebus Bay Weddell Seal Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0225110

Award Number: 0225110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $633786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Garrott rgarrott@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay J. Rotella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Siniff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Erebus Bay Weddell seal population study in eastern McMurdo Sound,
              Antarctica  was initiated in 1968 and represents one of the longest intensive
              field investigations of a long-lived mammal in existence. Over the thirty-four
              year period of this study a total of 15,636 animals have been tagged with
              144,927 re-sighting records logged in the current database. As such, this study
              is  an extremely valuable resource for understanding population dynamics of not
              only Weddell seals,  but also other species of both terrestrial and marine
              mammals with similar life-history  characteristics. With the retirement of the
              original investigator, Dr. Donald Siniff, this proposal represents an effort to
              transition  the long-term studies to a new team of investigators. Dr. Robert
              Garrott and Dr. Jay Rotella  propose building upon the foundation with two
              lines of investigation that combine use of the long-term database with new
              field initiatives. The continuity of the demographic data will be maintained by
              annually marking all pups born, replace lost or broken  tags, and perform
              multiple mark-recapture censuses of the Erebus Bay seal colonies. The new data
              will be combined with the existing database and a progressively complex series
              of analyses will be performed using recently developed mark-recapture methods
              to decompose, evaluate, and  integrate the demographic characteristics of the
              Erebus Bay Weddell seal population. These analyses will allow the testing of
              specific hypotheses about population regulation as well as temporal and spatial
              patterns of variation in vital rates among colonies within the population that 
              have been posed by previous investigators, but have not been adequately
              evaluated due to data  and analytical limitations.  The primary new field
              initiative will involve an intensive study of mass dynamics of both  pups and
              adult females as a surrogate measure for assessing annual variation in marine
              resources  and their potential role in limiting and/or regulating the
              population. In conjunction with the collection of data on body mass dynamics
              the  investigators will use satellite imagery to develop an extended time
              series of sea ice extent in McMurdo Sound. Regional extent of sea ice affects
              both regional primary productivity and  availability of haul out areas for
              Weddell seals. Increased primary productivity may increase  marine resources
              which would be expected to have a positive affect on Weddell seal foraging
              efficiency, leading to increased body mass. These data combined with the large
              proportion of  known-aged seals in the current study population (>60%) will
              allow the investigators to develop a  powerful database to test specific
              hypotheses about ecological processes affecting Weddell seals. Knowledge of the
              mechanisms that limit and/or regulate Weddell seal populations and  the
              specific bio-physical linkages between climate, oceans, ice, and Antarctic food
              webs can  provide important contributions to understanding of pinniped
              population dynamics, as well as  contribute more generally to theoretical
              understanding of population, community, and ecosystem  patterns and processes.
              Such knowledge can be readily applied elsewhere to enhance the ability  of
              natural resource managers to effectively maintain assemblages of other
              large-mammal species  and the ecological processes that they facilitate.
              Continuation of this long-term study may also contribute to understanding the
              potential impacts of human activities such as global  climate warming and the
              commercial exploitation of Antarctic marine resources. And finally, the  study
              can contribute significantly to the development and testing of new research and
              analytical  methodologies that will almost certainly have many other
              applications.  
