Title       : Upgrade of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Chemical and Biochemical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0225622

Award Number: 0225622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaoyi Jiang sjiang@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington

"Upgrade of a Scanning Probe
              Microscope for Chemical and Biochemical Analysis"

The scanning probe
              microscopic (SPM) technique can be used not only for the characterization of
              surfaces at the sub-nanometer resolution, but also for the measurement of
              nano-scale forces. SPM has been one of main techniques used in the PI's group
              for various ongoing nanotechnology projects, including (a) characterizing
              self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) formed by alkanethiols on Au(111), dendrimer
              monolayers on Au(111), and alkyl monolayers on Si(111) at the molecular
              resolution, (b) studying protein adsorption and detecting antigen-antibody
              interactions, and (c) measuring quantitative frictional properties of various
              thin films. Tapping mode SPM is very important for these ongoing projects,
              particularly for the study of interfacial phenomena and properties of
              biological systems on surfaces in liquids. The current SPM system in the PI's
              group was acquired from Digital Instruments (DI) about five years ago. It has
              been heavily used in various research and teaching activities. However, it does
              not have many important features, such as tapping mode operation. The PI
              proposes to upgrade the existing SPM from NanoScope E to NanoScope IIIa Control
              Station with Extender Electronics Module. This upgrade will allow the PI's
              group to perform tapping mode SPM in liquids. Upgrade of the SPM will greatly
              enhance the PI's research capacities, broaden his research areas, and
              facilitate collaborations with people on and off campus. The broader impact of
              this grant will be that many graduate students and undergraduate students will
              benefit from the instrument through their research experience or laboratory
              sessions in a course.  If the research is successful, society will benefit
              through better biocompatible materials.

