Title       : Antarctic Climate Evolution: Paleoclimate and Ice Sheet Modeling Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0225801

Award Number: 0225801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33961              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. DeConto deconto@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science
              Foundation, provides support for a workshop entitled "Antarctic Climate
              Evolution: Paleoclimate and Ice Sheet Modeling." ACE (Antarctic Climate
              Evolution) is a new research initiative that has recently grown out of the
              ANTOSTRAT (ANTarctic Offshore STRATigraphy) project. The goal of ACE is to
              advance the study of Antarctic climate and glacial history, through
              paleoclimate and ice sheet modeling studies, purposefully integrated with
              geological investigations of the direct and proxy record of ancient Antarctic
              climates and ice sheets. While ACE is not yet an official SCAR (Scientific
              Committee for Antarctic Research) program, a proposal will be presented to SCAR
              XXVII in July 2002, with the hope of establishing ACE as a fully sanctioned,
              international research initiative, operating under the SCAR umbrella. The
              ANTOSTRAT and newly appointed ACE steering committees have identified the need
              for members of the international climate and ice sheet modeling community, with
              interests in Antarctic climate and glacial history, to be identified and united
              with geologists working on the reconstruction of ancient Antarctic climates and
              ice sheets. In order to promote interaction between these groups, an ACE
              Paleoclimate and Ice Sheet Modeling Workshop will be held in Northampton
              Massachusetts, May 30-June 2, 2002. The emphasis of the workshop will be placed
              on evaluating the "state of the art" in modeling the climates and ice sheets of
              the Antarctic paleoenvironment and developing strategies for incorporating
              geologic data into paleoclimate, ocean, and ice sheet modeling studies. The
              workshop will consider a wide range of timescales, with an emphasis on
              Paleogene glacial inception and longer-term (>10 4 year) climate change and ice
              sheet behavior. The workshop will better define modeler's needs, from a
              geologic data perspective. In turn, the modeling community will have a better
              understanding of the types and quality of data available for model boundary
              conditions, model development, and model validation. Workshop topics cover two
              general categories: 1) climate and ice sheet models: assessment and
              applications, and 2) the geologic record: boundary conditions and model
              validation. Participants will contribute to one of these categories by
              submitting an extended abstract, giving 15-minute oral presentations, and
              presenting volunteered posters. The meeting will be limited to 30 participants.
              The workshop strategy calls a roughly equal number of modelers and geologists.
              Lively discussion, focused on developing strategies to better incorporate
              geologic data into numerical modeling exercises and vice versa, is anticipated.
              Some workshop participants will be charged with chairing sessions, leading
              breakout groups, and reporting on breakout session activities. All participants
              are expected to engage in discussion and to contribute to the final workshop
              summary document. The workshop report will include extended abstracts, meeting
              proceedings, and a final summary report. The summary will include
              recommendations for future research strategies aimed at unraveling Antarctic
              climate and glacial evolution. A draft version of the workshop report will be
              presented to SCAR XXVII in July 2002. An abbreviated workshop summary will be
              submitted to the primary literature, while the complete document will be
              disseminated via hardcopy mailings, through email list servers, and via the
              world-wide-web. An ACE website has already been established at the University
              of Massachusetts (http://www.geo.umass.edu/ace). It is intended that the
              results of this workshop will help guide ACE related research for years to
              come.
