Title       : NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences--"Stochastic Partial
               Differential Equations and Their Applications"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0225738

Award Number: 0225738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31470              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jinqiao Duan duan@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is a growing recognition of a role for the inclusion of stochastic terms
              in the modeling of complex systems.  The addition of such terms has led to
              interesting new mathematical problems at the interface of probability and
              partial differential equations.  In order to quantify uncertainty and estimate
              predictability of these systems, we need better understanding of stochastic
              partial differential equations.  Thus, the investigation of stochastic partial
              differential equations has attracted a lot of attention recently, from both
              theoretical and applied communities.  It is now the very time to have a sharply
              focused conference in this field.  The Principal Lecturer for this conference
              is Professor Jerzy Zabczyk, Institute of Mathematics, Polish Academy of
              Sciences, Poland.  Jerzy Zabczyk's research on stochastic partial differential
              equations 
places him at the forefront of this exciting area.  He is the
              co-author of the research monographs
``Stochastic Equations in Infinite
              Dimensions" (1992)  and ``Ergodicity in Infinite Dimensions" (1996). He is
              uniquely qualified to provide an overview of the major recent developments in
              the subject and point to research directions in the future.

Scientific and
              engineering systems are often subject to random influence.  Stochastic partial
              differential equations are appropriate models for many randomly influenced
              systems. This conference is to stimulate new research on stochastic partial
              differential equations and their applications in engineering, science and
              finance, by bringing together both established researchers and graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows.
The lecture notes will be published and
              will be accessible to a wide audience of professionals interested in the
              subject.


