Title       : PREMISE: Comparative Life Cycle Impacts of Bio- and Petro-Based Lubricants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0225912

Award Number: 0225912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99452              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Theis theist@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Scheff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Kosobud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7206,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant the National Science Foundation's PREMISE program provides funds to
              examine issues associated with the substitution of petroleum-based lubricants
              with bio-based (i.e. plant-derived) lubricants for industrial applications. 
              Such an approach would appear to be an attractive material substitution;
              biolubricants are renewable, relatively nontoxic, biodegradable, and more
              easily extracted and processed than petrolubricants, with fewer environmental
              consequences.  There are, however, three aspects of the use of biolubricants
              that must be addressed further in order to estimate the societal,
              environmental, and technological benefits and impacts of the widespread use of
              these substitutes: performance, regulatory, and life cycle.  Using a variety of
              standardized testing procedures and data sources, this research will examine
              these three areas, comparing results with similar information for
              petroleum-derived lubricants.

This research involves the assembly of a
              multidisciplinary group with members from academia, government, and the
              industrial sector, that possesses the collective expertise to address the
              diverse issues associated with bio- and petro-based lubricants.  The main goals
              of the project are to begin the process of gathering data and integrating
              findings into a comprehensive assessment of the value and costs of
              biolubricants as replacement materials for petroleum-based products, and to
              establish a framework for extending the results obtained to specific
              applications.  If it can be shown that biolubricants are as effective as
              mineral oils currently being used, are cost competitive, and result in fewer
              environmental problems, it is probable that much of the data collected can be
              extrapolated to a variety of industrial applications.  from 

