Title       : SGER: Novel All Solid-State SiC Fuel Cell for High Power Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0225697

Award Number: 0225697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Saddow saddow@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Wolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our objective is simple and straightforward - use novel porous SiC materials to
              develop an all- solid state fuel cell that it'll more than double the output
              power of Si based fuel cells while completely eliminating the problem of CO
              poisoning of expensive Pt electrodes! Currently available proton exchange
              membrane fuel cells (PEMFC5) suffer from three major limitations connected to
              cell design and materials used. First, most PEFC designs require elaborate
              manifold design and hydrodynamic control schemes which include humidification
              modules and rotating components such as pumps and compressors. The second major
              limitation comes from the Pt anode electro catalysts, which are extremely CO
              intolerant down to the 5 to 10 ppm level. Thirdly, poor thermal dissipation
              from the exothermic process limits membrane lifetimes and power density output.
              Our objective is to make use of rapid advances in novel SiC nanoporous
              materials to completely eliminate the need for platinum and low-temperature
              polymer membranes. Preliminary results from catalytic reactor studies show that
              SiC has a high degree of catalytic activity and. due to its wide band gap, high
              output fuel cells operating at higher thermal budget efficiencies will be
              possible. The objective of this work is to demonstrate such a fuel cell that
              will revolutionize the portable power storage industry. Advantages/advances
              over conventional PE FC s are summarized below:

o	Completely passive
              operation designed run on dry, low pressure, solid-source hydrogen and
              atmospheric pressure air without the need for humidification modules.
              Elimination of compressed gaseous hydrogen fuel and negative public perception
              (e.g.. hydrogen bomb, Hindenburg, etc.).

o	Elimination of hydrodynamic
              auxiliaries such as pumps, compressors, fans or blowers resulting in completely
              quiet operation. Increased power, efficiency and reliability by eliminating the
              parasitic power required to run auxiliaries and absence of moving mechanical
              parts.

o	Elimination of the costly Pt electrode and CO poisoning
              problems.

o	Solid-state microfabrication, thin-film deposition, and
              micromachining approaches
provide a manufacturable modular, self-contained
              unit.

o	Greatly improved fuel cell stack size and weight, fuel storage and
              delivery, packaging,
robustness and thermal management due to microfabrication
              and material properties of
SIC.

o	Significantly improved thermal budget
              efficiencies due to the high thermal
conductivity of SiC, which is higher than
              that of copper at room-temperature, 430 verses 540 W/mK respectively.

Rapid
              development of this technology is critical.  Therefore a seed grant to get
              these novel ideas from the concept stage to the demonstration stage is needed.
              Traditional proposals to expand this research at the University of South
              Florida are planned. However the graduate students who are already working on
              this project were being funded on a grant that has just ended. Therefore
              immediate funding is required to cover this research if progress is to
              continue.

