Title       : Integrated Sensing: Network Support for Distributed Sensing Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0225448

Award Number: 0225448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo A. de Veciana gustavo@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ari Arapostathis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margarida Jacome  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              At the core of the next generation of networking applications 
and technologies
              lies the potential of embedding sensing and 
actuating capabilities in the
              network so as to support a 
variety of monitoring and controls applications. 
              In this 
proposal we target applications that require stringent 
quality of
              service guarantees, e.g., applications needing 
global snapshot(s) of the
              state of a physical attribute,
or requiring correlating various such
              attributes.  For example, 
one might jointly track the wind speed and the
              density of 
a given pathogen to create evolution models.  To support such
              
applications while achieving high sensor utilization we 
propose to
              investigate two complementary problems:
(1) What are fundamental
              characteristics and requirements of
estimation and control
              applications
drawing spatio-temporal data from networked sensors; and
(2)
              What types of network support, e.g., sensing `primitives' 
and
              resource/traffic management mechanisms will be 
critical to enable wide-spread
              shared usage of such networks.
Due to the expected heterogeneity of sensor
              networks
and possible mismatch between a sensor's `capacity' to
              process
queries and the network bandwidth delay product,
achieving timely
              coordinated responses from a potentially large
set of sensors shared by
              multiple users may be difficult.
This is exacerbated by the inherent asymmetry
              of communications 
associated with such sensing activities, i.e., one-to-many
              queries 
resulting in many-to-one sensor responses.  As a result one can
              
expect unpredictable bursts of traffic, network hot spots, and 
degradation
              in performance. As part of the proposed research
we will investigate these
              problems from the perspective of
the applications, the network and the
              sensors. 

