Title       : Viral Transmission Dynamics in the Serengeti
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0225453

Award Number: 0225453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1482000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig Packer packer@biosci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew P. Dobson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 7242,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Of the emerging infectious diseases, zoonotic and generalist viral pathogens
              pose a particular threat to public health and biodiversity.  The effective
              control of these diseases requires both the identification of reservoires of
              infection and an understanding of viral transmission dynamics within complex
              host assemblages.  Yet for most emerging infectious diseases, reservoirs remain
              to be identified and little is known about mechanisms by which infections are
              maintained.  This study will propose a theoretical and practical framework for
              recognizing reservoirs in the field, which will be applied to identify
              reservoirs of viral infections in the Serengeti, Tanzania.  The recent
              emergence of viral diseases in this area provides the opportunity for a
              comparative study of zoonotic and generalist pathogens within a diverse,
              well-studied and important ecosystem.  Furthermore, the area is surrounded by
              rapidly expanding human and domestic animal populations which have profound
              impacts on the transmission dynamics of infectious diseases.  This study will
              investigate the transmission dynamics of three viral pathogens, rabies, cane
              distemper virus (CDV), and canine parvovirus (CPV), identifying reservoirs of
              infection through a combination of approaches that include intervention trials,
              genetic analyses and disease surveillance.  Empirical data on the spatial
              distribution of hosts and contact rated will be integrated into mathematical
              models of transmission between and within species.  These models will be used
              to (a) investigate mechanisms by which viral infections are maintained in
              multi-population systems; (b) anticipate future requirements for disease
              management in relation to changes in human activity and climate patterns; (c)
              design cost-effective programs for the control of disease in human and animal
              populations.

