Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Workforce Diversity and the Occupational Culture
               of Firefighters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9300802

Award Number: 9300802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Martin K. Whyte                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Trow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral                  
              Dissertation Research program.  The research will examine the                  
              occupational culture of municipal firefighters and the relationship            
              of that culture to racial, ethnic and gender diversity in the                  
              workforce.  The investigators will employ a range of qualitative               
              techniques of data collection, notably interviews and participant              
              observation, in a number of branches of the fire department in                 
              Oakland, California.  The study will focus on the aspects of                   
              occupational culture that resist the influx of workers from                    
              previously excluded minority groups and on variations in the                   
              process of occupational socialization that may reflect the race,               
              ethnicity or gender of the newcomer.                                           
                                                                                             
                   This research will contribute to the sociology of occupations,            
              race and ethnic relations, and gender, as well as increasing the               
              knowledge base for municipal and national policies concerning                  
              occupational integration of minority groups and women.  In addition            
              to the scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award             
              will materially assist a highly promising student in completing                
              research for the Ph.D. dissertation.  Thus it contributes to future            
              scientific manpower and the thorough training of the next                      
              generation of sociologists.
