Title       : SGER: Young Children's Reaction to a Natural Disaster: Memory and Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9300956

Award Number: 9300956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49521              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorraine E. Bahrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janat Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate memory in young children and their              
              mothers for events related to a major hurricane as a function of               
              stress, operationalized as level of hurricane exposure.  Ninety-six            
              three- and four-year-old children and their mothers will be                    
              interviewed two months and again one year following the devastation            
              of Hurricane Andrew in Miami, Florida.  Thirty-six additional three            
              and four year olds and their mothers will be interviewed at the                
              one-year interval only, as a control group.  Participants will be              
              selected so as to represent equally low, moderate, and severe                  
              hurricane exposure conditions, defined by the extent of damage to              
              their homes.  All participants will be asked to recount events that            
              fall into three time periods, 1) the prehurricane preparations, 2)             
              the hurricane itself, and 3) the posthurricane recovery period.                
              The memory interview will consist of open-ended questions, followed            
              by specific category prompts for each period.  The research will               
              assess the amount of rehearsal of the information from the period              
              before, during, and after the hurricane, as well as the degree of              
              child and adult well being.  Accuracy, amount, and content of                  
              recall will be coded, using a propositional analysis.  Of primary              
              concern is how these retention measures differ as a function of                
              stress level and retention interval.  The research will assess the             
              effects of the first interview on retention at one year, using                 
              comparisons against the control group for the three stress levels.             
              The research will also explore relations between content and amount            
              of recall for children and adults.  Of secondary concern will be               
              relations between measures of memory and well being, and between               
              adult and child well being.  Findings of this study may improve our            
              understanding of the relation between memory and stress in children            
              and provide us with important information about the amount,                    
              accuracy and nature of recall for a traumatic event.  In contrast              
              with most research on traumatic events (e.g., physical, emotional,             
              or sexual child abuse), this research is unique in that stress is              
              so easily operationalized and memories can be corroborated.
