Title       : Electronic Structure of Conjugated Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9300163

Award Number: 9300163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoltan G. Soos SOOS@PRINCETON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will study the electrical, fluorescence and non-                 
              linear optical properties of conjugated polymers associated with               
              pi-pi* excitations in carbon polymers and sigma-sigma* transitions             
              in polysilanes. Solid-state models for either include electron-                
              phonon and electron-electron interactions in extended Hubbard or               
              Pariser-Parr-Pople models. The proposed studies will exploit exact             
              solutions to quantum cell models, including their non-linear                   
              optical responses and extend correlated states to include electron-            
              phonon interactions. The idea is to obtain transferable coupling               
              constants from molecular systems. The different photophysics of                
              polysilanes relative to their carbon counterparts is also central              
              to this proposal. Lastly, new symmetry adapted solutions will be               
              applied to the rich singlet and triplet spectra of anthracene,                 
              trans-silbene and other conjugated polymers in order to refine                 
              parameters and to study the charge and spin dependence of confined             
              bipolarons and polarons.                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The idea of this proposal is to get at paramaters which describe               
              the photophysics (eg. fluorescence, conductivity) of polymeric                 
              carbon and silicon systems from their simpler molecular fragments.             
              These parameters are used within simple electronic models, which               
              describe the basic quantum mechanical physics of these systems, to             
              determine trends of behavior and the reasons for that behavior.                
              Comparisons between the carbon and silicon analogues will be made.             
              The end result is a better understanding of the spectra of these               
              systems. These materials are of interest because of their large                
              non-linear optical response and high-electroluminescence; they                 
              might be used for example in large area display technology.
