Title       : REU: Stable Isotopic Applications to Great Plains Ecology, Paleoecology,
               Archeology, and Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9300418

Award Number: 9300418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Tieszen tieszen@inst.augie.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen R. Diggins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Augustana College
	      29th and Summit
	      Sioux Falls, SD  57197    605/336-0770

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to continue REU support  for                         
              another year in the Department of Biology at Augustana                         
              College.  The program will support undergraduate                               
              participation in a  focused research program which                             
              integrates the research activities of ten investigators from                   
              Augustana College (6), Univ. Neb. (1), The Nature                              
              Conservancy (1), S.D. State Univ. (1), and Black Hills State                   
              Univ. (1). The projects are integrated at the scientific                       
              level because of the common interests in prairie ecology and                   
              paleoecology, and because each project benefits from the                       
              applications of the stable isotopes of C and N to the                          
              methodology. A coherent group and a unique methodology will                    
              be used to continue ecological and archeological                               
              reconstructions in a geographic area of rich ecological                        
              resources and to encompass growing interest in diets and                       
              physiology. The REU students will be active participants as                    
              Augustana College hosts the International Conference. on                       
              Bone Modifications in 1993. Four high school teachers will                     
              participate,  funded in total by the S. Dakota-NSF State                       
              Systemic Initiative.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Ten students (half women, half from off-campus) will study                     
              field and laboratory problems with a common focus.  They                       
              will be expected to gain some mastery of the theoretical                       
              basis for their study as well as the experimental design and                   
              ultimate interpretation. Weekly seminars and workshops will                    
              review each project's theoretical basis and research design;                   
              enhance the students' library, laboratory, data handling,                      
              and scientific writing skills; and broaden their                               
              understanding of the related projects. The ten-week summer                     
              program and academic year independent study will culminate                     
              in an REU Symposium in which each student will present                         
              his/her results and conclusions and help develop the                           
              hypotheses for next summer's projects. Outstanding women                       
              will be selected again as seminar speakers and to serve as                     
              role models. Twenty high schools will be invited to select                     
              an outstanding woman student to attend the REU Symposium and                   
              return for one day in summer. A major ethics conference will                   
              be hosted and  a report disseminated  dealing with reburial                    
              of museum specimens and animal research.
