Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear PDEs and Viscosity Solutions: Variational
               Problems and Control Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1993 
File        : a9300966

Award Number: 9300966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Jensen rrj@math.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9300966  Jensen       This project will examine mathematical problems arising
              from  both the calculus of variations and control theory.  A common  feature of
              the problems is their affinity for the framework of  viscosity solutions.   The
              development of new techniques and  methods necessary to resolve these problems
              will both advance the  theory of viscosity solutions and provide new examples
              of their  applicability.  Viscosity solutions of differential equations  were
              introduced in 1981 to characterize uniquely  the value  functions of optimal
              control and differential games.  Part of  the project will continue the study
              of such applications.  Two  other problem areas come from the calculus of
              variations.  The  first is based on the strategy of finding functions with 
              prescribed boundary values on a domain which has minimal L-1  norm.  These
              problems have been successfully studied using  viscosity solutions.  The
              current work will use viscosity  solutions to analyze specific solutions of
              problems of motion by  mean curvature to help understand the level sets of
              these  functions.  The second line of investigation is to study the same  sets
              of functions as before with the goal of minimizing the  maximal norm.  This
              gives rise to fourth order homogeneous  partial differential equations.  Some
              work has already been done  on the analysis of such questions but much more
              remains.       Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical 
              modeling of the physical world.  The role of mathematical  analysis is not so
              much to create the equations as it is  to provide qualitative and quantitative
              information about  the solutions.  This may include answers to questions  about
              uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis  often develops
              methods for approximation of solutions and  estimates on the accuracy of these
              approximations.  ***
