Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates: Developmental Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9300121

Award Number: 9300121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Marsteller pmars@learnlink.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biology at                      
              Emory University to continue a successful Research                             
              Experiences for Undergraduates SITE in the broad area of                       
              Developmental Processes.  Recruitment efforts will focus on                    
              students at primarily undergraduate institutions and on                        
              women and minority students in order to encourage                              
              underrepresented groups to consider careers in science.                        
              Each year ten students will be invited to participate based                    
              on academic records, evidence of research potential and                        
              interest, and recommendations from faculty at their home                       
              institution.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The program has the following objectives: (1) to provide                       
              formal and informal introductions to the processes of                          
              science; (2) To provide an intensive research experience in                    
              one subdiscipline; (3) To provide perspective by examining                     
              alternative approaches to processes of development at                          
              different hierarchical levels; and, (4) To maximize                            
              participant interaction with other undergraduate and                           
              graduate researchers, their specific research mentor, and                      
              his/her research group.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Students will select a research mentor and project from the                    
              following areas: genes and development, cellular                               
              differentiation, development of behavior, and developmental                    
              processes in ecology and evolution.  Students will work                        
              under the direct guidance of one of the 22 participating                       
              research mentors.  All participants will attend workshops on                   
              scientific methodology, research design, data analysis and                     
              interpretation, and scientific communication skills.                           
              Students will design and conduct an independent project in                     
              consultation with their mentor.  They will participate in                      
              weekly progress discussions with other student researchers                     
              and the project directors.  Each focal area will also have                     
              weekly lab meetings to discuss project progress.  Students                     
              will interact with their research mentor, his/her research                     
              group, including graduate students and technicians, and will                   
              attend departmental seminars. Each student will present                        
              his/her project at a research symposium at Emory; a written                    
              report will be "published" in the in-house journal,                            
              Undergraduate Research at Emory.
