Title       : File Structuring and Information Retrieval for Large Full Text Libraries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9300124

Award Number: 9300124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Buckley chrisb@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard Salton  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9300124  Salton    This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing
              award.   The processing of large collections of heterogeneous text is 
              addressed where both the text lengths and the subject matter vary  widely.   In
              such circumstances, the integrity of full documents  cannot be maintained, but
              access needs to be provided to individual  text excerpts in accordance with
              specific user requirements.   This  project is concerned with three main
              aspects relating to the design  and operations of a flexible full-text
              environment: the content  analysis and text indexing for heterogeneous data in
              unrestricted  subject areas; the generation of linked text structures of many 
              kinds where similar text excerpts are jointly accessible by  following the text
              links; and the implementation of sophisticated  text utilization methods in
              such a structured text environment.    Corpus-based text analysis methods are
              under development based on  sophisticated text matching algorithms that account
              both for  existing global vocabulary coincidences between different texts,  and
              for similarities in the local environment in which the  vocabulary is used.  
              When similar words are used in similar local  contexts, the meanings are
              normally congruent.   Hypertext  structures of relatable text excerpts must
              then be generated at  various levels of detail, and these linked text
              structures must be  utilized for flexible text traversal, and the recognition
              of text  themes, and the automatic construction of text abstracts and 
              summaries.   The availability of large structured text environments  will
              vastly improve the manipulation of collections of full text,  and open up many
              areas of application in text transformation and  text use.     ***
