Title       : SGER: Gonadal Steroid Actions During Neural Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1993     
File        : a9300861

Award Number: 9300861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40733              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Tobet 6176420234  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances I. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shriver Ctr Mental Retard
	      
	      Waltham, MA  02154    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Sex differences in brain and behavior are a result of the                 
              perinatal hormonal environment.  Exposure to testicular androgens              
              during critical developmental periods can permanently alter the                
              anatomy, biochemistry, and physiology of the central nervous                   
              system.  A major question is how do the gonadal steroid hormones               
              regulate the differentiation of the brain at the cellular level.               
              It is likely that the hormones act through fundamental                         
              developmental mechanisms, such as controlling how many cells are               
              born, how such cells migrate to reach their targeted                           
              destinations, and whether or not they survive.  In this Small                  
              Grant for Exploratory Research, Dr. Tobet will exploit recent                  
              technological advances to examine the mechanisms by which gonadal              
              steroid hormones influence neuron migration during brain                       
              development.  He has identified a molecule in radial glial, a                  
              particular cell type of the brain, that could play a role in                   
              hormone-dependent cell migration.  Dr. Tobet will now localize                 
              this molecule in the brains of developing males and females and                
              then determining whether its synthesis is regulated by gonadal                 
              steroid hormones.  In addition, he will establish an in vitro                  
              culture system to examine cell movements and contacts directly                 
              and under defined and manipulatable conditions.  The results from              
              this work will provide new insights leading towards understanding              
              the biochemical steps involved in the actions of steroid hormones              
              on the developing nervous system.  The identification and                      
              characterization of molecules that regulate the translation of                 
              gonadal steroid signals into permanent changes in brain structure              
              and ultimately function are essential for determining the process              
              of sexual differentiation.  The importance of these hormonal                   
              effects is underscored by evidence of sex differences and                      
              androgen influences in the susceptibility to certain syndromes,                
              learning disabilities, and neurological disorders.
