Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Topology of Generalized Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9300935

Award Number: 9300935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130200             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bryant bryant@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Washington Mio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Frank Quinn has shown that, for n >= 5, a connected                       
              generalized n-manifold (n-gm) X has an associated resolution                   
              obstruction, given by a "local index" i(X), which is an integer                
              congruent to 1 mod 8.  X is resolvable if and only if i(X)=1.                  
              This result, combined with a theorem of R. D. Edwards, implies                 
              that an n-gm X, n >= 5, is a topological manifold iff X has the                
              disjoint disks property (DDP) and i(X) = 1.  Left open in the                  
              results of Quinn was the question of whether nonresolvable                     
              generalized manifolds exist.  Recently, the investigators,                     
              together with Steve Ferry and Shmuel Weinberger, have shown that,              
              given any simply connected, closed n-manifold X, n >= 6, and any               
              integer m = 1(mod 8), there is an n-gm X, homotopy equivalent to               
              M, with i(X) = m.  The discovery of these examples raises several              
              questions about the topology of generalized manifolds and these                
              questions form the basis of this project.  The ultimate purpose                
              is to understand the general classification scheme of generalized              
              manifolds in high dimensions with the immediate goal of                        
              discovering to what extent these spaces behave like real                       
              manifolds.                                                                     
                   A topological manifold of dimension n, or n-manifold, is a                
              geometric object that looks locally like euclidean space of                    
              dimension n.  Thus, scientific phenomena modeled on these spaces               
              can be expressed and analyzed, using local coordinate systems.                 
              One of the central problems of geometric topology has been to                  
              prescribe a "topological characterization" of (locally) euclidean              
              spaces.  By this we mean a list of properties that a topologist                
              could use to check whether or not a given space is a manifold.                 
              Characterizations of manifolds of dimension one or two have been               
              known for a long time, but higher dimensional characterization                 
              schemes have proved to be elusive to formulate and verify.  A                  
              characterization of manifolds of dimension greater than four was               
              conjectured by James Cannon in an address to the 1978                          
              International Congress of Mathematicians in Helsinki.  Frank                   
              Quinn discovered that Cannon's criteria would yield a solution to              
              the problem,                                                                   
              provided that an additional integer invariant is zero.  Recently,              
              the proposers, along with Steve Ferry and Shmuel Weinberger,                   
              found a large class of geometric objects of dimension greater                  
              than five that satisfy Cannon's criteria, but have non-zero Quinn              
              invariant.  There is evidence that these new spaces should be                  
              incorporated in the class of manifolds and a common theory                     
              developed.  The investigators intend to study the foundational                 
              aspects of the theory and its potential applications.  As an                   
              example, among other things, they plan to relate these                         
              "generalized manifolds" to the study of dynamics on manifolds by               
              showing that they may play the role of axis of symmetry of                     
              motions in space.
