Title       : REU Site for Microelectronic Materials and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1995     
File        : a9300405

Award Number: 9300405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christos G. Takoudis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric P. Kvam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerold W. Neudeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9250,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Twelve students will participate in the Research Experiences for               
              Undergraduates program in microelectronic materials and                        
              processing at Purdue.  The Schools of Chemical, Electrical, and                
              Materials Engineering, which have been sharing undergraduate                   
              courses as well as research on electronic materials and                        
              processing for several years, participate in this program.                     
              Students will be recruited from regional universities and                      
              universities with high minority enrollments for summer research                
              projects.  Undergraduate students from Purdue will be able to                  
              perform summer or academic year research.  The focus of the REU                
              site will be the synthesis, processing, properties, structure,                 
              and performance of microelectronic materials, and the                          
              interrelationships among these aspects.  Specific projects                     
              include anisotropic etching of microelectronic this films,                     
              selective epitaxial growth and insulator degradation, processing               
              on patterned substrates, fundamentals of metal contacts to                     
              semiconductors, and integration of oxide films with Si                         
              technologies.  The goals of the REU are to introduce students -                
              with emphasis on women and minorities - to independent research                
              on electronic materials and their processing, to develop and                   
              enhance the student's creativity and originality, to develop                   
              outstanding candidates for graduate programs, to demonstrate the               
              excitement and rewards from successful research, and to prepare                
              B.S. graduates who will excel in industrial Research and                       
              Development environments.
