Title       : A National Agenda for Virtual Reality Research and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9300012

Award Number: 9300012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra K. Wigdor swigdor@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a one year funding participation in a joint project of the             
              Committee on Human Factors of the National Academy of Sciences and             
              the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board.  The national               
              agenda helps to define and shape the field by describing the                   
              current state of the technology and its potential, and to suggest              
              a rationale and priorities for the near-and long-term allocation of            
              R & D resources to further technology development and                          
              commercialization.  The agenda, based on a comprehensive review of             
              software, hardware, human-computer interfaces, and generic research            
              issues that cut across many application domains associated with                
              this technology, is prepared by a multidisciplinary committee of               
              researchers and developers in the public and private sectors.                  
              Several federal agencies are currently considering or already have             
              research and development programs involving one or more aspects of             
              applications of virtual reality research and development including             
              equipment design, scientific visualization, the management of large            
              multifaceted databases, and applications for training and the                  
              performance of tasks in remote environments.  Also, there are                  
              groups doing industrial and academic research in this area.  The               
              study increases the shared understanding of the state of the art,              
              of the full range of potential applications, and of the most                   
              critical and promising directions for future research.  The study              
              takes a broad view of the themes and principles across applications            
              such as examining the issue of how much reality is appropriate to              
              provide maximum benefit.  The study committee, as other National               
              Research Council study committees, provides a forum for experts                
              with different perspectives to examine all sides of an issue and               
              present an integrated, balanced and objective view.  They bring                
              together sponsor liaisons to share ideas and concerns with                     
              committee members and one another.  This project, with NSF's                   
              participatory funding, produces an NRC report addressing research              
              and development opportunities in the field of virtual reality.  The            
              estimated total cost for the committee operation is $468,900 over              
              an 18-month period.
