Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Scaling and Models of Sediment Biogeochemical
               Nutrient Transformations in the Baltic Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9300474

Award Number: 9300474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Conley CONLEY@#HPEL.UMD.EDU OR  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 5937,
Abstract    :
              9300474  Conley    This three-year award supports U.S.- Sweden cooperative
              research  in marine ecology between Daniel J. Conley of the University of 
              Maryland's Center for Environmental and Estuarine Studies and  Fredrik Wulff of
              the Department of Systems Ecology, Stockholm  University.  The objective of the
              research is to determine the  processes controlling the net exchange of
              nutrients from  sediments of the Baltic Sea.  Using theoretical analyses, field
               and laboratory experimental studies and model verifications, the 
              investigators will work together on determining biogeochemical  control
              mechanisms in varying geographical areas of the Baltic  Sea.  Annual cruises
              are planned with researchers from Sweden,  Poland and Russia.    Biogeochemical
              cycles and processes in a marine system are of  prime concern for local coastal
              zone and shallow seas.  The  Baltic Sea offers excellent opportunities to study
              these  processes since it is a well-defined and intensively studied  estuary
              that has experienced large-scale environmental changes  from eutrophication and
              human activity.  Both eutrophying  substances and toxic substances (nitrogen
              and phosphorus) are  increasing in the Baltic, which in turn give rise to
              storage of  silica in the sediments and low levels of dissolved silicate.  
              These low levels may have future consequences on species  composition and the
              food web.  In order to reverse the current  trends in eutrophication, not only
              found in the Baltic Sea, but  also in other estuaries, the investigators will
              take sediment  cores from the study sites and characterize them in terms of 
              their physico-chemical features, and the flux rates for silicate,  dissolved
              nitrogen species, and phosphorus.  These data will be  used to develop a
              process oriented model describing the exchanges  of nutrients.  The research
              will complement and enhance the  present data and advance understanding of the
              mechanism  underlying changes in the Baltic Sea.  Dr. Conley brings to this 
              collaboration expertise in the bi ogeochemical cycling of silica.   This is
              complemented by the Swedish investigator's expertise in  biogeochemical
              modeling of fluxes of nitrogen, phosphorus and  silica between water and
              sediments.  ***
