Title       : Electromechanical and Thermodynamic Properties of Quasi-One Dimensional Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9300507

Award Number: 9300507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Brill jwbrill@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The depinning of density waves and the concomitant elastic                     
              softening in quasi-one dimensional metals is of current interest               
              due to their non-linear behavior. In particular, it is not                     
              understood if the softening is intrinsic to the density wave or is             
              due to relaxation of defects or domains in the density wave.  This             
              proposal deals with experiments that are specifically designed to              
              address this phenomena.  The central experiment is to measure                  
              changes in the static shear modulus of tantalum trisulfide when its            
              charge-density-wave becomes depinned.  The measurements will                   
              utilize a recently developed sensitive position detector. Changes              
              in the static twist angle of a fiber of tantalum trisulfide will be            
              measured with a frequency modulated helical resonator (400 MHz)                
              cavity.  Torque will be applied with a magnetic wire "flag"                    
              attached to the sample.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Experiments to measure the temperature dependence of the specific              
              heat at the different phase transitions exhibited by quasi-one                 
              dimensional metals; the goal is to provide a basis for a better                
              understanding of the role of fluctuations at these transitions.                
              Phase transformations to be investigated include                               
              charge-density-wave, spin-density-wave, anion-ordering, and                    
              spin-Peierls transitions.  Specific heat on small crystals                     
              (typically less than 1 mg) will be measured using ac calorimetry               
              and can be applied to crystals as small as 0.01mg.  Complimentary              
              measurements will include Young's modulus and magnetic                         
              susceptibility.  Results will be fit to various fluctuation models.            
              %%%                                                                            
              Quasi-one-dimensional metals conduct along only one                            
              crystallographic direction and, as a consequence, exhibit some                 
              unusual and unexplained phenomena. Many are inherently non-linear              
              and/or involve strong fluctuation effects and this proposal                    
              describes some experiments using new, sensitive probes, which                  
              address long-standing problems in our understanding of these                   
              materials.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Many quasi-one dimensional metals exhibit electron density wave                
              distortions, in which the charge or spin density becomes                       
              periodically modulated, at low temperature.  In some of these                  
              materials, the density wave can be depinned (forced to move) with              
              extremely small electric fields; this effect has become a paradigm             
              for non-linear dynamics in solids.  When the density wave is                   
              depinned, the materials become elastically softer; it is not                   
              understood if this softening is only a dynamic effect, caused by               
              the motion of density wave defects, or intrinsic due to the sliding            
              density wave. This proposal studies changes in the static shear                
              modulus of tantalum trisulfide, a prototypical charge-density-wave             
              material, that directly addresses this question. The investigators             
              have recently developed a radio-frequency helical resonator cavity             
              operating at 400 MHz as an extremely sensitive probe that can                  
              detect sample motion of less than 1 Angstrom; this apparatus will              
              be adapted to measure the static properties of these novel                     
              materials.  If successful, the technique may be applicable for                 
              related studies, such as torque magnetometry.                                  
                                                                                             
              In addition quasi-one dimensional metals exhibit an wide array of              
              low temperature phase transitions. There has been considerable                 
              theoretical interest in these transitions because fluctuation                  
              effects are enhanced by their one-dimensionality.  However, high               
              quality thermodynamic measurements, which probe these fluctuation              
              effects have been lacking. The investigators will continue using ac            
              calorimetry to study the specific heat of these materials. In                  
              particular charge-density wave, spin-density wave, order-disorder,             
              and spin-Peierls transitions will be studied. Complementary                    
              thermodynamic measurements will include Young's modulus and                    
              magnetic susceptibility. The results will be analyzed in the                   
              context of current theoretical investigations to understand the                
              role of fluctuations at these transitions.
