Title       : Provenance History of Upper Cenozoic Sandstones of the Bengal Basin, Bangladesh
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9300295

Award Number: 9300295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil S. Lundberg lundberg@gly.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5989,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This dissertation improvement                                    
              grant supports travel and provides field                                       
              expenses for Dr. Neil Lundberg and his doctoral                                
              candidate, Ashraf Uddin of Bangladesh.  In                                     
              addition, a U.S. undergraduate student will                                    
              participate in the research and gain experience                                
              in working with Bangladesh geologists.  The                                    
              project will be carried out in collaboration                                   
              with Dr. Monirul Hoque of the Department of                                    
              Geology, University of Dhaka in Bangladesh.  It                                
              seeks to study the quaternary sequences of the                                 
              Bengal basin for petrographic, mineralogic and                                 
              geochronologic evidence of the tectonic history                                
              of the adjacent mountain belts.  Sample                                        
              collection and sedimentologic observations in                                  
              the field will be followed by detailed analysis                                
              of sediment composition and fission-track                                      
              geochronology.  Modal analysis of sandstones                                   
              and heavy-metal studies, complemented by                                       
              fission-track analysis of detrital apatite and                                 
              zircon, will be used to evaluate changes in                                    
              source-area composition, to determine unroofing                                
              trends and rates, and to test hypothesized                                     
              episodes of uplift.  These data will be                                        
              compared to existing data sets for equivalent                                  
              deposits of the Sub-Himalayan Siwalik sequence                                 
              and the Bengal fan.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project is likely to provide                                      
              detailed quantitative data on the stratigraphic                                
              record of the Himalayan collision.  It will                                    
              provide research opportunity in an excellent                                   
              natural laboratory for a graduate and                                          
              undergraduate students in a U.S. university.                                   
              It can also help the host country by provding                                  
              an improved understanding of the regional                                      
              geological framework and basin history,                                        
              important in developing petroleum resources of                                 
              the Bengal basin.
