Title       : Synthesizing Energy Efficient Circuits and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1993 
File        : a9300936

Award Number: 9300936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul T. Hulina                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Albicki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 4710      DESIGN AUTOMATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4730,9215,
Abstract    :
              Most of the work in the field of logic synthesis has concentrated  on the topics
              of logic minimization and synthesis for testability.   While both of these
              issues are of great importance, it seems  natural to go beyond these
              applications.  This effort aims to  expand the current applications of logic
              synthesis to include the  domain of synthesis for reduced power dissipation.   
              The work here is based on the assumption that switching activity,  the number
              of internal nodes that are charged or discharged when a  new set of inputs is
              applied to the system, is a strong indicator  of power dissipation in static
              CMOS structures.  The proposal  builds on some novel results obtained in the
              synthesis of two level  logic circuits, such that they exhibit, optimal
              switching  activities.  The research advocated utilizes these results to 
              explore procedures for the energy efficient synthesis of arbitrary 
              combinational logic functions.  The methodology employed in the  study is based
              on a rigorous analytical approach, with simulation  results and measurements on
              actual fabricated circuits being used  for model verification and refinement.  
               It is widely known that clocking frequency seriously effects the  power
              dissipated in a system.  The utilization of double-edge-  triggered flip-flops,
              which trade area for clock frequencies  operating at half the value, represent
              a relatively inexpensive way  to reduce energy dissipation and naturally
              complements research in  low-power logic synthesis.  This work advocates
              studying techniques  to ensure that the systems built are fully testable.  The
              methods  of Boolean space expansion, and modified input storing elements,  are
              being explored to obtain full testability.    The goal of this research is the
              development of a new synthesis  tool which will enable users to easily
              implement digital functions  with reduced energy dissipation, while maintaining
              full  testability.  When an integrated circuit is operating in the  testing
              mode, the energy consumption may be far gr eater than during  normal operation
              as many internal nodes which do not usually switch  are being tested.  The
              proposed research will ensure that under  testing conditions the energy
              consumption of the system is minimal  thus avoiding damage to the circuit.
