Title       : Ionization-Structure-Reactivity Relationships in Transition Metal Chemistry:
               Metal-Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1995  
File        : a9300841

Award Number: 9300841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Lichtenberger dlichten@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program provides continued support for research on the nature                  
              of metal-metal bonding by Dr. Dennis L. Lichtenberger of the                   
              Chemistry Department, University of Arizona.  Using                            
              photoelectron spectroscopy, Lichtenberger is able to                           
              characterize the electronic structure of metal-metal                           
              interactions as affected by changes in chemical environment.                   
              The strength of the metal-metal bonds under investigation                      
              ranges from quadruple and triple bonds to those with only weak                 
              associations.  The metals used most commonly are chromium,                     
              molybdenum, tungsten, rhodium, ruthenium, and iron.  Ligands                   
              will also vary, and in some cases the metals will be bridged.                  
              Plans are also in place to study some terminal metal-oxo,                      
              metal-nitrido, and metal-alkyne systems, in which multiple                     
              bonding between a metal and a heteroatom occurs.  Lichtenberger                
              will also continue to improve the high precision X-ray core                    
              photoelectron spectroscopy instrumentation in his laboratory                   
              for study of both gas phase and condensed species, including                   
              thin films of metallic materials.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              The structure, stability and reactivity of metal-metal bonds                   
              influences many chemical, catalytic, and materials processes.                  
              By developing methods to study a wide variety of multi-metal                   
              systems and cataloging fundamental information about their                     
              electronic behavior, Dr. Dennis L. Lichtenberger of the                        
              University of Arizona will contribute to both the theoretical                  
              and practical understanding of systems that are important in                   
              the chemical and electronic industries.
