Title       : Quantitative Characterization of Terrestrially-derived Organic Matter in Recent
               and Ancient Marine Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9300890

Award Number: 9300890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy I. Eglinton teglinton@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Miguel A. Goni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1670,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Quantitative Characterization of Terrestrially-derived Organic                 
              Matter in Recent and Ancient Marine Sediments                                  
                                                                                             
              Specific Objectives of this research are: (i) To improve and expand            
              methods to recognize and characterize terrestrial (and marine)                 
              sedimentary organic matter, with special emphasis placed upon                  
              macromolecular components; (ii) to develop and refine mixing                   
              models, based on mass balance calculations using coupled                       
              concentration-isotope composition measurements on discrete                     
              components, which more accurately describe the contributions from              
              river systems to shelf or basin sediments and to delineate these               
              contributions as a function of distance from source.                           
                                                                                             
              The approach builds upon previous studies. A detailed comparison of            
              two established methods for characterizing OC, namely CuO oxidation            
              and analytical pyrolysis will be performed. A side-by-side                     
              quantitative evaluation of the scope and limitations will provide              
              useful quantitative geochemical information including a mass                   
              balance of the major constituents with respect to TOC for selected             
              "end-member" samples.  This task will be facilitated by bulk and               
              compound specific isotopic measurements on representative                      
              components.  This information will then be collated and will form              
              the basis for mixing models developed to describe contributions                
              from terrestrial (and marine) sources to sedimentary OC. The                   
              validity of these models will be appraised in investigations of                
              sedimentary environments for which abundant supplementary                      
              geochemical information exists (Gulf of Mexico, Washington margin).            
              Subsequently the models will be applied to key environments in                 
              which present understanding of terrestrial organic matter                      
              influences is more limited (Black Sea, Amazon shelf).
