Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Correlation betweenthe Nonmetal to
               Metal Transition in Clusters and at Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9300238

Award Number: 9300238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19870              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Ward Plummer eplummer@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Dowben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 5936,
Abstract    :
              9300238  Plummer  This award supports Professors E. Ward Plummer of the
              University of  Tennessee, Peter Dowben of Syracuse University, and N. John
              DiNardo  of Drexel University to collaborate in condensed matter physics with 
              three German counterparts: Professor Klaus Rademann and Dr. Ourania  Rademann
              of the University of Marburg and Dr. Eckart Ruhl of the  Free University of
              Berlin.  The purpose of their cooperative  research is to develop a picture of
              the fundamental mechanisms for  the nonmetal to metal transition in the simple
              metals.  The  collaborative plan brings together three U.S. experimentalists
              who  have done substantial research on the nonmetal transition in two 
              dimensions and at solid surfaces to work with three German  experimentalists
              who have done complementary research on the  transition in clusters.  The
              research requires substantial  experimental work at a synchrotron light source,
              as well as access  to other very specialized analytical equipment.  The German 
              collaborators are able to provide access to the German facility  known as
              BESSY, in Berlin, while the U.S. collaborators will arrange  for joint work at
              the U.S. National Synchrotron Light Source and  other U.S. facilities suitable
              for the very complicated  characterizations of alkali metal in surface islands
              and surface  aggregates.  Both U.S. and German postdoctoral associates and 
              graduate students will be involved in the collaborative research.    Transition
              metal clusters and aggregates exhibit a nonmetal to metal  transition with
              increasing cluster size.  Similar transitions have  been observed for
              transition metal layers on solid surfaces.  So  far, the in-depth study needed
              to demonstrate a direct connection  between metal to nonmetal transition in
              clusters and at surfaces has  been done successfully only for one metal,
              mercury.  These  investigators propose to expand that base of knowledge by 
              undertaking the necessary comparative research on transition in  alkali metals.
               Since data already exist on alkali b ehavior in  surface layers, the joint
              research will focus principally on the  transition in clusters.  Results from
              this research will contribute  to understanding the basis for the difference in
              behavior between  metals and non-metals.  ***
