Title       : REU Program in Forest Ecology at the Harvard Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9300219

Award Number: 9300219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Lent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Boone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Bowden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds  to the Harvard Forest to support                    
              a site for an REU summer program in forest ecology. The                        
              Harvard Forest is a Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER)                       
              site involving over a dozen senior researchers from seven                      
              institutions working collaboratively to compare the impact                     
              of historically-important physical disturbances with recent                    
              and projected physical and chemical disturbances on forest                     
              ecosystems in New England. The core component of the REU                       
              program will be an independent research project conducted by                   
              each student that will provide experience in the scientific                    
              process. Independent projects will introduce students to                       
              hypothesis generation, project planning and data analysis                      
              and presentation.  Additional REU educational activities                       
              will include weekly seminars on research and research                          
              methods, counseling on careers and graduate education in                       
              ecology, lunch-time student-led research discussions,                          
              laboratory discussion sessions, and field trips to off-site                    
              research locations. The  Harvard Forest is well equipped for                   
              an REU program, including field, laboratory, and                               
              instructional facilities, and excellent living                                 
              accommodations. Students will be advised by the principal                      
              investigators with additional guidance from other LTER                         
              researchers. Participants will be recruited with strong                        
              emphasis on participation of women, minorities, and                            
              physically challenged students, particularly those from non-                   
              research oriented colleges and universities. A program for                     
              maintaining contact and following up on student progress                       
              will be instituted to improve the program and to assess the                    
              value of the Harvard Forest program in encouraging students                    
              to pursue research careers.
