Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Civil Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1993        
File        : a9300952

Award Number: 9300952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lucy Morse                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter H. Gerstle gerstle@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              Eight undergraduate students from the Rocky Mountain and Southwest             
              Regions of the United States will participate in a ten-week,                   
              comprehensive research experience at the University of New Mexico              
              during the summer of 1993.  In accordance with his/her interests,              
              each student will participate as a team member in one of the                   
              following eight projects: 1) participate in the stress testing and             
              analysis of a steel interstate highway bridge; 2) learn about                  
              various methods for measuring displacements and strains using laser            
              interferometry techniques; 3) acoustically test an existing bridge             
              on the Rio Grande River to locate hidden cracks; 4) construct small            
              scale models of hydraulic structures and test these models in an               
              open channel flow facility; 5) design foot pad systems for a                   
              universal lunar lander currently being designed by NASA; 6) use the            
              discrete element approach to study micromechanical interactions                
              between particles modeled as ellipsoids; 7) design a self-                     
              sustaining biosphere to orbit the sun; and 8) develop practical                
              new techniques for the remediation of polluted ground water.  Over             
              half of the students will be selected this year from applicants at             
              institutions other than UNM, especially those without active                   
              research programs.  Women, minority and disabled applicants will               
              be recruited.  The students will become familiar with their                    
              projects through early contact with the research faculty.  Each                
              student can expect to learn to work independently over the course              
              of the summer.  He/she will also present a final seminar on the                
              research, assist in writing a publication describing the work, and             
              may travel to a meeting to present the results.
