Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems Arising in the Stability Analysis of
               Traveling Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9300848

Award Number: 9300848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Gardner gardner@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award supports continuing research on the stability of               
              travelling waves.  Several application areas such as fluid                     
              mechanics (a modified Burgers equation), reaction-diffusion                    
              systems, the Murray-Oster mechanochemical theory of pattern                    
              bifurcation and competing population models.  Much work has been               
              done on wave solutions of most of these equations.  This project               
              is concerned with the stability of such wave solutions, a topic                
              which has received very little attention.  The project gives a                 
              very important framework of stability analysis for travelling                  
              waves by using topological invariants.  It is a conceptually new               
              idea; very robust to perturbations because of its topological                  
              character.  The basic idea of 'stability index' has been                       
              developed recently.  It shows great potential as a new tool which              
              can be used to explore many examples of wave phenomena occurring               
              in both theoretical mathematics and the physical world.                        
                   The travelling wave is the most basic object used                         
              to understand dynamic pattern formation such as shock                          
              waves, crystal growth, and flame propagation, since the phase                  
              change occurs only through the motion of interfacial boundaries                
              and such a motion takes the form of travelling waves.  The                     
              important issue is knowing whether such waves are observable or                
              not, which is the same thing as asking whether they are stable.                
              It is, in general, quite difficult to determine their stability                
              properties, since travelling waves are large amplitude solutions               
              connecting two different stable states and usually contain sharp               
              transition layers.  The new topological machinery used in                      
              this project to detect stability is not a perturbative one, and                
              hence has the potential for broad applicability.
