Title       : Hormone-Behavior Adaptations in Arctic Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1995  
File        : a9300771

Award Number: 9300771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Odile de la Beaujardiere                
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394252             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wingfield jwingfie@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Arctic summer poses a number of problems for migratory birds               
              that exploit the rich productivity of the tundra for reproduction.             
              The breeding period is so brief that the time required for the                 
              establishment of a territory, pair bonding and courtship may be                
              truncated into a few days or even hours. Birds must arrive early to            
              begin nesting so that the young are produced while conditions are              
              still favorable for their survival. Frequently, weather conditions             
              in the Arctic spring are severe, resulting in serious metabolic                
              problems not only for the onset of breeding but even for survival.             
              This research will elucidate the mechanisms by which Arctic birds              
              resist the rigors of the Arctic summer. Among the questions                    
              addressed are why there is variation in the adrenocortical                     
              responsiveness to stress both among and within species, whether                
              this is related to behavioral effects of stress hormones such as               
              corticosterone and the distribution of receptors in neural tissue,             
              and whether the variability is regulated by photoperiod through the            
              action of gonadal hormones. Additionally, the hormonal basis of                
              variation in breeding strategy will be explored in the                         
              white-crowned sparrow that shows spatial opportunism on arrival and            
              then defends neither a territory nor a nest site; and in the snow              
              bunting that shows an intermediate strategy and defends a nest site            
              at least during egg-laying, but does not appear to be territorial              
              later in the season. Comparisons of these species, and receptor                
              distributions for steroid hormones in the brain will shed new light            
              on the diversity of hormone-behavior adaptations in Arctic birds,              
              and will have considerable significance for the regulation of                  
              reproductive processes of vertebrates in general. Both of these                
              objectives are alligned with program goals for Polar Biology and               
              Medicine.
