Title       : A Manual to the Plants of Costa Rica - Final Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1997    
File        : a9300814

Award Number: 9300814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry E. Hammel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Grayum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This biodiversity survey project will complete the final, three-               
              year phase of a remarkable ten-year study that will document the               
              plants of Costa Rica.  The manual will be published in English and             
              Spanish and will include keys, diagrams, descriptions and                      
              geographic distribution of the plant species.  Simultaneously, this            
              data (checklists, keys, full treatments and illustrations) will be             
              available as a computerized database to scientists and students.               
              Collaborators in Costa Rica include scientists at INBio, the Museo             
              Nacional and the Organization for Tropical Studies.  The data will             
              be incorporated into a GIS database at INBio.  Representative plant            
              collections for research and training of students have been and                
              will continue to be deposited at these institutions as well a                  
              Missouri Botanical Garden.  The manual and the on-line database                
              will be an essential biodiversity research and conservation                    
              reference for tropical biologists and for biologists in Costa Rica             
              and throughout Latin America.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              This biodiversity study will complete a remarkable ten-year study              
              to survey, inventory and document the plants of Costa Rica.  The               
              resultant manual will be published in English and Spanish, with the            
              data available as a computerized database to scientists and                    
              students.  Collaborators in Costa Rica include scientists at INBio,            
              the Museo Nacional and the Organization for Tropical Studies. The              
              study will continue to yield representative plant collections for              
              research and training of students in Costa Rica and at Missouri.               
              The manual and the on-line database will be an essential                       
              biodiversity research and conservation reference for tropical                  
              biologists and for biologists in Costa Rica and throughout Latin               
              America.
