Title       : REU Site in the Study of Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9300375

Award Number: 9300375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Israel Abramov abramov@email.gc.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Oley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louise Hainline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Riddell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              79        Psychology Sciences NEC                 
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds to The Infant Study Center and Visual                
              Research Lab in the Psychology Department at Brooklyn College to               
              continue a successful REU-Site which offers students a research                
              experience which focuses on many aspects of the visual system.                 
              Together with a colleague from Medgar-Evers College of CUNY,                   
              mentors will constitute a REU-Site aimed at students who might be              
              persuaded by their research experience to continue to the doctorate            
              in Experimental and Developmental Psychology, and related areas in             
              the Neurosciences.  Both institutions have many women and minority             
              students as well as special programs to attract and guide such                 
              students; heavy emphasis will be placed on recruiting among them.              
              The training program includes laboratory seminars, an active role              
              in a specific research "team", and public presentations of results.            
                                                                                             
              The research areas, which are all heavily computerized and                     
              instrumented, include: (1) Development of infants' abilities to                
              focus their eyes on objects around them (i.e., mechanisms of                   
              accommodation and convergence); methods will include quantitative              
              photorefraction.  (2) Brain mechanisms associated with vision.                 
              Visual evoked potentials will be recorded to examine the maturation            
              of physiological systems, especially those involving the lateral               
              interactions that are so important for object recognition.  (3)                
              Color vision, particularly the use of scaling techniques to specify            
              color appearance under a variety of viewing conditions, such as                
              changes in retinal position; results will be related to known                  
              variations in anatomy and physiology across the retina.                        
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to               
              attract talented students into careers in science through active               
              undergraduate research experiences.
