Title       : "Undergraduate Research Participation: Collaborative Cross Disciplinary Research
               in Biology"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9300288

Award Number: 9300288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Kunz kunz@bio.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to establish an NSF-REU Sites                        
              project in the Department of Biology at Boston University                      
              for ten students.  Past experience has shown that NSF awards                   
              for undergraduate research have stimulated many previous                       
              participants to become productive scholars.  Six cross-                        
              disciplinary, team-oriented projects will provide each group                   
              of two students with the opportunity to work closely with                      
              two experienced faculty mentors on a common project.  The                      
              emphasis on the REU site project is to promote research                        
              interactions between students and research biologists whose                    
              disciplines are traditionally focused on different sub-                        
              disciplines in Biology.  Collaborative research topics                         
              include:  the effects of heavy metal uptake on reproduction                    
              in dogfish shark, regulation of neurotransmitters during                       
              development, intensity of selection in environmentally                         
              induced mutations, establishment of cell lines from                            
              endangered species, adrenocortical activity in captive bats,                   
              and mechanisms of gene induction in retinal cells.  Faculty                    
              mentors have been carefully selected on the basis of their                     
              experience in the classroom, research contacts with                            
              undergraduates, and their own research contributions.  The                     
              participating faculty mentors have a broad spectrum of                         
              research interests and are represented by both beginning and                   
              establish investigators.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Qualified undergraduates will be recruited mostly form                         
              regional four-year colleges that do not provide significant                    
              opportunities for research and from Boston University.  The                    
              Program will recruit five students from local and regional                     
              colleges and five from Boston University.  Recruitment                         
              efforts will specifically target minority, women, and                          
              physically challenged students.  Selection procedures will                     
              be based on scholarly aptitude, research potential, and                        
              previous experience.  Students will be expected to live on                     
              the university campus and to participate in the full range                     
              of research opportunities, weekly discussions, and social                      
              gatherings to foster a sense of community among students and                   
              faculty mentors.  A special ethics component will focus on                     
              issues such as standards of scientific integrity, authorship                   
              responsibility, information privacy and protection, ethical                    
              treatment of animals, alternative animal models, conflict of                   
              interest, and plagiarism.
