Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9300197

Award Number: 9300197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harrington Wells harrington-wells@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Buchheim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lamont K. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Goldsmith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biological                      
              Sciences at the University of Tulsa to continue a successful                   
              REU SITE.  The program will help train undergraduate                           
              students in the philosophy, mechanics, and execution of                        
              scientific research.  This project will enhance an already                     
              strong program in undergraduate research participation, and                    
              will extend this program into the summer. Another goal is to                   
              enhance opportunities for participation in scientific                          
              research for members of underrepresented groups. The                           
              Undergraduate Summer Research Program will consist of a                        
              research workshop, independent research projects, weekly                       
              group meetings, invited speakers, and a research colloquium.                   
              The research workshop will introduce the students to the                       
              philosophy and mechanics of the various fields in biology                      
              represented by the participating faculty. One result of the                    
              workshop will be the development by each student of an                         
              individual research project. These projects will focus on                      
              nectivore foraging ecology, reproductive behavioral ecology,                   
              vertebrate reproductive physiology (ecology & evolution),                      
              algal evolution & systematics, or cyanobacterial                               
              microbiology. The students will complete their projects over                   
              the course of the summer. The weekly group meetings will                       
              provide a forum for review of literature, progress reports                     
              on research projects, and for solving problems that arise                      
              during the course of the projects. The invited speakers will                   
              expose the students to a wider variety of view points in                       
              biology than is available through the participating faculty.                   
              Finally, students will communicate the results of their                        
              projects and experience critical peer review through the                       
              research colloquium.
