Title       : Collective Nuclear Excitations Probed with Neutrons and Nuclear Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9300077

Award Number: 9300077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $887000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Yates yates@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse L. Weil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus T. McEllistrem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research of the nuclear science group using the Van               
              de Graaff accelerator laboratory at the University of Kentucky                 
              will focus on related topics in nuclear structure, neutron                     
              reactions and scattering, and nuclear astrophysics.  Studies of                
              nuclear structure are primarily oriented toward a) exploring                   
              collective multi-phonon excitations, such as quadrupole-                       
              quadrupole, quadrupole-octupole, and octupole-octupole modes, at               
              low excitation energies, b) defining the nature of mixed-symmetry              
              or "scissors mode" excitations in deformed and transitional                    
              nuclei, c) defining the separate roles of protons and neutrons in              
              collective modes, and d) understanding nuclear shell structure                 
              and the nature of nuclear shape transitions.  Since transition                 
              rates are required to interpret these phenomena, the techniques                
              developed in our laboratory to measure nuclear level lifetimes                 
              with the Doppler-shift attenuation method following inelastic                  
              neutron scattering are crucial to these investigations.  Neutron               
              scattering studies will concentrate on understanding the                       
              differences between excitations probed by neutrons and by other                
              hadrons or leptons and will complement many other ongoing nuclear              
              structure investigations.  Detailed studies or nuclear level                   
              densities in the bound state region and the energy dependence of               
              level densities will be pursued.  Carefully selected studies in                
              nuclear astrophysics that are particularly appropriate to our                  
              capabilities and facilities are proposed.
