Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Polya Trees for Nonparametric Bayesian Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9300137

Award Number: 9300137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Lavine michael@stat.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Polya trees are a class of probability models intermediate                
              between the more specific Dirichlet processes and the more                     
              general tailfree distributions.  The proposed research project                 
              will investigate whether Polya trees provide workable solutions                
              in some problems where Dirichlet processes are unsatisfactory.                 
              The hope is that the generality of Polya trees can be used to                  
              create models that reflect prior and posterior opinions more                   
              accurately while avoiding the computational complexity of the                  
              full class of tailfree distributions.  The proposed research                   
              concentrates in four areas:                                                    
                1. Modelling opinions of smoothness, monotonicity and                        
              unimodality through the joint distributions of the components of               
              the Polya tree,                                                                
                2. Modelling predictive distributions through mixtures of Polya              
              trees,                                                                         
                3. Assessing the robustness of parametric models by exploring                
              nonparametric models concentrating around parametric ones;                     
              assessing the consistency of the nonparametric models and                      
                4. Generalizing the Dirichlet process to yield more flexible                 
              priors for the sizes of the point masses in the random                         
              distribution.                                                                  
                   A constant problem in statistics is constructing                          
              mathematical models for real world phenomena.  To be useful the                
              models must be sufficiently sophisticated to represent essential               
              features of the phenomena accurately but must also be                          
              computationally tractable.  The proposed research project                      
              investigates a class of models called "Polya trees" that                       
              generalize the well known, tractable, but somewhat limited class               
              of models called "Dirichlet processes."  The hope is that Polya                
              trees can represent real world phenomena more accurately than                  
              Dirichlet processes while remaining tractable.  The work will                  
              proceed partly through theoretical calculation, partly through                 
              computer simulation and partly through examples of Polya trees                 
              applied to real data.
