Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Ecology & Conservation Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1993       
File        : a9300380

Award Number: 9300380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy J. Hatch hatch@umbsky.cc.umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biology at                      
              the University of Massachusetts at Boston to continue a                        
              successful REU SITE.  The program will give ten                                
              undergraduate students the opportunity to participate in                       
              research projects in ecology and conservation biology                          
              working with one of eight faculty sponsors in the                              
              Department.  Students  will be recruited intensively in the                    
              Boston area and also elsewhere in New England.                                 
                                                                                             
              The two major component of the program are complementary:                      
              (1) a series of lectures/discussions for all the students,                     
              and (2) individual research projects in which each student                     
              is closely associated with an advisor/mentor.                                  
                                                                                             
              Initial group meetings that address the theory and practice                    
              of research continue as weekly meetings at which students                      
              focus on topics that relate to the conduct of research or                      
              its implications They will also visit two or more field                        
              sites and learn directly about each others' projects A small                   
              hands-on workshop on molecular techniques will show the                        
              great potential of such methods for ecology An end-of-                         
              session retreat at the University Field Station will serve                     
              to articulate impressions, explore philosophical issues, and                   
              weave together some of the summers' threads.                                   
                                                                                             
              Potential research topics are will be suggested, several of                    
              which can effectively involve two or more undergraduates.                      
              The topics are focused on issues of biodiversity and                           
              conservation ecology but are intentionally diverse to                          
              illustrate several approaches They include three on the                        
              behavioral ecology of rare/endangered vertebrates, and                         
              others on the physiological ecology of Lepidoptera, the                        
              diversity of bacteria, the genetics of endangered plants,                      
              and the genetic diversity of deep-sea molluscs.  At the end                    
              of the session each student will prepare a written and                         
              present a short paper in a mini-conference.
