Title       : A Framework for Integrated Production Planning and Scheduling in a Hybrid
               Assembly Job Shop Environment Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9300568

Award Number: 9300568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bobbie L. Foote Foote@mailhost.ecn.uoknor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adedeji B. Badiru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Simin Pulat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manjunath Kamath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shivakumar Raman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9300568  Foote       The advancement in computer technology and the competition 
              among computer companies have resulted in an increase in the  application of
              computer aided design (CAD), computer aided process  planning and computer
              aided manufacturing (CAM).  Although the  development of new technologies is
              necessary for the advancement of  science, lack of integration of these
              technologies will prove  detrimental to the system and hence may result in the
              desertion of  such technologies. Today, there is greater need for efficient   
              production management techniques than ever.  Current methods of  improving
              production management focus on several approaches as  independent methods of
              improvement.  The goal of this research is  to develop in some sense a
              'maximal' production management  methodology.  A 'maximal' methodology is one 
              that takes advantages  of the major variable sources of flexibility and
              response available   to a manager:  choosing lot size,process plan (which part
              feature  to process), process used to create feature, sequence at each 
              process, inventory created, shortage accepted or subcontract  awarded.  The
              methodology applies to a hybrid assembly job  shop,  which manufactures
              components some of which go to an assembly line.       This approach is now
              possible due to advances in modeling  and  computational methodologies,
              increased computer power, and advances  in data base organization.  The
              individual data fields (time  standards, process plans, holding costs,
              reliability and defect  rate data, etc.) are limited to those currently
              available in actual  manufacturing systems known and explored by the
              researchers.  The  individual choices must be coordinated since optimizing an 
              individual variable such as lot size may overload a bottleneck  resource,
              optimizing flow time by shortest processing time may  increase tardiness and
              again overload a temporary bottleneck.   The  integration of fast simulation
              process planning, multiple criteria  optimization, stochastic programming with 
              recourse techniques with  the scheduling and sequencing techniques is original
              and shows  promise of improvements over the  current theory.
