Title       : Acquisition of Ultra-High Angular and Energy Resolution Photoemission System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9300812

Award Number: 9300812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Xun Shen zxshen@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Piero A. Pianetta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Spicer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9162,
Abstract    :
                   The novel design of this new ultra-high resolution                        
              photoemission system will give an energy and angular resolution of             
              better than 5 meV and 0.2 degrees, respectively.  The 5 meV                    
              resolution is about a factor of 4-5 times better than most current             
              state of the art spectrometers.  The 0.2 degrees angular resolution            
              is about a factor of 10 times better than the typical angle-                   
              resolved photoemission spectrometer.  Most importantly, the                    
              analyzer enables one to simultaneously acquire 80 spectra at                   
              different angles in the time it would normally take to acquire one             
              spectrum with a conventional spectrometer.  In addition, the large             
              analyzer size also dramatically enhances the efficiency of the                 
              spectrometer.  This means that the new spectrometer will have a                
              total counting rate at least 100 times better than the best                    
              spectrometer in the field now.  This equipment will be used for a              
              variety or research programs at Stanford University.  It will also             
              be made available to researchers from other institutions.                      
                   The successful implementation of this system will have a very             
              positive impact on many exciting areas of research on advanced                 
              materials.  This includes the high-temperature superconductors,                
              semiconductors, the fullerenes and their derivatives, magnetic                 
              materials, the Mott insulators, and heavy fermion and mixed valence            
              compounds.  Some of the key issues in contemporary physics will be             
              very effectively addressed by the extremely high energy and angular            
              resolution made available by the new spectrometer.  Examples                   
              include the superconducting gap in cuprates and the Kondo resonance            
              in heavy fermions.  Acquisition of this system will greatly enhance            
              ongoing and future research, as well as the educational environment            
              at Stanford University and other institutions.
