Title       : Undergraduate Research Projects on the Geology of a Deformed Continental Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1994        
File        : a9300259

Award Number: 9300259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance M. Soja csoja@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim A. Waldron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   We seek funding for a two-year summer research program to                 
              enhance research opportunities in the field and laboratory for                 
              geology undergraduate students from Colgate University and other               
              colleges.  Our goals are to better prepare undergraduate students              
              for graduate education in geology and to encourage pursuit of                  
              future careers in the geosciences and related fields by involving              
              junior and senior undergraduates in a supportive research                      
              environment.  Minority students enrolled in Colgate University`s               
              pre-college summer program and in the geology department's field-              
              based seminar for first-year students and students from other                  
              colleges will be strongly encouraged to participate in our summer              
              program.  Research topics provide undergraduates interested in                 
              geology with tractable study problems that will make significant               
              contributions to our understanding of the geologic history of a                
              classic deformed continental margin.  Research topics in New York              
              and New England will focus primarily on the Taconic fold/thrust                
              belt, Adirondack massif, and Cortlandt Complex.  Additional                    
              research opportunities will be available at Colgate on topics                  
              related to aqueous geochemistry, clay mineralogy, and geomorphology            
              and in Alaska on the paleontology and sedimentology of Paleozoic               
              carbonates.  Student participants will begin our summer geology                
              program by attending a six-week orientation field exercise where               
              they will learn the fundamentals of field-based research and                   
              undertake independent mapping exercises in a variety of                        
              geographical and geological contexts.  For seven weeks following               
              the field program, students will work on research projects in close            
              partnership with geology faculty at Colgate.  Students will                    
              continue their research as independent study projects or as senior             
              Honors theses during the academic year.  We will teach students how            
              to use analytical instrumentation in geologic research and will                
              encourage them to incorporate departmental equipment (SEM/EDS, XRF,            
              XRD, AA, ion chromatograph, magnetometer, gravity meter,                       
              resistivity meter, and exploration seismograph) into their studies.            
              Students will present the results of their projects in a research              
              symposium at Colgate and (or) in coordination with faculty at                  
              regional geology meetings.
