Title       : Mechanistic Studies of Flavoprotein Oxidases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9506060

Award Number: 9506060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Fitzpatrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Reinhart  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                 :      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       #       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                        :    
                :                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    $       H       l                                        
                    D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @       P:            
                           @         e =       e                   #                         
                                               j       j   j       j       j       j       j 
                                                                                   O   L     
                                                                                             
                       #                   1           T       4   O                       j 
                                                                                     O       
                     j       j                                                               
                     j               j                                       ~              
              j       j       j       j                           4                          
                                                                                    9506831
              Plapp Alcohol dehydrogenases from horse liver and yeast have been studied
              extensively, but the origin of the catalytic activity and the function of the
              whole protein in catalytic dynamics is not fully understood. Roles for some
              amino acid residues at the active sites have been proposed from knowledge of
              the three dimensional structures, chemical modification, pH dependencies, and
              site directed mutagenesis, but contributions to catalysis should be
              quantitatively evaluated. Although enzymologists consider that residues at the
              active site are most critical for catalysis, emerging data suggest that amino
              acid residues distant from the active site contribute indirectly to catalytic
              power. Moreover, conformational change s can affect catalysis in unknown ways.
              Alcohol dehydrogenases offer a good system for studying these and other aspects
              of dynamics and catalysis. Three dimensional structures of the liver enzyme in
              two conformational states have been solved, and amino acid sequences for more
              than 60 alcohol dehydrogenases are available. Rate and dissociation constants
              for each step in the mechanism can be estimated from steady state and transient
              data and can quantitatively assess the effects of structural changes. The
              objectives of the proposed research are to answer questions about (1) the pH
              dependence of the catalytic mechanism, (2) the contribution of protein dynamics
              and conformational changes to catalysis and hydrogen tunneling, and (3) the
              tertiary and quaternary structures of various states of the horse and yeast
              enzymes. Site directed mutagenesis will be used to substitute amino acid
              residues, and steady state and transient kinetics, x ray crystallography, NMR,
              and fluorescence will be used to study these variants. Amino acid residues in
              the proton relay system and other residues at or distant from the active site
              will be substituted in order to study the origin of the pH dependencies for
              coenzyme binding and substrate interconversion steps. Residues near the
              coenzyme and substrate binding sites will be studied, as will some residues
              that contribute to the overall electrostatic potential of the protein. Protein
              flexibility and hydrogen tunneling will be studied in the liver enzyme with
              substitutions of residues in the interiors of the domains and at hinge regions,
              and by deletion of Q loops or other "extraneous" structural elements. Dynamic
              fluorescence properties of the horse liver enzyme with substituted tryptophan
              residues will be assessed. Three dimensional structures of complexes of the
              tetrameric yeast alcohol dehydrogenase and of potentially new conformational
              states of the dimeric horse liver enzyme will be determined by x ray
              crystallography. This research should increase our understanding of 
              biocatalysis. %%% Alcohol dehydrogenase is the enzyme required for the
              production of ethanol by fermentation in yeast and for the removal of alcohols
              by metabolism in man. The enzyme accelerates the rate of dehydrogenation of
              alcohols with a coenzyme, but the catalytic mechanism is not yet fully
              understood. Enzymes are large proteins that have a smaller active site region
              with several amino acid residues that directly bind the alcohol and the
              coenzyme. Other amino acid residues outside of the active site provide a
              framework for the catalytic process and indirectly affect the rate of the
              reaction by controlling protein dynamics. Three dimensional structures of the
              horse and human liver enzymes have been determined, and now the structure of
              the yeast enzyme will be determined. The horse liver enzyme changes
              conformation during catalysis, which may facilitate the transfer of hydrogen by
              a "tunneling" process. The roles of the various amino acid residues in the
              horse and yeast enzymes will be studied by "protein engineering", which uses
              site directed mutagenesis to change individual amino acids, and by steady state
              and rapid  reaction kinetics, X ray crystallography, and other spectroscopic
              methods that can detect the effects of the mutations. These studies will
              increase our understanding of biocatalysis. ***         @     @                
                      ;                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                      S u m m
              a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (
