Title       : Linkage of Laramide Depositional and Deformational Histories of the Sweetwater
               Arch and Adjacent Parts of the Hanna Basin, Wyoming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9506462

Award Number: 9506462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason A. Lillegraven   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur W. Snoke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lillegraven  9506462  This interdisciplinary study is focused in south-central
              Wyoming, along the boundary of the Hanna Basin and adjacent uplifts to the
              north.  The area is in the heart of the Rocky Mountain foreland, a region
              characterized by broad, asymmetric basement arches that over-rode adjacent
              subsiding basins along thrust and/or reverse faults (so-called "Laramide-style"
              deformation).  The Hanna Basin, although areally small, exposes an enormously
              thick, fossil-rich sequence of Upper Cretaceous to lower Eocene strata.  Parts
              of the sedimentary sequence were affected by the same structural events seen
              more obviously in adjacent mountain blocks.  Data from both areas suggest a
              polyphase deformational history, although its timing and regional extent are
              uncertain.  Goals of the research transgress boundaries among traditional
              disciplines of paleobiology, biostratigraphy, physical stratigraphy, and
              structural geology.  Paleogeography is a unifying theme, including: 1)
              interpretation of physical evolution of the Rocky Mountain landscape during the
              Laramide orogeny; and 2) documentation of massive changes in diversity among
              its ancient vertebrate inhabitants through time.  The research depends upon
              integration of new paleontological and geological data, linked between the
              basin and its marginal uplifts.  The unusually thick and richly fossiliferous
              Ferris Formation, for example, provides unique opportunity for adding new,
              highly relevant taxonomic distributional data to debates on: 1) catastrophic
              versus gradualistic dinosaurian extinction; and 2) the nature of North American
              mammalian faunal "recovery" following terrestrial extinctions near the end of
              the Cretaceous time.  These same fossils, in conjunction with abundant
              mammalian remains from the younger Hanna Formation (Paleocene-early Eocene),
              not only provide evidence for detailed zonation of stratigraphic horizons
              within the Hanna Basin, but also allow temporal calibration of recognizable,
              important geologic events.  Stratigraphic linka ge of unique paleontological
              occurrences with lithologically distinctive assemblages of syntectonic
              conglomerates, for example, shows significant differences in the timing of
              uplift, and erosional histories, between western and eastern extremes of the
              Hanna Basin's border of northern mountains.  The study area affords unusual
              opportunity to document effects of Laramide structural style throughout the
              geologic column, ranging from Precambrian igneous and metamorphic cores of the
              Shirley and Seminoe Mountains upwardly through the Paleozoic and Mesozoic
              montane cover into syntectonic basinal strata deposited during the latest
              Cretaceous and early Paleogene.  The structural research is to develop a
              detailed chronology based upon: 1) continuation of geologic/structural mapping
              in key areas; 2) analysis of deformational overprinting, from mesoscopic to
              macroscopic scales; 3) study of major and minor faults, applying kinematic
              analysis; 4) preparation of additional interpretive cross-sections from surface
              and subsurface (from well and seismic reflection sources) data; and 5)
              retrodeformational analysis of adjacent montane and basinal structures.  These
              kinds of detailed investigations, which are simultaneously based upon, and
              dependent upon, new paleontological/geological data derived from field
              observations, provide superb opportunities to: 1) expand basic knowledge of
              paleogeographic development of an area of converging tectonic patterns; 2)
              analyze important tectonic relationships among crustal shortening, orientation
              and sequential evolution of structural features, and synorogenic sedimentation;
              and 3) test diverse geometric and kinematic tectonic models applied to the
              basement-involved, contractional regime characterizing the eastern Rocky
              Mountains.
