Title       : Role of Histones H1 in Modulating Transcription Factor Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9506164

Award Number: 9506164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry L. Workman jlw10@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506164  Workman  While functional transcription studies have implicated both
              core histones (nucleosome cores) and the linker H1 histones in transcription
              control, the distinct roles of these proteins and their functional interactions
              have not been determined. The long term goal of this research is to describe
              the details of these interactions as well the interactions of transcription
              factors with these histone complexes. These studies will employ model
              nucleosome templates to determine basic parameters governing the ability of H1
              to regulate transcription factor access to nucleosomal DNA. We will analyze the
              histone domains and modifications that govern the functions of H1 in
              transcription repression and activation. Moreover, these studies will utilize
              purified systems, where activities can be accurately attributed to protein
              components. These studies will help clarify several issues concerning H1
              function and provide mechanistic detail of how transcription factors overcome
              H1 repression to access nucleosomal DNA at enhancer and promoter elements in
              cellular chromatin during gene activation.  The specific objectives are:    1)
              Determination of which core histone amino termini and precise acetylated
              lysines effect H1 binding to nucleosomes and repression of factor binding. 
              Individual core histone amino termini regulating H1 repression will be
              identified by the formation of hybrid nucleosomes where specific histone tails
              have been removed.  The ability of acetylated forms of these histones to also
              relieve repression will be determined by the application of novel
              immunoblotting techniques using antibodies to all or specific acetylated
              lysines on histones.  These methods will determine the specific acetylated
              histones and in some cases the specific acetylated lysines which alleviated H1
              repression.  2) Analysis of H1 domains involved in restricting transcription
              factor access and the effect of H1 phosphorylation on their activity.  The
              function of histone H1 domains (i.e. the central globular doma in, the
              C-terminal and N-terminal domains) in repression of transcription factor
              binding will be determined by assaying the function of these individual
              domains.  The role of H1 phosphorylation will be determined by measuring the
              repression of factor binding by hyper-phosphorylated H1.  In addition, the
              retention or loss of phosphorylated H1 forms upon transcription factor binding
              will be determined by western-blots of mobility shift gels using antibodies to
              total H1 or antibodies specific for hyperphosphorylated or dephosphorylated
              forms.  %%%  While functional transcription studies have implicated both core
              histones (nucleosome cores) and the linker H1 histones in transcription
              control, the distinct roles of these proteins and their functional interactions
              have not been determined. The long term goal of this research is to describe
              the details of these interactions as well the interactions of transcription
              factors with these histone complexes. These studies will employ model
              nucleosome templates to determine basic parameters governing the ability of H1
              to regulate transcription factor access to nucleosomal DNA.  ***
