Title       : Object Identification, Classification and Avoidance in 3-D Underwater Automated
               Surveillance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9506771

Award Number: 9506771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimon P. Valavanis kimon@cacs.usl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Al R. Steward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Magdy A. Bayoumi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George N. Saridis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9506771  Valavanis  The central mbjective of the proposed work is:  object 
              identification, classification and avoidance in 3-D  underwater automated
              surveillance.  The motivation behind  this objective is monitoring and
              safeguarding wetlands,  coastal fisheries and deep water polluted environments,
               which are among the most valuable national resources.  The  specific
              application domain, directly related to the  proposed work, is surveying and
              monitoring Louisiana's  wetlands and shallow water fisheries in collaboration
              with  the Southern Science Center (SSC) - previously known as the  National
              Wetlands Research Center - and the recently  established National Marine
              Fisheries Services (NMFS), both  located at the University of Southwestern
              Louisiana's  (USL's) research park.    This proposal capitalizes on already
              available resources,  technology and algorithms, developed for other
              applications,  but adapts and further modifies and enhances them for the 
              proposed automated surveillance problem.  The end result  will be:  a detailed
              methodology/approach for the real-time  sensor based autonomous control and
              navigation of an  underwater vehicle, capable of automated surveillance in 
              sensitive environments.  There will be no field studies  and/or vehicle related
              experiments at this stage.  Three  specific objectives will be accomplished:   
              i)Development of a detailed architecture for underwater    vehicle motion
              control.    ii)    Implementation and experimental verification of an   
              already derived total color difference (TCD) measure and    total color
              difference tolerance (TCDT) thresholds for    underwater object identification.
                 iii)   Enhancement and verification of a recently derived    potential based
              panel method for autonomous vehicle    motion planning in a 3-D workshop
              environment.  ***
