Title       : Structure and Permeability of the Outer Mitochondrial Membrane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1997     
File        : a9506113

Award Number: 9506113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen A. Mannella   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506113  Mannella  This project aims at answering fundamental questions about
              the  structure and function of the gated membrane channel, VDAC or 
              mitochondrial porin, which is formed by a 31-kD protein in the  mitochondrial
              outer membrane.  Electron microscopy and digital  image analysis are being
              applied to two-dimensional (2-D) crystals  generated from isolated fungal outer
              mitochondrial membranes to  determine the 3-D shape of the VDAC channel in two
              different  conformations (and complexed with an endogenous modulator protein) 
              at a resolution of about 2nm.  Information about the structural and  functional
              topography of the VDAC protein also are provided by  sequence-specific
              antibodies and by partial proteolysis  experiments.  Regions of the channel
              polypeptide that are most  likely to form transmembrane  -strands are being
              identified by  applying a novel algorithm for local multiple-sequence alignment
               (the Gibbs sampler) to sequences of VDACs and distantly related  bacterial
              channels (several of which have known atomic structure).   These varied kinds
              of "low-resolution" structural information will  be used to construct a
              self-consistent folding model for the VDAC  polypeptide.  At the same time,
              systematic attempts will be made to  grow bigger 2-D and 3-D crystals of the
              VDAC channel, suitable for  higher resolution structure determination by
              electron and/or x-ray  diffraction.  These crystallization attempts have been
              made  possible by recent success in expressing the mitochondrial protein  in
              bacteria at levels over 100-fold greater than are possible with  fungal
              cultures.  %%%  The cell and its internal compartments are bounded by membranes
               composed of lipids and proteins.  The lipids form a bilayer sheath  that is
              impenetrable to polar ions and molecules.  Proteins make it  possible for the
              different compartments to communicate, i.e.,  exchange material.  For example,
              some proteins form channels,  water-filled passageways across the membrane
              bilayer which open and  close (or gate) in  response to different stimuli.  The
              basic  structure of channels and the molecular mechanism(s) of their  gating
              are only poorly understood.  In this project, we are  studying a channel that
              occurs on the surface of the intracellular  organelle that is the cell's
              powerplant, the mitochondrion.  The  channel is switched by transmembrane
              electrical potentials between  states with different degrees of openness, and
              this gating appears  to be controlled by other proteins in the mitochondrion. 
              Using  electron crystallography and other biophysical and biochemical 
              approaches, this research will determine the three-dimensional  structure of
              the channel in different states, in order to  understand how it is formed and
              how it opens and closes.  ***
