Title       : Development of Time-Resolved Solid-State NMR Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9506117

Award Number: 9506117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy N. Evans evansj@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506117  Evans  This proposal seeks to develop further the technique of time- 
              resolved solid-state NMR spectroscopy, a method introduced recently  by this
              laboratory for the structural investigation of fast  reactions, particularly
              enzymatic reactions, as a function of time.  The overall goals are to (1)
              design, build and test an new type of  apparatus for rapidly freezing
              enzyme-substrate (or for that  matter, any two reactants or substrate and
              catalyst) in 100  microseconds or less, and (2) develop new pulse-sequences for
               measurement of selective distances from dipolar coupled spins  within
              transient species by time-resolved rotational-echo double  resonance (REDOR)
              solid-state NMR.  The development of these new  methods will be important not
              just in extending the time-resolution  and structural information that
              time-resolved solid-state NMR  spectroscopy can currently provide, but also for
              setting the stage  for the delineation of the molecular events of enzymatic
              catalysis  and culminating in the making of a "movie" of an enzyme in action. 
              %%%  Enzymes are the agents responsible for carrying out the majority of  the
              chemical transformations in the living organisms.  The purpose  of the work
              funded by this proposal is to develop methods, based on  the structural
              technique Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)  spectroscopy, to determine the
              molecular details of an enzyme in  action.  Thus the ultimate goal is to define
              in three dimensions  the exact position of all the atoms at the site where the
              enzyme  carries out its chemistry, and follow them as a function of time.   The
              methods being developed are a completely novel approach to this  problem, and
              the consequences of solving this are significant for  an intellectual
              understanding of how enzymes work.  Such knowledge  could eventually be used to
              develop novel drugs, herbicides or  pesticides.  ***
