Title       : Genetic Regulation of Phase Change in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9506258

Award Number: 9506258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Poethig spoethig@mail.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9506258  Poethig    The correct timing of events in development is critical
              for normal  morphogenesis. At the same time, changes in the relative timing of 
              different developmental events (heterochrony) can be an important  source of
              novelty in evolution, particularly when the timing of  reproductive maturity
              changes relative to somatic maturity. The  vegetative development of the shoot
              in plants is marked by several  more or less discrete phases that can be
              distinguished from one  another on the basis of a variety of morphological and 
              physiological traits. A large number of obvious phase specific  traits have
              been defined in maize, greatly facilitating the genetic  and molecular analysis
              of the process of phase change in this  species. Recently, Dr. Poethig has
              identified a new mutation,  glossy early flowering, that dramatically
              accelerates both  vegetative and reproductive development. Mutant plants
              produce  leaves with adult vegetative fates abnormally early in shoot 
              development and also flower early. Although extensive work on woody  plants has
              suggested that the vegetative phase of the shoot is  linked in some way to its
              reproductive capacity, gef is the first  genetic link between these two aspects
              of shoot development in  maize. Dr. Poethig proposes to a) characterize the
              phenotype of gef  at a molecular, histological, and morphological level, b)
              determine  its cell autonomy by clonal analysis, and c) establish its 
              relationship to other genes involved in phase change by analyzing  double
              mutations. In addition, he proposes to conduct extensive  genetic screens for
              new mutations affecting phase change. these  screens will involve screening in
              a wild type genetic background  for mutations that accelerate vegetative phase
              change, and  screening a gl15-2 background for mutations that either enhance or
               suppress this partially functional mutation. These experiments  should provide
              new insight into the relationship between vegetative  and reproductive
              maturation in plants, and provide th e genetic and  molecular resources
              necessary for future research on the mechanisms  of this important aspect of
              plant development.  ***
