Title       : APS Conference on Understanding the Biological Clock: From Genetics to
               Physiology; July 8-12, 1995; Hanover, NH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9506222

Award Number: 9506222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Frank mfrank@aps.faseb.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Physiological Soc
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Biological rhythms are an important way in which living organisms interact
              with the environment, and a variety of mechanisms have been found for
              "biological clocks."  This conference is the first major conference in many
              years to provide a comprehensive overview of chronobiology, the study of the
              mechanisms underlying daily (circadian) and other cyclically timed functions
              and behavior of living organisms.  Speakers represent a full range of
              approaches from molecular biology and genetics of invertebrates and bacteria to
              comparative physiology and human behavior.  Diversity of chronobiological
              systems is a central theme, as the conference evaluates the current status of
              the field and directions for the future.  The conference organizers have
              encouraged participation by men and women who are from several nations and
              different kinds of institutions, representing a range of research opportunities
              for the attending younger investigators and students.  The final publication
              will be a lasting reference source as well as an authoritative overview on the
              current knowledge about biological clocks.  The book along with the
              interactions at the conference will have a significant impact on the field. 
              Results are likely to extend beyond simply biological rhythms, to sensory
              neuroscience, sensorimotor control, neuroendocrine and behavior studies in
              general.  Results also are likely to have an impact on improving areas of human
              performance in the workplace where features such as shift-work can affect daily
              rhythms.
