Title       : Genetic Analysis of Endocytosis in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9506839

Award Number: 9506839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas G. Davis ndavis@cmb.biosci.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95-06839  Davis          Endocytic trafficking entails receptor uptake from the
              cell  surface, and then transport through a series of poorly characterized 
              endosomal compartments, where decisions must be made concerning  recycling back
              to the surface versus delivery to the lysosome for  hydrolysis. Because of the
              complexity of the overall membrane transport  process and its consequent
              resistance to classical biochemical  dissective analysis, the underlying
              molecular mechanisms that control  and catalyze the various membrane transport
              steps remain largely  unknown. This proposal describes a powerful method of
              genetic analysis  in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae that isolates mutants
              defective  in the endocytosis of the yeast pheromone receptors. Surface
              pheromone  receptor is required for the mating of the two haploid cell types. 
              Under conditions where synthesis of new receptor is shut off, wild-type  cells
              mate poorly due to loss of surface receptor to ongoing receptor  endocytosis
              and degradation. Endocytosis-defective mutants retain  receptor at the cell
              surface, mate, and can thereby, be easily  isolated. Mutations isolated in the
              receptor genes themselves will  define the endocytosis signals on the receptor
              proteins themselves.  Mutations in other genes will define trans-acting
              functions required  for endocytosis, and serve thereby, to identify elements of
              the  transport apparatus. Preliminary results indicate that many of these  ren
              mutants (defective in receptor endocytosis) will be late-acting,  blocking
              endocytosis at post-surface transport steps. A pathway for  yeast endocytic
              transport will be defined through the genetic ordering  of ren mutants by
              epistasis analysis. Molecular cloning and sequence  analysis of the encoded
              proteins will impart a new understanding of the  molecules that catalyze
              endocytosis.  The mechanisms that drive the  fundamental processes of the
              eukaryotic cell -transcription, secretion,  and the cell cycle -- generally
              have been well conserved through  evolut ion from yeast to man. This appears to
              be true for endocytosis as  well. Molecules identified through this proposed
              research, we  anticipate, will allow isolation of the homologs that control 
              endocytosis in mammals.  %%%        Research in this proposal focuses a variety
              of powerful genetic  approaches on the process of receptor endocytosis, studied
              in the yeast  Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Endocytosis is the process by which
              patches  of the cell surface membrane are invaginated and internalized into the
               body of the cell. It provides a mechanism for uptake of essential  nutrients
              into the cell, and by controlling the abundance of different  receptors at the
              cell surface, it also serves to regulate the cell's  communication and contact
              with the external environment. Selective  internalization of surface receptors,
              both regulates the capacity for  response to different extracellular hormones
              and also modulates contact  with neighboring cells and beneficial symbionts.
              Not surprisingly,  endocytosis plays a major role in disease processes as well.
              A variety  of harmful agents -- viruses, bacterial endotoxins, and
              intracellular  parasites -- make malevolent use of this process.  Endocytic 
              trafficking entails uptake of receptors from the cell surface, and then 
              transport through a series of poorly characterized intracellular  compartments,
              the "endosomes". Because of the complexity of this  overall membrane transport
              process and its consequent resistance to  biochemical dissective analysis, the
              underlying molecular mechanisms  that control and catalyze the various membrane
              transport steps remain  largely unknown. Our newly developed genetic approach
              provides a  straightforward way of experimentally dissecting this complexity. 
              A  key first step will be the isolation of a collection of mutants that  block
              endocytosis of the yeast pheromone receptors. Cell surface  pheromone receptor
              is required for the conjugal mating of the two yeast  sexes. Under experimental
              conditions where new receptor synthesis  has  been shut-off, the yeast cells
              mate quite poorly due to the loss of  cell surface receptor to ongoing
              endocytic internalization. Mutants,  specifically defective for the endocytic
              process, fail to internalize  receptor, retain it at the surface, and
              consequently show robust  mating. Such mutants are easily isolated.
              Endocytosis-defective  mutations that map to the receptor genes themselves,
              will identify the  endocytosis signals, that is those features of the receptor
              proteins  which direct their own uptake. More exciting are mutations in other 
              genes. These will identify new proteins, elements presumably of the  molecular
              machinery that catalyzes and effects this endocytic uptake.  We expect that the
              subsequent molecular cloning and sequence analysis  of these novel proteins
              will impart a new understanding of the  molecules that catalyze this complex
              transport process.   The various  mechanisms that drive the fundamental
              processes of the eukaryotic cell,  generally have been found to be quite well
              conserved through evolution,  from yeast to man. Endocytosis is no exception,
              we anticipate therefore  that the molecules identified in the yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae by  this research should provide an entry into the
              molecular analysis of  endocytosis in animal cells, allowing the isolation and 
              characterization of the analogous proteins from mammals.  ***
