Title       : Evolutionary Radiations in Paleozoic and Mesozoic Crinoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9506568

Award Number: 9506568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Foote mfoote@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Foote  9506568   This research will (1) use explicit data on skeletal anatomy to
              document evolutionary radiations in Paleozoic and Mesozoic crinoids, and (2)
              test for a proposed difference between evolutionary radiations at different
              taxonomic scales by comparing the radiation of crinoids as a whole to the
              radiations of the constituent subgroups of crinoids.   Evolutionary radiations,
              involving substantial increases in the number of named taxa and in
              morphological diversity, are among the most prominent features of the fossil
              record.  It is commonly thought that evolutionary radiations at different
              taxonomic, temporal, and spatial scales do not differ significantly in temporal
              patterns or underlying mechanisms.  This perspective has scarcely been tested
              directly.  There are some hints that there may be a major difference between
              the evolutionary radiations of higher taxa (clades) and the lower taxa
              (subclades) nested within them, namely that morphological diversification
              within subclades is more gradual in time than diversification of the larger
              clade to which they belong.  However, these suggestions have been based on case
              studies that are not ideally suited to test this idea.  By comparing the
              Paleozoic radiation of a major invertebrate group, the Crinoidea, to that of
              subsidiary crinoid clads that diversified concurrently with the larger crinoid
              clade, I will test for the existence of such a discordance between taxonomic
              ranks.  The Mesozoic radiation of articulate crinoids will provide an
              additional comparison.  The results will help to answer questions about the
              hierarchical nature of evolution and our ability to predict larger-scale
              evolutionary patterns from smaller-scale patterns.   Changes in morphological
              diversity, or disparity, during evolutionary radiations are usually assessed by
              using proxies such as the number of higher taxa (mainly classes and orders). 
              There are a number of reasons to question the adequacy of such proxies.  The
              proposed research will use direct quantification o f morphology to study
              evolutionary radiations in crinoids.  I will use discrete morphological
              characters to quantify crinoid form, and will measure morphological disparity
              based on the net dissimilarities among species.  I will apply a number of
              quantitative approaches, including "clade-shape" statistics, to explore the
              temporal pattern of morphological expectations of various evolutionary models. 
               The proposed research will answer questions about the generation of
              morphological diversity over long spans of evolutionary time, and will develop
              a morphological database that can be used by other workers to investigate a
              wide range of issues, including phylogenetic relationships, evolutionary rates,
              and trends.
