Title       : Career: The Role of Protease Activities in Arabidopsis thaliana Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9506195

Award Number: 9506195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susannah Gal sgal@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9506195  Gal  Proteins are the major structural and enzymatic component of 
              the cell.  The level of these essential compounds is  dependent not only on the
              level of synthesis, but also on  the level of breakdown by proteolytic enzymes.
               Despite  their identification and study since early in this century, 
              proteases have been primarily analyzed only in vitro.  This  includes analysis
              of their substrate specificity, pH optimum  and inhibitor susceptibility.  But,
              the role of these  enzymes in plant physiology can at present only be 
              speculated from these studies.  Proteases have been  implicated in such
              processes as leaf senescence, organ  abscission, seed germination and resource
              reutilization, but  are likely to be involved at many other stages of plant 
              growth where protein degradation is important.  For example,  expression of a
              number of specific protein products is  hampered by their instability due to
              natural mechanisms of  protein degradation in some tissues.  Relatively little
              is  known about the mechanisms of proteolytic degradation in  plants, so this
              proposed work will identify the proteases in  Arabidopsis thaliana.  The goal
              is to determine the role of  the these enzymes in plants and which one(s)
              affect the  accumulation of desirable proteins.  Not only will this work  set
              the stage for understanding how proteolysis controls a  number of cellular
              processes, but may also lead to new  approaches in plant biotechnology where
              protein levels are  critical for maintenance of a desirable phenotype.    The
              State University of New York at Binghamton prides itself  on its excellence in
              teaching and research.  Dr. Gal's  educational objectives during this granting
              period would  support that role of the university and the department.  The 
              goal is to integrate teaching and research by bringing more  research into
              course teaching and by bringing a teaching  framework to the undergraduate and
              graduate students in the  laboratory and the department.  This would equip the 
              students with the cri tical thinking skills needed for a  lifetime of learning
              in biology.
