Title       : NMR Studies of RNA Aptamers for Biological CoFactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9506913

Award Number: 9506913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juli Feigon feigon@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506913  Feigon  Aptamer is a name coined for DNA or RNA oligonucleotides which
              have  been selected from a large pool of oligonucleotides containing a  region
              of random nucleotide sequence for binding to a specific  target molecule.  The
              isolation process involves repeated cycles of  selection for, and enrichment
              of, oligonucleotides with an affinity  to a specific target, followed by
              amplification of these sequences  using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
              Olionucleotides with  the selected characteristics, i.e. binding to a specific
              molecule,  are finally identified through cloning and sequencing.  The cloned 
              sequences are usually screened for a common consensus and possible  secondary
              structural motif.  This methodology has been used to  identify a number of
              different classes of RNA aptamers that bind  specifically to common metabolic
              substrates and cofactors.  These  include ATP, GTP, riboflavin, FAD, FMN,
              cyanocobalamin and the  amino acids arginine and citrulline.  Based on the
              consensus  sequences and further experiments such as deletion analysis, 
              minimal binding sequences have in most cases been identified and a  secondary
              structure proposed.  However, to date, no three  dimensional structure for RNA
              aptamers have been determined.  Multidimensional, multinuclear NMR spectroscopy
              will be used to  determine the three-dimensional structures of aptamers that
              bind  biological cofactors, in the absence and presence of bound  cofactor. 
              RNA samples for NMR studies will be synthesized by in  vitro transcription
              using T7 RNA polymerase.  These will initially  be investigated by 1H NMR
              spectroscopy to screen for sequences  which give good NMR spectra.  Once
              well-behaved samples are  obtained, partially or uniformly 15N and/or
              13C-labeled samples  will be synthesized, to facilitate complete resonances
              assignment.   In favorable cases, complete three-dimensional structures will be
               determined using metric matrix distance geometry and refinement by  molecular
              dynamics.    %%%  NMR spectroscopy  will be used to study the structures of RNA
               oligonucleotides that bind biological cofactors.  These RNAs  contain a wide
              variety of proposed secondary structural motifs,  including hairpin loops,
              internal loops, pseudoknots, and  intramolecular G-quartets.  Thus,
              determination of their structures  will lead to a greater understanding of the
              principles of nucleic  acid folding.  Very few RNA structures of any kind have
              been solved  so far, so any information on tertiary structures of RNA should 
              greatly add to the knowledge base of these secondary structure  motifs. 
              Determination of the specific cofactor-RNA interactions  will also help
              elucidate some of the factors governing sequence  specific recognition of RNA
              by proteins and other ligands.  The  structures of the specific ligand binding
              sites are also relevant  to "RNA world" models of the origin of life, in which
              the evolution  of intermediary metabolism occured at the time of the RNA world.
                Finally, determination of these structures should be useful in the  design of
              new catalysts which need these co-factors for their  function.  ***
