Title       : Structure and Assembly of Helical Plant Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  1997    
File        : a9506204

Award Number: 9506204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald Stubbs gerald.stubbs@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506204  Stubbs  The structures of a number of helical plant viruses will be 
              determined in molecular detail, using the fiber diffraction methods  already
              used in this laboratory for several viruses of the  tobamovirus (tobacco mosaic
              virus, TMV) group.  The viruses to be  studied include three tobamoviruses,
              odontoglossum ringspot virus  (ORSV), ribgrass mosaic virus (RMV) and sunn-hemp
              mosaic virus  (SHMV), and one furovirus, soil-borne wheat mosaic virus (SBWMV).
                Structures of the three tobamoviruses will be determined by  molecular
              replacement, using the known structure of TMV.  The  structure of SBWMV will be
              determined using the methods of multi-  dimensional isomorphous replacement
              developed in this laboratory.  All structures will be refined using molecular
              dynamics methods, as  adapted in this laboratory for use with fiber diffraction
              data.   These refinement methods will be developed further.  The  tobamovirus
              group is the only rod-shaped virus group for which  three-dimensional
              structures have been determined at the molecular  level.  The structures to be
              determined will be important in  understanding the molecular characteristics of
              the group, including  the relationship between subgroups, and will advance
              understanding  of viral assembly and disassembly, viral-host interactions and 
              specificity, and vector transmission, as well as the relationship  between
              structure and the rapid evolution of RNA viruses.    %%%  The structures of a
              number of rod-shaped plant viruses will be  determined in molecular detail,
              using the fiber diffraction methods  already used in this laboratory for
              several viruses of the  tobamovirus. The viruses to be studied include three
              tobamoviruses,  odontoglossum ringspot virus (ORSV), ribgrass mosaic virus
              (RMV)  and sunn-hemp mosaic virus (SHMV), and the furovirus soil-borne  wheat
              mosaic virus (SBWMV).  The tobamovirus group is the only rod-  shaped virus
              group for which three-dimensional structures have been  determined at the
              molecular level.  The structu res to be determined  will be important in
              understanding the molecular characteristics of  the group, including the
              relationship between subgroups, and will  advance understanding of viral
              assembly and disassembly, viral-host  interactions and specificity, and viral
              transmission, as well as  the relationship between structure and the
              characteristically rapid  evolution of RNA viruses.     ***
