Title       : Differentiation and Evolution of the Nematode Male Tail
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9506308

Award Number: 9506308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott W. Emmons emmons@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9506308  Emmons    The aim of this project is to elucidate the molecular
              genetic basis  for the evolution of a morphological novelty. The organisms to
              be  studied are free living soil nematodes related to the model genetic 
              organism Caenorhabditis elegans. In previous work it has been shown  that a
              novel morphological feature of the male copulatory structure  has appeared
              during evolution of the genus Caenorhabditis. Genetic  studies in C. elegans
              have revealed that development of this  feature involves several genes acting
              in a morphogenetic pathway.  One gene of this pathway is the nematode homolog
              of the  transcription factor Pax-6. Pax-6 is found in many multicellular 
              organisms, from insects to vertebrates, and is thought to play an  essential
              role in patterning the central nervous system, as well as  in the development
              of the eye. The role of evolutionary change at  the Pax-6 locus in the
              appearance of the novel morphological  feature of nematodes will be
              investigated. Cell lineages will be  determined for several species and
              compared to those of C. elegans  to determine what role change in cell lineage
              has played in  evolution of morphology. The Pax-6 homolog of one non- 
              Caenorhabditis species will be isolated, sequenced, and compared to  the gene
              of C. elegans. The aim is to determine whether genetic  changes affecting
              morphology have occurred upstream of Pax-6, in  the promoter of Pax-6, in the
              protein coding region of Pax-6, or  downstream of Pax-6. If the genes of C.
              elegans and the second  species are identical in amino acid sequence and are
              expressed in  the same cells, then evolutionary change must have affected 
              downstream functions. If the two genes are not identical, then a  series of
              hybrid genes constructed from the genes of the two  species will be tested in
              C. elegans and in the second species. By  identifying in detail the genetic
              changes in a developmental gene  that have given rise to changes in morphology,
              Dr. Emmons hopes to  help elucidate both the genetic determi nants of
              morphogenesis, and  the nature of the genetic changes that result in evolution
              of  morphology. The results of this study should contribute towards  answering
              several outstanding questions concerning the mechanism of  evolution.  ***
