Title       : Control of RNA Processing in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9506301

Award Number: 9506301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillie L. Searles lsearles@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506301  Searles  The goal of this research is to determine the role of the
              nuclear protein encoded by the Drosophila melanogaster suppressor of sable 
              su(s)  gene in RNA processing control. The proposed experiments will test the
              hypothesis, based on previous work, that su(s) functions to aid the splicing
              machinery in discriminating between authentic and cryptic 5' splice donor
              sites. The following are specific objectives of this proposal. (1) Since
              purified, recombinant su(s) protein,expressed in a baculovirus system, binds to
              RNA, several biochemical techniques will be employed to determine whether su(s)
              binding affects the ability of a given pre-mRNA to be spliced.  The sites of
              su(s) protein binding on RNAs will be mapped. If su(s) binds specifically to
              donor site regions, a splicing complex assembly assay will be used to determine
              if su(s) binding to these sites interferes with Ul snRNP binding. Other
              experiments will examine the RNA binding specificity of endogenous su(s)
              protein and define the basis for poor splicing activity of su(s) mutant nuclear
              extracts. (2) To determine if the region of su(s) required for in vitro RNA
              binding activity is required for su(s) function in vivo, deletions will be
              introduced into RNA binding domain, and transformants carrying these deletion
              derivatives will be analyzed. If the deletions affect su(s) function in vivo,
              an effort will be made to identify specific amino acid residues required for
              the RNA binding activity. As a first step toward the identification of other
              functional dmains, the Musca domeslica su(s) homolog will be cloned and its
              sequence compared to the available D. melanogaster and D. virilis sequences.
              (3) To determine whether the intracellular distributions of splicing components
              and inefficiently spliced pre-mRNAs are altered in su(sJ mutants, larval
              salivary gland cells will be immunostained or in situ hybridized with
              appropriate probes and examined by con focal microscopy. (4) Natural RNA
              targets of su(s) regulation will be identified.   Antibodies that recognize
              su(s) strongly stain a relatively small number of polytene chromosomes bands in
              salivary gland nuclei. The strong sites of su(s) staining, which are likely to
              contain genes regulated by su(s), will be mapped on polytene chromosomes.
              Subsequently, an effort will be made to identify and analyze specific
              transcripts that are subject to regulation by su(s). This analysis of su(s)
              function has the potential to advance the understanding of mechanisms that
              regulate splice site selection in higher eukaryotes.  %%%  Eukaryotic genes
              contain varying numbers of regions of sequence which are named "introns". They
              are spliced out of the mRNA transcript and, in some cases, have alternative end
              points and so can result in a gene at the DNA level encoding more than one
              protein as a final product.  Thus it becomes important to understand how the
              splice sites in a transcript are identified and utilized. During the tenure of
              the previous award, experimental evidence suggested that the nuclear protein
              encoded by the gene from Drosophila,  suppressor of sable  su(s)  functions to
              aid the splicing machinery to discriminate between authentic and cryptic 5'
              splice donor sites. Further work will be undertaken to provide data to support
              this hypothesis. This analysis of su(s) function has the potential to advance
              the understanding of mechanisms that regulate splice site selection in higher
              eukaryotes.  ***
