Title       : Glycolytic Enzyme Dynamics in Living Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9506959

Award Number: 9506959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard Pagliaro LEN@U.WASHINGTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506959  Pagliaro    Much of  the understanding of cellular organization and 
              function has evolved in the conceptual framework of studying  the structure of
              fixed cells and biochemical processes in  dilute solution.  These approaches
              have been extremely  valuable in elucidating the microanatomy and biochemical 
              function of cells and their organelles, but the spatial and  temporal dynamics
              of many cellular processes remain poorly  understood.  In large part, this is
              due to the spatial  averaging inherent in many biochemical approaches and the 
              loss of temporal resolution in ultrastructural studies  requiring chemical
              fixation.  Fluorescent probe and optical  microscope techniques developed over
              the past decade have  made it possible to study an increasing number of
              molecular  and biochemical processes in living cells.  These techniques  are
              now adopted to characterize the organization of a  ubiquitous metabolic
              pathway, glycolysis, in living cell.  The glycolytic enzymes aldolase,
              phophofructokinase (PFK),  glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH),
              and triose  phosphate isomerase (TPI)  interact with each other and/or 
              structural proteins in vitro, and a variety of specific  reagents are now used
              to study their behavior, organization  and dynamics in vivo in living mammalian
              fibroblasts.  The  intracellular distribution and motility of each of these 
              enzymes is compared, and the interactions among these  enzymes in vitro and in
              vivo is characterized extensively.  The glycolytic enzyme enolase lacks
              specific interactions in  vitro and in vivo, and we will use enolase as a
              reference  molecule in our experiments.  Aldolase is concentrated in a 
              microdomain around F-actin stress fibers in fibroblasts, and  a fraction of the
              enzyme is bound in vivo.  This finding is  inconsistent with the textbook
              description of glycolysis  occurring as a series of fully solvated, diffusion
              limited  reactions in the cytoplasm, and consistent with a growing  number of
              models for organized glycolytic metabolism.   Recent work from several
              laboratories has led to the  identification of a putative domain for
              actin-interaction on  the aldolase molecule, based on biochemical and molecular
               genetic studies of aldolase interactions in vitro.  Site-  directed mutants of
              rabbit muscle aldolase are used to study  the effect of specific mutations on
              aldolase dynamics in  vivo; mutants of aldolase catalytic activity and actin- 
              binding activity have been obtained and characterized.  There is also evidence
              that PFK and GAPDH bind to F-actin  and may interact with aldolase in vitro. 
              The distribution  and mobility of these enzymes in vivo is mapped using ratio 
              imaging. The study is part of and reflects the  interdisciplinary approach
              taken by the lab, with  substantial biochemical characterization of reagents
              prior  to their use in vivo; electron microscopy, falling ball  viscometry,
              fluorescence photobleaching, and fluorescence  energy transfer measurements to
              quantify enzyme/actin  interaction in vitro; and microinjection, fluorescence 
              imaging, fluorescence photobleaching, and fluorescence  energy transfer
              experiments in vivo.  Better understanding  of the organization of this
              important and ubiquitous  metabolic pathway allows better understanding of the 
              cytoplasm, and how biochemical reactions in cytoplasm are  organized and
              regulated.  %%%  After the discovery of the particle responsible in a large 
              way for cellular energy metabolism of the cell, the  mitochondrion, a search
              was undertaken for a particle  responsible for the other component of energy
              metabolism,  the breakdown of sugars, a process called glycolysis. No 
              membrane-bound compartment was identified for this process,  so the general
              conclusion was that the enzymes reponsible  for glycolysis function in a
              solvated state.  With that  assumption, much of the chemistry of glycolysis has
              been  done completely in vitro, after the cells have been  homogenized,
              extracted and the individual enzymes purified.  This project approaches the
              nature of glycolysi s  differently, because it now appears likely that this 
              conclusion is in part, wrong.  Work in progress indicates  that some of the
              glycolytic enzymes act, to some extent,  within a particulate microdomain where
              they can be  associated with each other and with the cytoskeleton.  This  work
              identifies the extent of association by studying the  movement and mutual
              proximity of labeled "tags" for the  enzymes or their associative partners by
              means of advanced  fluorescence microscopy and imaging approaches.  The 
              advantage of the imaging approaches is that the process can  be understood in
              vivo; the cell and its components will not  be disturbed. The behavior of the
              enzymes,  aldolase,  enolase, phosphofructokinase, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
              dehydrogenase, and triosephosphate isomerase, and their  relationship to the
              cytoskeletal protein, F-actin, will be  studied in vivo.   Labeled fluorescent
              forms are  microinjected and their behavior studied through ratio  imaging, a
              process whereby the optical problems created by  the in vivo situation can be
              largely corrected.  The results  will have a large impact on the understanding
              of how the  cell organizes not only glycolysis, but other multi-  enzymatic
              pathways which are coordinately active in the  cell.  ***
