Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Error Estimation and Adaptive Error Control
               for Numerical Methods for Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9506519

Award Number: 9506519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Estep   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Estep       The investigator develops and implements accurate  approximation
              methods for differential equations using a  posteriori error estimates and
              adaptive error control.  The main  target is systems of reaction-diffusion
              equations.  Such problems  are important in practical terms because they occur
              as  mathematical models in applied science and engineering, including 
              applications in genetics, material science, chemistry, and  biology, among
              others.  The challenge is to compute accurate  approximations of solutions that
              generically include multiple  scales in their space and time behavior and whose
              behavior depends  strongly on parameters prescribed as part of the model. 
              Moreover,  using computation as a scientific tool requires an estimate of the 
              accuracy of the approximation.  The approach to these problems is  based on
              developing a posteriori error estimates that bound the  error in terms of
              computable information obtained from the  approximation once a computation is
              completed.  The analysis takes  into account both the difficulty of solving the
              differential  equation over a small interval and the global accumulation of 
              errors.  In particular, the stability properties of the solution  being
              approximated are measured by auxilary computations performed  during the
              approximation.  The result is robust and reliable  computational error
              estimates.  In addition, the investigator  examines the dynamical properties of
              numerical schemes in the  context of obtaining schemes with improved accuracy
              for a  specified problem and obtaining more accurate error estimates for  such
              schemes.  The third component of the project is the  development and
              implementation into code of adaptive error control  algorithms based on the a
              posteriori error estimates.  The ultimate  goal of this project is the public
              release of a parallel code that  can solve systems of reaction-diffusion
              equations in two and three  dimensions reliably and efficiently.      
              Mathematical models in applied science, including genetic s,  material science,
              chemistry, and biology, are often expressed as  nonlinear reaction-diffusion
              differential equations that contain  source terms balanced against terms that
              diffuse energy.  The goal  of such modelling is to describe the physical
              situation in terms  of the solution of the differential equation.  However, the
               nonlinear nature of most models makes it impossible to solve the  equations
              explicitly; consequently numerical approximation is an  important tool in
              science.  This approach has its own difficulties.  The balance between reaction
              and diffusion is usually delicate and  difficult to handle accurately. 
              Moreover, solutions of such  problems typically evolve on several scales, i.e.
              some interesting  behavior occurs in very localized regions in space and time
              while  other behavior evolves over long times or over larger regions in  space.
               The use of a uniform numerical discretization for a real  application results
              in huge computations that tax even the largest  computers.  The investigator
              aims to produce numerical schemes that  adapt themselves to the localized
              behavior of the target solution  so as to make the computations both as
              accurate as desired and as  efficient as possible.  Another benefit is that the
              estimate of the  accuracy can then be reported, which increases the scientific 
              level of numerical analysis.  The mathematical approach is develop  estimates
              of the error that use information obtained from the  approximation, which can
              then be used to adapt the discretization,  that is make the computations
              self-governing.  The investigator  also is implementing this theory in a code
              for parallel computers  that can solve very general problems with minimum user
              input.  The  intent is to make the code publicly available, yielding a 
              scientific tool that benefits the engineering and scientific  infrastructure.
