Title       : Structure and Dynamics of the Chloroplast ATP Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9506255

Award Number: 9506255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Richter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             (& !?                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                       !?    
               !?                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    $       H       l                                        
                    D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       9506255    
                                      cynthia m cox                       cynthia m cox      
                      @    + r  e =       e                                                  
                                          j       j   j       j       j       j       j      
                                                                                  1          
                                                                                             
                  #           Y               8   T       5                           j      
                                                                                             
                j       j                                                                    
                j               j                                       ~               j    
                j       j       j                                                            
                                                                              9506255 Richter
              This research addresses the relationship between the structure, function and
              regulation of the ATP synthase enzyme.  This allosteric enzyme reversibly
              utilizes the energy of a transmembrane proton gradient to synthesize ATP.  The
              long term goal of the research is to contribute toward an understanding of the
              mechanism of the energy transduction process and to understand how this enzyme
              is regulated under physiological conditions in plants and animals.  Prior NSF
              funding has led to: 1) Cloning and over-expression of all five subunits of the
              catalytic F1 portion of the chloroplast ATP synthase (CF1); 2) Recovery of the
              subunits from bacterial inclusion bodies and refolding them into their native,
              active forms;  and 3) Reconstituting them into a functional F1 complex. 
              Further studies will utilize this system to genetically engineer CF1 subunits
              for analyzing regions of functional importance, and to examine functional
              dynamics of subunits during the catalytic process using biochemical and
              biophysical techniques.  This proposal describes a collaborative
              multidiciplinary approach focusing on the structure and function of the three
              smaller CF1 subunits, ( ( and (.  Genetic engineering experiments will involve:
              1) Site-directed mutagenesis studies to probe the functional and structural
              importance of different regions of the polypeptide chains via replacement or
              deletion of specific amino acids or sequences of amino acids; 2) Studies of
              subunit dynamics through attachment of intrinsic (tryptophans) and extrinsic
              (via cysteine residues) fluorescent probes to specific sites on the ( ( and (
              subunits.  Labeled subunits will be reconstituted with CF1 deficient in these
              subunits for fluorescence studies aimed at (a) structural mapping of subunits
              within  the CF1 complex using fluorescence resonance energy transfer
              measurements and (b) monitoring subunit dynamics during catalytic turnover by
              the enzyme by monitoring the time-dependent anisotropy of intrinsic and
              extrinsic fluorescent probes; 3) Chemical crosslinking studies involving
              attachment of bifunctional  chemical crosslinking agents at various engineered
              sites within the ( and ( subunits.  Mutant subunits will be reconstituted with
              the other CF1 subunits and with the membrane-bound proton channel portion (CF0)
              of the enzyme for chemical crosslinking studies aimed at identifying the sites
              of interaction between CF1 and CF0 subunits. %%% This research addresses the
              relationship between the chemical structure and biological function of the ATP
              synthase enzyme of plant chloroplast membranes.  This enzyme is responsible for
              the conversion of the energy from sunlight into the chemical storage form.  ATP
              (adenosine triphosphate).  ATP in turn supplies the energy  for the conversion
              of carbon dioxide into sugar in plants.  Analogous enzymes supply more than 90%
              of the ATP required for energy-dependent metabolic processes in animals and
              bacteria.  The long term goal of the research described in this proposal is to
              identify, at the molecular level, how the ATP synthase enzymes capture energy
              and convert it into ATP.  We intend to approach this goal by genetically
              engineering the ATP synthase so as to probe the importance of specific sites
              within the enzyme for the energy conversion (catalytic) process.  Some of the
              genetically engineered sites will provide sites for attachment of chemical
              probes which will be used to identify specific events involving changes in the
              structure of the enzyme which occur during the catalytic process.  Attachment
              of other chemical probes to genetically engineered sites will allow us to
              cross-link (tether) pieces of the enzyme together so that we can identify
              specific sites of protein-protein interaction which occur within the enzyme and
              which are important for catalysis.  A thorough understanding of this very
              efficient natural energy conserving process will potentially lead to the design
              and implementation of vastly improved energy storage and utilization processes 
              or human use. ***                           ;                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                          
              (
