Title       : Lignin Degradation by Phanerochaete Chrysosporium: Biochemical Characterization
               of Extracellular Peroxidases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9506338

Award Number: 9506338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Gold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1107,1167,9104,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              -,4:                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    i *4:   i
              *4:                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H   I   J         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9506338 Gold
              The aim of this project is to further our understanding of manganese peroxidase
              (MnP) and lignin peroxidase (LiP) from the lignin degrading basidiomycete
              Phanerochaete chrysosponum. The underlying objectives  are to further
              characterize the structure, mechanism and function of these enzymes. The
              binding interactions between MnP, Mn and oxalate will be studied by kinetic
              spectroscopic and equilibrium dialysis methods. The oxidation of oxalate by MnP
              and the role of oxalate in the inactivation of MnP by H2O2 will be examined.
              Using a homologous expression system, the P.I. intends to construct, express
              and characterize site directed mutants of the Mn binding site of MnP. In order
              to understand how LiP oxidizes polymeric lignin, the LiP oxidation of several
              model polymeric substrates, including cytochrome c and ribonuclease, will be
              examined. In particular, the P.I.  will examine the role of veratryl alcohol in
              facilitating these reactions. Nucleophilic substitution and dimerization
              reactions will be used to monitor the formation of stable cation radicals
              during the LiP oxidation of dimetho xybenzenes. By examining a series of
              dimethoxybenzene and dimethoxybenzyl alcohol substrates,  the requirements for
              producing and stabilizing the cation radical intermediate in this reaction will
              be determined %%% Lignin is the most abundant renewable aromatic polymer in the
              biosphere. It constitutes 15 30% of woody plant cell walls, forming a matrix
              that surrounds the cellulose. This encrusting matrix significantly retards the
              microbial depolymerization of cellulose and thus lignin plays a key role in the
              earth's carbon cycle. The potential utilization of microorganisms for
              transforming lignocellulose into useful materials, chemicals and fuels is a
              significant field of research. Most studies on lignin degradation have focused
              on white rot basidiomycetes because these fungi degrade this polymer much more
              rapidly than other organisms. In addition, apparently they are the only
              organisms that completely degrade lignin to CO2 and H2O. The best studied
              lignin  degrading fungus is Phanerochaete chrysosporium. Since 1983 major
              breakthroughs have occurred in the study of the lignin degradative system of P.
              chrysosporium. The discovery and purification of two extracellular peroxidases
              involved in this process have stimulated a great deal of further research. Of
              major significance are the recent reports that both LiP and MnP are able to
              depolymerize synthetic lignin in vitro) and to oxidize several aromatic
              pollutants. Also of major significance is the work on the structure and
              mechanism of LiP and MnP. Three major goals of this project are: (1) to
              elucidate the structure and mechanism of the lignin  degrading peroxidases; (2)
              to establish the role of these enzymes in lignin and aromatic pollutant
              degradation; and (3) to study the regulation and expression of the genes
              encoding these enzymes. ***                                  @                 
                                                                                             
                                                                   ....()()))()()            
                                                                       S u m m a r y I n f o
              r m a t i o n                           (                                      
                          @                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       Oh     +'  0                          
                          $       H       l                                               D  
                  h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @    a  1:            
                           @                                   @    M  4:                    
                                                                                           @ 
                                                       Microsoft Word 6.0                    
                                               4                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     e =       e                                       w     
                                               "       "   "       "       "       "       " 
                   L       L       L       L       L       d       n       L           C   x 
                   |       |       |       |       |       |       |                         
                       #
