Title       : The Genomes and DNA Processing in Oxytricha Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9506287

Award Number: 9506287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Prescott prescotd@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506287  Prescott  The purpose of these groups of experiments is to understand
              the evolution and unique structure of macronuclear and micronuclear genomes and
              their processing in development. Three strategies to study the micronuclear
              genome and its processing and the evolution of the macronuclear and
              micronuclear genomes are proposed:  1. Comparison of macronuclear  with
              micronuclear versions of 5 genes in addition to the 5 already studied is
              proposed to establish the frequency of gene scrambling and a fuller definition
              of various scrambling patterns. 2. The temporal relationships of DNA processing
              events, particularly IES excision, MDS unscrambling, excision of gene-sized
              molecules from chromosomes, and telomere addition are to be detected in
              individual developing macronuclei with polymerase chain reactions. 3. A
              comparison of sequence versions of particular genes among several species of
              Oxytricha will give a measure of phylogenetic relationships and show how
              scrambling of micronuclear genes changes or is modified in evolution.  %%% 
              Cilliated protozoa possess a transcriptionally inactive germline nucleus
              (micronucleus) and a transcriptionally active somatic nucleus (macronucleus)
              within the same cell. After two cells mate, a new macronucleus develops from a
              micronuclear fusion product in each mating partner, and the old macronucleus
              disintegrates. In cilliates of the hypotrich group, DNA sequences are
              extensively amplified, cut, spliced, eliminated, and reordered during the 3-day
              development of a macronucleus. During these events blocks of DNA sequences in
              many genes are reordered to produce transcriptionally functional genes.
              Comparison of the DNA sequences of micronucliar with macronuclear versions of 5
              genes has shown that micronuclear versions are interrupted by multiple, short
              AT-rich sequences called internal eliminated sequences (IESs) that are spliced
              out during macronuclear development. Three of the 5 genes are scrambled; blocks
              of sequence called macronuclear destined sequences (MD Ss) which are separated
              by IESs, are out of order, and, in some instances, inverted compared to the
              transcriptionally functional macronuclear versions of the genes. Parts or all
              of this DNA processing may represent evolution of novel molecular operations or
              may represent exploitation of molecular operations sporadically used in less
              conspicuous forms among other eukaryotes. In either case, these unusual events
              are an opportunity to learn about possible ways that an organism may manipulate
              its genomic DNA. Experiments to provide more detail of the actual mechanisms
              involved will be done.  ***
