Title       : Theoretical Studies of Aqueous Solvation of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9506796

Award Number: 9506796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toshiko Ichiye ichiye@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9506796  Ichiye  The development of theories of aqueous solvation of
              biological  macromolecules is crucial to understanding their structure and 
              function.  This research will develop theories for macromolecular  solvation
              and implement them into simulation algorithms and to  study specific
              interactions of water and counterions with proteins.   Simple continuum solvent
              models are insufficient to describe  phenomena such as hydrogen bonding, local
              dielectric perturbations  and phenomena involving separations of only a few
              water layers.  To  understand and model the molecular nature of solvation, the 
              approach used here is the development of statistical mechanical  integral
              equation theories.  First, the previously proposed  integral equation theory
              for solvation of globular molecules will  be extended to proteins.  To
              facilitate this, a new model of water  for simulations will be developed, which
              is equivalent to TIP4P in  structural properties but is three times faster than
              3-site water  models in Monte Carlo simulations.  Without further development, 
              this theory can then be used to predict the solvation of a given  structure;
              e.g., a crystal or NMR structure of a protein.  Second,  this theory of aqueous
              solvation of macromolecules will be  incorporated into dynamics simulation
              algorithms.  Currently,  addition of explicit solvent into a molecular dynamics
              simulation  is the only simulation method to include the molecular nature of 
              water, but it is very costly in computer resources.  Several  different methods
              of incorporating this theory are discussed.  The  final goal is incorporation
              of ionic strength effects into  simulation methods.  %%%  The development of
              theories of aqueous solvation of biological  macromolecules is crucial to
              understanding their structure and  function.  This research will develop
              theories for macromolecular  solvation and calculations that can then be used
              to study specific  interactions of water and counterions with proteins.  This
              theory  can be used to predict t he solvation of a given structure; e.g., a 
              crystal or NMR structure of a protein.  Second, this theory of  aqueous
              solvation of macromolecules will be incorporated into  dynamics simulation
              algorithms.  The final goal is incorporation of  ionic strength effects into
              simulation methods.  ***
