Title       : Characterization and Simulation of the Effects of Redox Zones on the Fate and
               Transport of Contaminants in the Saturated Subsurface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9506467

Award Number: 9506467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Loague keith@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9506467   Loague    Anthropogenic contamination can create geochemical zones of
              different redox potential, which in turn will cause many hazardous contaminants
              to exist in different oxidation states in different zone of aquifers.  The
              mobilities of these contaminants in the different oxidation states may vary by
              orders of magnitude.  This greatly complicates the task of predicting the
              transport, fate and effects of groundwater contaminants.  The work proposed
              here will provide insight into the fate and transport of hazardous chemicals in
              the saturated subsurface.    This work will establish a physics and chemistry
              based simulation protocol that will enable future workers to quantitatively
              estimate the fate and transport of contaminants that can exit in multiple
              oxidation states.  The well-studied USGS Toxic Substances Hydrology  Research
              Program field site on Cape Cod, MA will serve as a unique data set for model
              development and testing.  The results anticipated from this work include i)
              characterization of the reactions responsible for the distribution of Fe (II)
              observed at the Cape Cod site and ii) the potential fate of the iron and anoxic
              zone under current and future management strategies.  The measure and model
              approach used for the cape Cod site in this study will serve as a surrogate for
               future investigations at similar contaminations sites.  The approach to be
              taken for the proposed work consists of three phases.  The first phase will be
              accomplished by i) developing a set of chemical reactions, based upon
              thermodynamics, that control the concentration of iron, and ii) analyzing the
              sensitivity of  batch simulations to concentrations and abundances of reactants
              and products.  The second phase will be accomplished by investigating what 
              processes affect Fe (II) during transport at the Cape Cod site  by i) 
              constructing a one-dimensional model to simulate the development of the sewage
              plume and iron zone and ii) considering the importance and impact of
              rate-limited reactions.  In third p hase the chemical batch modeling and the
              one-dimensional transport modeling will be integrated to develop a model of
              coupled groundwater flow, chemical speciation, and solute transport at the Cape
              Cod field site.  The third phase will be accomplished by  i) developing a
              two-dimensional  vertical cross-sectional groundwater  flow model, ii) 
              developing  a two-dimensional vertical corss-sectional groundwater solute 
              transport model, and iii)  coupling the fluid flow and solute transport models.
               These simulations will be compared with field data to evaluate model
              performance in terms of assessing concept development and predictive
              capabilities of the coupled modeling approach.
