Title       : Heterochromatic Loci and Position Effects in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1997     
File        : a9506916

Award Number: 9506916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerold A. Schubiger gerold@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara T. Wakimoto  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506916  Wakimoto  In the proposed studies, the regulatory difference between
              heterochromatic and euchromatic genes will be examined using germline
              transformation and chromosome rearrangements. The cis-regulatory requirements
              of the light (lt) gene will be identified by testing the effect of specific
              repetitive DNAs on transcription of a transgene that contains the It promoter
              fused to the coding sequences of the bacterial lac Z gene. Repetitive DNA
              fragments will also be tested for their ability to confer the properties of
              heterochromatin by assaying insertions for effects on chromosome morphology,
              euchromatic gene expression and gene dosage using germline transformation. As a
              complementary approach, larger regions of the left arm of chromosome 2 (2LH)
              will be tested for various functions by comparing the effects of chromosome
              rearrangements that variegate for heterochromatic and euchromatic genes, but
              differ only in the amount of 2Lh. These overlapping deletions provide the
              material for physical mapping of the heterochromatin so functional properties
              can be correlated with size of a heterochromatic block or the type of
              repetitive DNA.  %%%  The chromosomes of higher eukaryotes are comprised of two
              cytologically distinct domains, heterochromatin and euchromatin.
              Heterochromatin appears darkly stained and tightly condensed throughout the
              cell cycle, including interphase, while euchromatm shows cell cycle changes in
              the level of condensation. The structure and function of heterochromatin will
              be examined through the study of the heterochromatin on the left arm of 2Lh of
              Drosophila melanogaster. Previous studies have shown that at least eight genes
              located within 2Lh require proximity to heterochromatin for normal levels of
              expression. Chromosome rearrangements that remove these genes from centric
              heterochromatin and place them in distal euchromatic regions cause variegated
              expression. Molecular studies have shown that long, heterogeneous arrays of
              repetitive DNA are located within and surroundilg  one heterochromatic gene,
              the lt gene. These studies address questions about the molecular determinants
              of higher order chromosome structure and the functional significance of the
              heterochromatin. Therefore, the results should contribute to a better
              understanding of chromosome structure in other organisms  ***  ??
