Title       : Collaborative Research: Quantitative Hierarchical Models for Fossil and Recent
               Marine Assemblages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9506639

Award Number: 9506639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy E. Plotnick plotnick@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              .                   C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       p       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     .      
              .           4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                        7   8
                9   :   ;   <   =   >   ?   @   A                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9506639
              Plotnick   Some recent studies of marine fossil assemblages suggest that they
              exhibit a hierarchical pattern of stasis or persistence on time scales ranging
              from millions to hundreds of millions of years.  Other studies seemingly
              contradict this, suggesting that the taxonomic composition of marine
              assemblages are open; i.e., that persistent marine communities do not exist. 
              Both views of the stability of these systems invoke abiotic perturbations as
              major controlling factors.  Any ecological model invoked to explain these
              patterns must include a consideration of the heterogeneous distribution of
              habitats and ecosystems over a wide range of spatial scales, changes in habitat
              distribution over time, and the effect that spatial heterogeneity will have on
              population and community dynamics.  In addition, any model must include a 
              consideration of the severity and frequency of abiotic perturbations, which can
              also occur at multiple temporal and spatial scales.  Fortunately, the last
              decade has seen a tremendous growth in qualitative and quantitative studies in
              landscape ecology and metapopuulation  dynamics specifically designed to
              examine such problems.  This proposal is designed to fund collaborative
              research between a paleontologist and a landscape ecologist, in order to
              develop and utilize a quantitative model for the dynamics of ecological units
              on multiple spatial and temporal scales.  This model, CAPS, will integrate
              metapopulation concepts into the spatial models developed for landscape ecology
              and examine the relationship between the scales of biotic dynamics with those
              of disturbance regimes.  CAPS will be used to address several problems of
              paleontological and ecological interest: How do fine-grained, high frequency
              interactions at the landscape scale affect broader scale properties of species
              abundance and distribution at metapopulation and biogeographic scales? To what
              extent does long distance transport stabilize local biotas against extinction
              due to local disturbances? Is the impact of a given disturbance contingent on
              its location or timing? What are the relative roles played by disturbance and
              biotic interactions in producing observed patterns of community structure?  
              Paleontology provides the only long term record of the biotic impact of global
              change.  As a result, the interpretation of spatial and temporal changes in
              community composition observed in the fossil record is of major importance. 
              The model developed in this proposal will greatly aid in the interpretation of
              these data.                                            Oh     +'  0            
                                        $       H       l                             S u m m
              a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (                        
                                        6                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         D       h                           
                                     R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                           
                         9506639                             Felicia A. Fauntleroy           
                 Felicia A. Fauntleroy       @    a                              @           
                                     @    a                                                  
                                                                 @                           
                             Microsoft Word 6.0                                              
                     1                                                                       
                             ;                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       e =       e                   p                                       
                                 p       p   p       p       p       p       p               
                                                                         C                   
                                                                                         )   
                             v           T   +   E                           p               
                                                                                       p     
               p                                                                       p     
                       p                                                       p       p     
               p       p                           =                                         
                                                                     9506639 Plotnick   Some
              recent studies of marine fossil assem
