Title       : Role of Turbulence Structure in Bedload Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9506415

Award Number: 9506415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Shreve   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Shreve  9506415     The long-term goal of the project is to develop
              quantitative predictive relations between fluid flow and bedload transport that
              incorporate the role of turbulence more precisely than those currently
              available.  Such relations should apply to the broad spectrum of nonuniform or
              unsteady flows that occur in streams and beneath waves:  and their development
              should provide new insight into the mechanics of formation of a variety of
              erosional and depositional features from ripples and dunes to bars and
              channels.  The proposed research will therefore emphasize the parts of the
              coupled flow-sediment problem that most directly bear on how the morphology and
              stratigraphy of these features originate and evolve.   It will entail a
              combined experimental and theoretical approach.  The experimental work will use
              two-component laser-doppler velocimetry, high -speed motion-picture
              photography, and a newly developed force transducer to (1) make time-series
              measurements of near-bed fluid velocities, bedload sediment transport, and 
              bed-particle forces noninvasively in both nonuniform and unsteady flows at
              turbulence-resolving frequencies, (2) study the turbulence structure over
              spatial variation in bed roughness, and (3) make synoptic measurements of
              bedload particle motions, fluid-velocity profile, and turbulence structure by
              particle tracking.  The theoretical work will use the experimental data to (1)
              elucidate the equations of motion for near-bed sediment particle trajectories
              by evaluating the formulas for the lift and drag forces, assessing the relative
              magnitudes of the terms in the equation, and testing the effects of the
              turbulence fluctuations (instead of using time average velocities, (2) use the
              verified equations and measured fluctuating velocity fields to compute bedload
              particle trajectories for statistical comparison with actual trajectory speeds,
              heights, and lengths, and (3) apply nonlinear forecasting techniques to study
              the relations between the measured time series of the  near-bed velocities and
              the corresponding bed-particle forces and bedload transport.   The proposed
              research basically addresses two fundamental problems:  (1)  relating the
              forces exerted on particles on the bed to the temporal and spatial distribution
              of the near-bed fluid velocities and (2) relating the entrainment and motion of
              those particles to the forces.  The experimental work will elucidate the
              processes involved in both relations, provide ground truth for any general
              model of entrainment and transport of bedload, and supply new data on the role
              of turbulence in bedload transport.  The theoretical work will aid in
              developing a more accurate description of bedload transport in natural flows,
              verify the formulas for lift, drag, and other forces on bedload transport by
              turbulent flows.  Together, the two approaches should significantly enlarge
              current understanding of the physics of bedload transport of sediment by both
              streams and waves.
