Title       : The Archaeology of Exchange Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9506142

Award Number: 9506142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78912              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Terrell terrell@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. John Terrell and his colleagues
              will conduct archaeological research in the coastal Aitape region of Papua New
              Guinea. During a 1993-4 survey, surface collections were made at selected
              locations along 265 km. of coastline in a region where no prior archaeological
              work had been conducted. The team will now return to these sites to: establish
              the age for pottery making in the region; test and refine a proposed ceramic
              sequence; and document how often pottery, stone and other materials from
              outside localities occur in the region. To accomplish these goals stratigraphic
              excavations will be conducted at several locations. Datable materials will be
              collected to establish a reliable radiocarbon chronology. Finally, chemical and
              petrographic analysis will be conducted on obsidian and ceramics to determine
              points of origin.  The Aitape region has long been of interest to
              anthropologists because of an apparent paradox. Linguistically the region is
              extremely diverse and large numbers of different cultural groups who speak
              different languages live closely side by side. However ethnographic evidence
              indicates that there is extensive trade among them and that they are quite
              similar in terms of traditional material culture. Anthropologists wish to
              understand how diversity in several basic cultural realms is maintained in the
              face of forces which lead towards unity in other areas. The goal of Dr.
              Terrell's archaeological research is to trace the emergence of interaction over
              time and to gain insight into the present pattern through the understanding of
              how it developed. The area is archaeologically unknown and the date of its
              first occupation has not been established.  This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
              will shed new light on the prehistory of the Pacific and increase our
              understanding of how cultural diversity develops and is maintained.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
