Title       : RUI: Categorical Methods in Computation and Semantics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9506383

Award Number: 9506383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98610              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Mulry phil@cs.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project exploits recent advances in the use of  sophisticated 
              mathematical methodologies to address related fundamental  questions in the
              foundations of computation theory and  programming language  semantics. Many
              important questions arise  out of a desire and need to capture  in a semantic
              setting both  minor and major variations in computational  strategies.   The 
              significance  in investigating such variations  lies in the  fact  that they
              can both provide a means of interpreting  increasingly  sophisticated
              programming language constructs, and also isolate  fundamental  mathematical
              processes at work that help define and  distinguish between  different notions
              of computation.    The main focus of the research entails the  utilization of
              new  approaches in the use of algebras, monads and comonads,  categories, logic
              and sheaves to provide a systematic and  conceptual approach  to the
              interpretation and solution of these  questions. Questions to be  addressed
              include:  finding an  algebraically robust interpretation for partial  data
              types and  partial maps; generating an intrinsic characterization of fixed 
              point constructions, including the generation of recursive data  types, and 
              isolating the special role of invariance in  this  process; defining a 
              categorical foundation for semantics in  general and describing a synthetic 
              domain theory in particular;  and  identifying and utilizing in a semantic 
              setting logical  properties resident in sheaf-theoretic structures.    General 
              areas of investigation include partial data types and  computation, fixed point
               semantics, monadic and comonadic  computation, invariance and algebras, and 
              partial sheaf  semantics.  Technical tools include functorial liftings on 
              categories of algebras, refined partial map classifiers,  algebraic uniformity,
               induction and coinduction principles,  natural and dinatural transformations, 
              monadic and comonadic  strength, domain theory and extensional PERs.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
