Title       : A Dissection of the Yeast ER Translocation Machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9506002

Award Number: 9506002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Brodsky jbrodsky+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506002  Brodsky    The molecular mechanism of protein translocation into the
              yeast ER will  be detailed, affording a deeper understanding of how
              polypeptides may  cross biological membranes. Although several factors required
              for  protein translocation have been identified through genetic analyses,  how
              these components act coordinately to thread a precursor protein  across the ER
              membrane remains obscure. Each member of the  translocation complex will be
              purified using standard techniques and  analyzed with a novel biochemical
              complementation test. The  mechanism(s) whereby ATP drives protein
              translocation, perhaps by  altering the conformation and activity of a
              subcomplex of the  translocation apparatus will be investigated. The
              purification of  active members of the translocation complex will rely on an
              assay in  which wild type protein fractions are tested for their ability to 
              restore protein import to reconstituted proteoliposomes prepared from  cells
              with non-functional mutations in the corresponding genes. An  active subcomplex
              of the translocation complex was successfully  purified using this test of
              biochemical complementation. Once other  active components in the complex are
              isolated, their interactions with  one another, their associations with a
              precursor protein and ribosomes,  and their ability to regulate the
              translocation channel will be  investigated. A liposome reconstituted with
              essential purified factors  in the complex should support protein import and
              determine which  members of the translocation machine are stimulatory or
              regulatory. To  examine how constituents of the translocation complex interact,
               affinity columns containing the required translocation factors are  prepared.
              Purified proteins or crude solubilized membrane extracts are  applied to the
              matrices to identify interacting subcomplexes or novel  members of the
              translocation complex. To determine which factors in the  translocation
              apparatus contact ribosomes and precursor proteins,  purified factors will be r
              econstituted into liposomes and mixed with  radiolabeled ribosomes or secreted
              proteins to assess their  interaction. A likely candidate for these contacts is
              the translocation  channel, Sec61p, which is presently 50%  pure and
              biochemically  complements the sec61 mutant in the reconstituted assay
              described  above. The interaction of Sec61p with other factors in the 
              translocation complex and measurements of the uptake of radiolabeled  peptides
              into liposomes containing either Sec61p alone or combined with  other purified
              proteins offer insights into how the translocation pore  is regulated. These
              studies will dissect an intricate protein machine  at the ER membrane that
              performs the first step in the secretory  pathway. The results from this study
              will permit an understanding of  how the transport of a protein across a
              membrane, an energetically  unfavorable process, is facilitated by the
              translocation complex: a  membrane protein machine of this complexity has not
              been fully examined  and reconstituted to date. The work proposed here will
              further the  comprehension of energy-requiring transport systems, of gated
              channels,  of heat shock protein function, and of the secretory pathway.
              Finally,  because these studies utilize a genetically defined system and 
              biochemical methods, novel techniques for examining membrane transport  and
              other cell biological phenomena will become evident.  %%%  The cell uses
              protein complexes to spacially organize temporal events.  These protein
              machines are found throughout the cell and help to  organize, for example,
              metabolic sequences, global cellular structure  and polarity, and traffic of
              newly synthesized proteins to their  correct locations.  The protein machine of
              interest here is an example  of the latter;  it is one which recognizes newly
              synthesized proteins  destined for delivery outside the cell (secretion) and,
              like a grocery  clerk, bags them up.  Interestingly, it only takes those items
              which  should be secreted, so it must recognize those items and  open up the 
              bag for them only -- not other proteins.  The movement (translocation)  of
              proteins into the bag, or endoplasmic reticulum (ER), is regulated  by this
              energy-consuming protein machine.  This work is to dissect the  machine, purify
              the components, and reconstitute its activity using a  "synthetic" bag, a
              liposome. This type or reconstitution has not been  done before.  The
              components of the machine have been identified using  the power of yeast
              genetics; if one of the components is made  nonfunctional by mutation,  the
              machine stops.  The sensitivity of the  machine to these mutations can be
              studied both in the cell (using ER)  and in the test tube (using liposomes). 
              The interaction of these  components, their energy dependence, and their
              self-assembly in the  test tube are analyzed.  The results have application to
              how other  protein machines fit together and how the cell regulates what gets
              out  of and what stays inside the cell.  ***
