Title       : DNA-Porphyrin Complexes: In 3-Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9506300

Award Number: 9506300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren D. Williams loren.williams@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506300  Williams  A molecular understanding of DNA-porphyrin interactions will 
              facilitate design of a host of technologically useful molecules  such as new
              artificial nucleases, structural probes and conjugates,  photodynamic agents,
              biomaterials and nano-devices.  Porphyrins  interact with DNA by several modes.
               Porphyrins intercalate, groove  bind, and may bind in novel, currently
              uncharacterized modes.  Some  porphyrins form non-covalent complexes with DNA
              while others are  reactive, causing strand scission, base release and other 
              reactions.  One attractive aspect of porphyrins is the systematic  manner in
              which DNA mode of binding and reactivity vary with  porphyrin shape, metal
              center, charge and additional structural and  physical properties.  These
              parameters are easily manipulated  because techniques for elaboration of
              porphyrin structure are  extensively developed.  However, no detailed 3-D
              structures of DNA-  porphyrin complexes have been determined thus far.  The
              goal of  this proposal is to determine 3-dimensional x-ray structures of 
              DNA-porphyrin complexes.  Initial work will focus on previously  obtained
              crystals of the following DNA-porphyrin complexes: (1)  (Cu)TMPyP4 - CGATCG,
              (2) (Cu)TMPyP4 - CGATICG, (3) (Cu)TMPyP4 -  CGATCG - K2PtCI, (4) (Cu)TMPyP4 -
              CGATCG - SmCI3, (5) (Cu)TMPyP4 -  ICGATCG, (6) (Ni)TMPyP4 - CGATCG, (7)
              (Pd)TMPyP4 - CGATCG, (8)  (Cu)TMPyP4 - CGCG,  where IC= 5-iodoC and TMPyP4 =
              meso-(4-(N-  tetra-methylpyridyl))porphyrin .  X-ray intensity data has been 
              obtained from several of these crystals and structure solution is  in progress.
                      Teaching Philosophy.  Georgia Tech is a combined research and  teaching
              institution.  Training pof undergraduates, graduate  students and post-doctoral
              associates is an essential part of the  PI's research program.  The PI's goals
              are to teach and conduct  research in an academic environment.  Motivation for
              classroom  teaching is enjoyment, intellectual challenge, and to gain and 
              maintain breadth of knowledge that  research alone does not  necessarily
              foster.  The PI has developed new curricula for several  courses.  His teaching
              philosophy is to excite students by  incorporating the latest techniques and
              results into the  curriculum.   %%%  Porphyrins and porphyrin-like molecules
              are brightly colored,  biologically critical molecules that give color to
              hemoglobin and  chlorophyll.  Porphyrins can interact by several modes with
              DNA,  the genetic material.  A molecular understanding of DNA-porphyrin 
              interactions will facilitate design of a host of technologically  useful
              molecules such as new artificial nucleases, structural  probes and conjugates,
              biomaterials and nano-devices.  Porphyrins  sometimes intercalate, sliding
              between base pairs and increasing  the length of DNA.  Under other conditions
              porphyrins bind in the  DNA grooves.  In some instances porphyrins may bind to
              DNA by  novel, uncharacterized modes.  Certain porphyrins are reactive, 
              causing DNA strand scission, base release and other reactions.  DNA  mode of
              binding and reactivity vary with porphyrin shape, metal  center, charge and
              additional structural and physical properties.   These parameters are easily
              manipulated.  However, thus far no  detailed 3-D structures of DNA-porphyrin
              complexes have been  determined.  X-ray crystallography is a method by which
              molecules  can be visualized in atomic detail.  For this work, x-ray 
              crystallography will be used to visualize complexes of DNA with  porphyrins. 
              Crystals of DNA-porphyrin complexes will be grown and  a beam of x-rays will be
              directed through each crystal.  The atoms  of the crystal scatter the x-rays. 
              After collection and proper  processing of the intensities of scattered x-rays,
              the positions of  the atoms of the DNA and of the bound porphyrin molecule can
              be  reconstructed.  ***
