Title       : Microtubule-Associated Proteins and the Regulation of Microtubule Organization
               During Oogenesis and Early Development in Xenopus laevis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9506051

Award Number: 9506051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404855             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Gard gard@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9506051  David Gard    Substantial evidence suggests that microtubules play
              important roles in the establishment of two important developmental axes that
              are specified or established prior to the cleavage of fertilized amphibian
              eggs: the animal-vegetal (A-V) axis of oocytes and eggs, and the dorsal-ventral
              (D-V)  axis of the developing embryo.  The proposed experiments investigate the
              role that microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) play in regulating microtubule
              assembly and organization during formation of the A-V and D-V axes in Xenopus
              oocyte and embryos.  Three biochemically-distinct XMAPs have been isolated from
              Xenopus eggs.  Confocal and electron microscopy will be used to examine the
              distribution of XMAPs during oogenesis and early development.  Microinjection
              of XMAPs and XMAP antibodies will be used to probe the function of these
              proteins in oocytes , eggs, and embryos.  The effects of XMAP phosphorylation 
              on microtubule assembly will be addressed in vitro and in permeabilized oocytes
              and eggs.  Finally, molecular cloning will be used to examine the structural
              relationship between XMAPs and MAPs from other species.  Results from this
              project will provide new information on the role of the microtubules in the
              formation of cellular and embryonic polarity.  %%%  This project will examine
              the regulation of a cytoskeletal network (i.e., microtubules) using oocytes,
              eggs, and embryos of the frog as a model system.  Results from this project
              will provide information on mechanisms establishing cellular polarity and
              embryonic polarity during early development.  Consequently, this project should
              provide insights into the mechanisms that establish the body plan of an
              organism.  ***
