Title       : Reflexion Models: Bridging the Gap Between Source and High-Level Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9506779

Award Number: 9506779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Notkin notkin@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 Given an existing software system and a task to accomplish,  software
              engineers decide whether and how to proceed based  on experience,  judgment,
              and system-specific knowledge. For  even modest-sized software  systems, there
              is a substantial  risk of making poor decisions because it is  difficult (if 
              not impossible) for software engineers to maintain adequate  knowledge of the
              source. To manage this risk, engineers  often use high-level  models to focus
              on particular aspects  of the system relevant to the task.  These models help
              the  engineer reduce risk only if they are sufficiently  accurate 
              representations of the actual system.    This research investigates an 
              approach that may help  engineers determine whether their task-specific models 
              are  good enough to make informed decisions.  An engineer  defines a 
              high-level structural model appropriate for the  task at hand and also
              specifies  how the model maps to the  source. A tool then computes a reflexion
              model that  shows  the engineer where the high-level model is consistent with 
              and differs  from the source. Analyzing the reflexion model  and applying
              personal experience  and judgment, an engineer  can then assess the risk of
              proceeding with the task.  In  some cases, especially when there are unexpected
               inconsistencies between  the model and the source,  computation of additional
              reflexion models may be  needed  before an informed decision can be made.   
              This project concentrates on  two activities intended to  determine whether
              reflexion models genuinely help  improve  our ability to effectively engineer
              software. The first  activity  focuses on specific enabling technical problems 
              related to reflexion models.  The second activity consists  of case studies
              with industrial partners. Kevin J.  Sullivan,  University of Virginia
              participates through a research  subcontract.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
