Title       : RUI: Characterization of a Molecular Chaperone in the Eukaryotic Flagellum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9506236

Award Number: 9506236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl A. Johnson kjohnson@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9181,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9506236  Karl Johnson   Molecular chaperones of the 70,000 M.W. Heat Shock
              Protein (HSP70)  family are special proteins that interact with many other
              types of proteins in cells to assist both their proper folding and assembly.
              Biological processes known to require HSP70 function include such diverse
              examples as response to stress, protein targeting and secretion, assembly of
              steroid hormone receptors, viral replication and the initiation of gene
              transcription.  Recent evidence implicates members of the HSP70 chaperone
              family in the construction of larger intracellular structures such as the
              microtubule cytoskeleton.  During an investigation into the assembly of a
              microtubule-containing organelle, the eukaryotic flagellum of the green alga
              Chlamydomonas, an HSP70 family member was identified. Immunofluorescent
              localization experiments demonstrated that this HSP70 protein was concentrated
              in the tips of flagella.  This localization is significant, as previous work
              has shown that the tips are the sites of flagellar assembly.  A combination of
              molecular, cytological and cell biological techniques will be employed to
              further characterize the in vivo role of this molecular chaperone.  This
              investigation offers significant opportunities for novel insight into the
              processes which govern cytoskeletal assembly in living cells.  Because flagella
              are present on many different cell types, including cells of the human body,
              investigations in the green alga Chlamydomonas should reveal details about
              conserved processes of macromolecular assembly applicable to understanding the
              formation of other microtubule-containing structures, such as the mitotic
              spindle or interphase microtubule cytoskeleton.  %%%   Living cells are dynamic
              systems that contain architectural elements that give them form and shape. 
              These structures must be assembled and disassembled at appropriate times and
              places in order for the cells to function properly.  This investigation
              examines the role a special kind of protein called a "chape rone" may play in
              this process.  This project should further our understanding of normal cellular
              functions and address a key mechanism in life.  ***
