Title       : Externally Bonded FRP Composites of RC Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9506736

Award Number: 9506736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Nanni   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Bakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Boothby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9506736  Nanni  The objective of this project is to provide the engineering 
              science necessary for the implementation of externally bonded FRP 
              reinforcement for the repair of concrete structures, except for  the case of
              members subjected to compression where enhancement of  strength and ductility
              is the result of lateral confinement of  concrete.  The material forms of
              interest are highly flexible  sheets made of dry fibers or prepregs that can be
              adhered to a  concrete surface after minimum surface preparation by means of a 
              polymeric resin.  The fibers are high-strength and high-modulus  such as carbon
              and aramid.  The methodology of the project  consists of an experimental and
              analytical study based primarily  on tensile reinforced concrete specimens. 
              Tests are conducted  under quasi-static conditions after mechanical
              conditioning  (repeated and sustained loading) and environmental conditioning 
              (thermal cycling and exposure to aggressive environments).  The  experimental
              program is necessary to quantify the effects of  externally bonded FRP
              reinforcement on concrete resistance to  cracking and to assess long-term
              strengthening performance.  A  part of the durability study is to determine
              whether the presence  of FRP reinforcement promotes/inhibits degradation of
              steel  reinforcement in concrete (i.e., galvanic corrosion when FRP is  made of
              conductive fibers).  Various material forms, conditions  at time of repair and
              preparation conditions are investigated.  Primary measurements include load,
              strain, interfacial  delamination, crack opening, and electrical  conductivity.
                 The project is conducted with the collaboration of the  manufacturing and
              construction industry in the intent of securing  suitable materials and of
              using field applications as a test bed  for laboratory findings and
              verification of modeling.  ***
