Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Phage Exclusion Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9506954

Award Number: 9506954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian J. Molineux molineux@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506954  Molineux  The specific goal of this research is to provide a complete
              understanding of the mechanism of F exclusion of T7 and related phages, an
              observation first made over 30 years ago.  This exclusion system exhibits many
              physiological, and perhaps also mechanistic, similarities with other abortive
              infections, including  rex and P22 sieB exclusion of other lambdoid phages, rex
              exclusion of T4 rII mutants, and Col Ib exclusion of T5 and related phages. 
              These abortive infections are all characterized by a complex phenomenology with
              no underlying molecular model or rationale to describe their properties, and it
              has proven difficult to distinguish between the primary cause of the abortive
              infection and ancillary events that occur merely because the abortively
              infected cell is dying.  At the physiological level, the dysfunctions that
              occur during an abortive phage infection also resemble those occurring during
              cell killing by some bacteriocins, during eukaryotic cell killing by some
              bacterial toxins, and during non-permissive infections of specific cell types
              by certain animal viruses.  Many of these biological systems are only poorly
              understood at the molecular level, at least in part because the activities of
              the genes involved in causing cell death have not been defined.  In order to
              fully understand the molecular basis of any exclusion system, it is necessary
              to know all of the genes involved.  From previous work from this laboratory,
              the T7-coded targets of F exclusion are known to be genes 1.2 and 10; both
              genes interact with F pifA, the sole F determinant of exclusion, and in doing
              so kill the cell.  Killing occurs in the absence of phage infection: cloning
              plasmids expressing either 1.2 or gene 10 as the only T7 gene is lethal to
              cells harboring pifA as their only F gene.  A genetic selection for mutants of
              E. coli that tolerate co-expression of the T7 and F genes has been developed
              and it is expected that various different mutants will be isolated that do not
              support F exclusion  of T7. An initial screen for such mutants resulted in the
              isolation of one strain that, when containing wild-type F or a multicopy
              plasmid expressing pifA, plates T7 at the same eop as an F- strain. Some other
              mutants isolated in this screen do not exclude (when containing F) T7 as
              efficiently as their isogenic parent strain and have acquired a phenotype of
              resistance to high levels of the antibiotic tetracycline, suggesting an
              involvement of cell membrane components in the abortive infection.  A more
              detailed study of these mutants, and others to be obtained in a more extensive
              search, will provide the essential genetic framework necessary for a complete
              molecular understanding of this phage exclusion system.  %%%  The goal of this
              research is to provide a complete understanding of the mechanism where a
              bacterial conjugation factor (the F plasmid) prevents the successful infection
              of bacterial cells by the T7 phage, a bacterial virus.  This study should
              impact the field of host-parasite interactions in general, since it is likely
              that the phage and plasmid genes involved in F exclusion of T7 interact with
              conserved cellular functions whose activities are compromised in many different
              biological settings.  ***
