Title       : Temporal Regulation of Baculovirus Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9506233

Award Number: 9506233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda A. Guarino   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506233  Guarino  Baculovirus late and very late genes are expressed at
              different times post infection. The late genes encode viral structural proteins
              and their expression is maximal between 24 - 36 hr post infection. Polyhedrin
              is an example of the very late genes which are involved in the formation of
              occlusion bodies in the nuclei of infected cells. Transcription of the very
              late genes is relatively low at 24 hr and reaches maximal levels at 48 hr,
              after the synthesis of late proteins and assembly of virions. This suggests
              that the late and very late promoters are controlled by different factors,
              although the mechanisms that regulate differential transcription of the two
              classes of genes are unknown. The goals of this project are to purify and
              identify the viral proteins that are directly involved in transcription of the
              late and very late genes. For this research, hybrid templates have been
              constructed that contain late or very late promoters linked to a synthetic DNA
              fragment that lacks cytidine residues on the transcript strand. In vitro
              transcription reactions performed in the absence of CIP yield strong signals
              resulting from accurate initiation at the correct sites. These constructs were
              used to monitor the purification of active transcription complexes from
              infected cell extracts prepared at 36 hr post infection. Phosphocellulose
              chromatography yielded two fractions that differentially transcribed the late
              and very late templates. Addition of the follow-through fraction to either of
              the active fractions resulted in an increase in transcription from both late
              and very late promoters, although the flow-through fraction had no
              transcription activity when tested separately. The very late transcription
              complex was purified on three additional columns. The purified complex contains
              only five proteins and transcribed the polyhedrin and 39k C-free constructs in
              the absence of additional factors, indicating that the complex has both
              promoter recognition and RNA polymerase activities. Next, the  late complex
              will be purified in order to compare the protein compositions of the two
              complexes. Proteins in the two complexes will be identified using a combination
              of methods including V8 protease mapping, immunochemical analyses, and direct
              protein sequencing. The DNA binding activities of the two complexes will be
              compared and proteins that differ between the two complexes will be targeted
              for further study, including an analysis of their promoter recognition.  The
              factors that increase expression of late and very late genes will be purified
              and the corresponding genes identified.  %%%  This research should aid in
              understanding the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of baculovirus late
              and very late gene expression. The baculoviruses late transcription system is
              unique among eukaryotic viruses. In some respects, it seems very primitive. The
              fact that late and very late promoters are preferentially transcribed by
              different RNA polymerase complexes is reminiscent of bacterial RNA polymerase
              and sigma factors.  However, transcription is increased by the addition of
              separable factors, a strategy of eukaryotic transcription systems.  In
              addition, results from this research may have a practical impacts on
              biotechnology.  The baculovirus expression system is widely used for the
              production of large amounts of medically important proteins for use as
              vaccines, diagnostic tools, or therapeutic agents. However, the baculovirus
              system has limitations: it is transient because the viral vectors kill the
              cells; and recombinant proteins are expressed late when cellular processing
              pathways are compromised. A knowledge of the mechanisms that control
              baculovirus polyhedrin expression may aid in the design of vectors that work in
              the absence of virus infection and thus do not kill the host or impair protein
              processing.  ***
