Title       : Molecular Genetics of Segment Determination in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9506206

Award Number: 9506206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Mann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506206  Mann  The development of a multicellular animal requires that all cells
              have two types of information: where they are relative to their neighbors
              (positional information) and what structure they should generate (identity
              information). In Drosophila melanogaster, the homeotic selector genes link
              these two pieces of information: their large cis regulatory regions interpret
              positional information and their protein products control cellular identities
              by regulating the transcription of downstream target genes. These target genes
              are important to characterize to understand how homeotic genes determine
              identities. Therefore, homeotic target genes were isolated using a molecular
              screen. Among these targets is a putative transcription factor that is
              predicted to control neuroblast identities in the central nervous system and a
              potential component of the cytoskeleton. Interestingly, the human homologs of
              both genes are implicated in oncogenesis, suggesting that, in some contexts,
              they can control cellular differentiation and/or proliferation. To investigate
              their wild type functions during Drosophila development, loss- and
              gain-of-function mutations of these genes will be generated. The consequences
              these mutations have on both embryonic morphology and gene expression will be
              analyzed. Using in vivo misexpression assays, the functions of the wild type
              and oncogenic forms will be compared. In addition, the homeotic-responsive cis
              regulatory sequences that control the expression of these genes will be studied
              using in vivo reporter gene constructs and in vitro DNA-binding assays.
              Together, these experiments will provide an understanding of how positional
              information is translated into identity information by the homeotic genes.  ***
