Title       : Identification of Physiological Substrates of pp60v-src: Engineering Non-natural
               ATP Specificity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9506929

Award Number: 9506929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevan M. Shokat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9506929  Kevan Shokat     Growth factors, transcription factors, hormones
              and cell cycle regulatory proteins utilize tyrosine kinases in their signaling
              cascades. The common molecular feature of these kinases is their activation of
              downstream proteins by phosphorylation of tyrosine residues.  The main obstacle
              to dissecting the involvement of specific tyrosine kinases in signal
              transduction cascades has been their lack of substrate specificity in vitro and
              in vivo.  The catalytic domains of tyrosine kinases possess little or no
              inherent substrate specificity.  In fact catalytic domains from one tyrosine
              kinase can be substituted into a different tyrosine kinase with little change
              in the function of the latter.  Other domains in the tyrosine kinases are
              responsible for assembling multiprotein complexes which guide the catalytic
              domain to the correct targets. The poor in vitro specificity makes it difficult
              to use purified enzymes and substrates to assess the involvement of an
              individual tyrosine kinase with phosphorylation of a particular substrate.  The
              manifestation of this poor substrate specificity in vivo is that many genetic
              approaches, such as gene knock out experiments, give no phenotype due to
              compensation by other cellular tyrosine kinases.  This proposal describes a
              method for tagging and identifying individual protein tyrosine kinases and
              their physiological substrates. The method is based on engineering the
              catalytic domain of a prototypical tyrosine kinase, v-src, to accept a
              non-natural ATP analog (A*TP).  A yeast based selection syqtem will be used to
              screen v-src mutants which accept unnatural ATP analogs.  Once the engineered
              v-src protein which accepts an unnatural ATP analog is identified it will be
              expressed in NIH 3T3 cells and  gamma- 32P A*TP will be provided to the cell. 
              Under these conditions, normal v-src induced signal transduction will cause all
              the physiological substrates of v-src  to contain an easily identifiable
              radiolabel (32PO4-Y single letter amino acid c ode ).  This methodology can
              also be used to label specific substrate tyrosine residues with the more stable
              phosphorothioate moiety resulting in a phosphotyrosine residue which is less
              sensitive to phosphatase catalyzed hydrolysis.  This method will provide a
              novel approach for the study of specific phosphatase involvement in signaling
              pathways.  The two types of experiments in concert will provide a powerful new
              tool for dissecting signaling cascades involving tyrosine kinases and
              phosphatases. The education plan of this project employs a multi-disciplinary
              approach to promote communication between biologists and chemists, and employs
              computer graphics to give the students a "hands-on" experience.  This
              experience is provided for both undergraduates and graduate students.  %%% 
              Cells process information about their environment by using protein signaling
              cascades.  Some types of cascades are so numerous and similar to one another
              that it has been difficult to study them  using standard biochemical and
              genetic techniques.  This proposal describes a chemical method for uniquely
              "tagging" one signaling protein at a time inside a cell which will allow us to
              decipher the molecular logic of signaling cascades.  The education plan is
              designed to improve the quality of both undergraduate and graduate education,
              and to promote communication between disciplines in science.  ***
