Title       : Faculty Career Development Including Kinetic Physics of the Magnetotail and
               Teaching Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9506594

Award Number: 9506594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia A. Cattell cattell@belka.space.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1045,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This proposal is designed to support the early career development  of the
              Principal Investigator in her position as a new faculty  member in the School
              of Physics and Astronomy of the University of  Minnesota.  This position
              requires both excellence in scientific  research, excellence in teaching,
              course development, and community  outreach activities.  The research component
              of the proposal is  focused on the kinetic physics of the Earth's magnetotail, 
              including data analysis, numerical studies, and both inputs to and  comparisons
              with various theoretical models of the magnetosphere.   Previous studies of
              electric field data in the magnetotail have  shown that the variable part of
              the field is usually one to two  orders of magnitude larger than the background
              field.  These  variable fields, including waves and large amplitude spikes,
              will  have a large effect on particle distributions as has been shown in 
              preliminary numerical studies.  It is proposed to characterize  statistically
              the parameters of the waves and spikes using data  from the ISEE-1 and Geotail
              spacecraft.  The results will be used  to provide empirical dissipation
              coefficients for use in MHD  simulations and global models and to develop a
              more realistic  electric field model for inclusion in the numerical study of 
              particle trajectories in the magnetotail.  The particle  distributions will
              then be compared to those observed on the  AMPTE/IRM spacecraft (as well as
              other plasma data).  As part of  this comparison, the nature of the complex
              distributions observed  at the plasma sheet boundary will be examined including
              effects  such as acceleration of electron beams in slow mode shocks and the 
              mapped location of the auroral zone/polar cap convection boundary.     The
              educational component will be focused primarily in two areas,  both of which
              have very high priority for the School of Physics and  Astronomy.  The first is
              improvement in the lower division physics  with calculus class which is the
              main introductory physics clas s  for engineers, physicists, and chemists with
              approximately 1200  students per quarter.  Modification of this course and TA
              training  for the course are an ongoing effort.  The second is inclusion of 
              undergraduates in research which has been a longstanding priority  for the PI. 
              In addition, there are many ongoing projects including  local efforts to
              improve K-12 science teaching, development of new  undergraduate courses, and
              outreach activities to share the  excitement of physics research with the
              community in which the PI  will participate, particularly in the later years of
              the proposal.
