Title       : RUI: Regulation of Insect Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9506166

Award Number: 9506166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139287             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Rankin srankin@alleg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9506166  Rankin      Insects have been widely used as model systems to study
              basic mechanisms of hormone production and action.  Moreover, study of the
              regulation of hormone production in insects by key regulatory proteins holds
              promise in the development of biorational pesticides.  The general objective of
              Dr. Rankin's proposal is to understand the hormonal bases of insect mating, egg
              development and subsequent maternal behavior that lead to reproductive success
              in an insect.  This investigation will utilize the ring-legged earwig,
              Euborellia annulipes.  This insect has proven to be an excellent, inexpensive
              model system for investigating the hormonal regulation of egg development and
              reproductive behavior because it exhibits precisely timed cycles of egg
              development followed by maternal behavior which are correlated with specific
              hormone production.  The specific goals are to investigate:  1) regulation of
              juvenile hormone production by alterations of levels two insect hormones
              (juvenile hormone and ecdysone), diet and mating status and by surgical removal
              of ovaries; 2) whether proteins that inhibit reproduction (allatostatins),
              similar to those in cockroaches, occur in the earwig by using existing antibody
              probes for determination of amounts and sources of such proteins; and 3)
              whether the cockroach allatostatins can inhibit cockroach hormone synthesis. 
              Each of these manipulations will be assessed for their effects on (or
              correlations with) two fundamental reproductive behaviors:  mating and maternal
              care.  The results are expected to increase  understanding of the physiological
              regulation of key reproductive hormones, egg development, and behaviors that
              contribute to the reproductive process in an insect.  ***
