Title       : Subunit Composition and In Vivo Studies of a Yeast Signal Recognition Particle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9506140

Award Number: 9506140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Ogrydziak dmogrydziak@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506140  Ogrydziak    Protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum
              (ER)  membrane is a basic biological process in which signal  recognition
              particle (SRP) has a critical role.  Mammalian  SRP consists of RNA (300
              nucleotides) and six protein  subunits (Srp9, 14, 19, 54, 68, 72p).  Only
              recently has an  in vivo role for SRP in protein translocation been 
              demonstrated.  The long term goals of this research are to  understand early
              events in ER protein targeting, with an  emphasis on the structures, functions,
              and interactions of  SRP and its components.  Specific objectives of this
              project  are 1) to identify key components involved in the process  and
              determine if they are essential for growth, and 2) to  develop tools needed for
              in vivo studies of protein  targeting and translocation.  The studies will be
              done with  the genetically tractable yeast Yarrowia lipolytica.  It  secretes
              high levels of an alkaline extracellular protease  (AEP) which will be used as
              a reporter molecule.  Several  interrelated lines of research will be
              conducted.  1) SRP  will be purified, sizes of the subunits determined, and N- 
              terminal amino acid sequence of SRP14 homologue gene product  determined.  The
              SRP receptor alpha-subunit gene will be  cloned, sequenced, and disrupted.  In
              Saccharomyces  cerevisiae all SRP components are important but not  essential
              for growth.  Unexpectedly, at least one of Y.  lipolytica's two functional SRP
              RNA genes is essential for  growth but SRP54 is not.  So determining whether or
              not the  SRP receptor alpha subunit gene is essential will be of  interest. 2)
              Because sensititity to loss of SRP components  seems to be protein-specific in
              S cerevisiae, studies on Y.  lipolytica Kar2p as an additional reporter
              molecule will be  completed.  Several laboratories, including our own, have 
              had difficulties isolating temperature (heat) sensitive  mutations in genes
              coding for SRP polypeptides.  Therefore,  a system for protein depletion will
              be developed because it  has been found  in S. cerevisiae that depletion of SRP
               components results in more severe translocation defects than  does deletion. 
              %%%  Of the many fungi upon which people rely for food and drink,  yeast is
              arguably the most important. This project focuses  on a yeast species, Yarrowia
              lipolytica, which is a "high  secretor"; its rate of secretion of certain
              proteins is  greater than for other yeast species, such as Saccharomyces 
              cerevisiae.  To explore this interesting difference, the  initial events
              involved in secretion are studied.  These  events include the recognition of
              the secreted proteins so  that they can enter  the secretory system
              efficiently. This  is accomplished by a signal recognition particle, SRP, that 
              recognizes a signal sequence on the protein to be secreted.  Part of the
              project is to biochemically and genetically  dissect the SRP and to develop
              more probes to test its  functionality.  The SRP "sits" on the membrane system,
              the  endoplasmic reticulum, which serves as the entry point for  secreted
              proteins.  Where the SRP "sits" is determined by a  receptor which recognizes
              the SRP.  This project will test  if one of the subunits of the receptor is
              essential for  growth.  It will also genetically deplete other components  of
              the SRP to determine if their role in protein delivery is  ancillary or direct.
               The work has broad biotechnological  application through  providing a system
              whereby commercial  proteins may be more rapidly secreted and through shedding 
              light on the secretion process itself.  ***
