Title       : RUI: Ribosomal RNA Mutations and Ribosome Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1995 
File        : a9506167

Award Number: 9506167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin Santer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ursula Santer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9506167  Santer  Ribosomes are complex ribonucleoprotein organelles which are 
              the sites of one of the most complex of biological  processes, protein
              synthesis. It has been recognized for a  number of years that the primary
              structure of rRNA plays a  crucial role in the reactions of protein
              synthesis.The  discovery of the catalytic capabilities of a number of RNA 
              molecules including rRNA has refocused attention on the  functional
              capabilities of RNA. However, even in the most  completely described ribosome,
              that of the procaryote E.  coli ,the relationship between structure and
              function is  still incompletely understood. Genetic and biochemical  methods
              are used here to study the relationship between the  primary structure and
              function in the 30S subunit of the  ribosomes of E. coli. The focus is on bases
              which are  involved in a number of reactions which assure the accuracy  of
              protein synthesis: those in the 530 and 980 loop regions  and positions 1492
              and 1493 of 16S rRNA of 30S ribosomes.  The mutated region of rDNA is cloned
              into plasmids  containing the rRNA operon under the control of constitutive  or
              inducible promoters to permit the study of any type of  mutation, including
              those which are lethal to the cell. To  study the effects of these mutations,
              in vivo studies have  been carried out to determine the effect of mutant 30S 
              ribosomes on cell viability and the ability of these  ribosomes to synthesize
              proteins and accurately translate  mRNA coding for b-galactosidase. These
              studies have  demonstrated, for the first time, that position 981 is  essential
              for translation.  It is now proposed to try to  define the steps in protein
              synthesis in which each of the  mutated bases are essential. To determine the
              accuracy and  extent of translation, a linked transcription-translation  system
              will be used to study the translation of mRNA  transcribed from a plasmid
              coding for a small molecular  weight protein of known sequence employing an
              extract of  cells containing mutant ribosomes. Addition al in vitro 
              experiments will be carried out to assemble a homogeneous  population of mutant
              30S ribosomes to study many of the  partial reactions of protein synthesis.
              "Suppressors" of  lethal mutations will be selected to identify bases, distant 
              on the primary structure of rRNA, which affect a common  function. Selection of
              "suppressor" mutations which may be  involved in translational initiation can
              help us to identify  bases in rRNA which are specifically involved in
              initiation  of protein synthesis. These studies should help ultimately  to
              genetically identify the components involved at each step  of protein
              synthesis.  %%%  All cellular proteins are synthesized by complex organelles 
              called ribosomes. which are composed of ribosomal RNA (rRNA)  and protein.
              However, even in the most completely described  ribosome, that of the
              procaryote E. coli, the relationship  between structure and function is
              incompletely understood.  The discovery of the catalytic capabilities of a
              number of  RNA molecules has refocused attention on the functional 
              capabilities of rRNA. Our studies use genetic and  biochemical methods to study
              this relationship. A rRNA gene  can be mutated at a specific, crucial position
              and  introduced into the cell on a special vector which permits  the study of
              lethal changes. The focus is on specific  positions which are involved in
              assuring the accuracy of  protein synthesis. We propose to define the steps in
              protein  synthesis which are affected by each of the mutated  positions.  It is
              important to thoroughly study this process  since it is essential for cell
              growth and development, and  the basis of much production biotechnology. These
              studies  will involve undergraduate students in every phase and  constitute a
              major part of their biology training. These  students will thus be learning
              first hand the importance and  excitement of molecu1ar biology in solving
              fundamental  biological questions.  ***
