Title       : Conservation of Interaction Patterns in Protein Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9506278

Award Number: 9506278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Godzik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506278  Godzik  Modeling of protein structures by computer, before it is
              determined  experimentally, is an invaluable tool, aiding drug design, mutation
               studies and often structure determination itself.  The main goal of  this
              research is to improve existing tools for the modeling of  protein structures
              by including extra information obtained from the  new type of analysis of
              regularities in known protein structures.   This whole approach can be best
              described as the reverse-  engineering of protein structures on the computer. 
              Protein  structures will be "decomposed" into interacting fragments, and, by 
              utilizing a library of "parts", they will be rebuilt.  To gain  experience as
              well as to measure progress during the method  development, known structures
              will be modeled onto structures of  other proteins from their structural
              families.  Experience gained  in the "rebuilding" of known structures will be
              used to make  structural predictions for a number of real targets.  %%%  The
              main scientific trust in this research is to explore and  utilize a new,
              interaction based, description of proteins.  In such  a description, a protein
              is seen as a collection of interactions  between side chains, rather than as a
              set of points in space; thus,  the very features responsible for the folding to
              a particular  structure are directly used in the structure description itself. 
               The quality of protein models obtained by homology modeling will be  improved
              by using insights obtained through this new perspective,  by focusing on
              side-chain interactions which remain constant with  sequence changes even as
              protein backbone shifts and slides.  The  goals of this research will be
              achieved in two stages.  In the  first stage, traditional modeling techniques
              will be supplemented  by additional information obtained from the analysis of
              protein  families.  In the second stage, a new modeling approach will be 
              developed, where the predicted protein structure will be built  inside-out,
              around interacting clusters of res idues, using  fragments of structures from
              other proteins.  To assist in  achieving these goals, a set of necessary tools
              will be developed.  A number of specific objectives, including building models
              of  proteins with various levels of homology to the target, will be  used to
              judge the progress of the research.  ***
