Title       : Interactions Between Streams and Ground Water Along the River Continuum:
               Influence of Stream Size, Geomorphology, and Catchment Wetness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9506669

Award Number: 9506669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Wondzell wondzell@fsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick J. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9526669  Wondzell    The objective of this study is to quantify the flux of
              water through the hyporheic zone of a mountain stream network from a small
              heawater stream (first-order), through intermediate sized streams (third-order
              and fifth-order), and along the mainstem (sixth-order) of the McKenzie River
              basin, Oregon.  Comparisons will be made among the sizes of the selected stream
              reaches, and between constrained and unconstrained stream reaches of each
              stream size to identify the geomorphic and hydrologic factors regulating the
              exchange of surface and ground water along the logitudinal profile of a
              mountain stream network.      The exchange flow of sstream water and the
              discharge of ground water through the hyporheic zone will be estimated at each
              site under the range of stream discharges observed for each season of the year.
               Well networks will be instaled on the valley floor at each study site to
              characterize the flow net.  The locations of each well will be mapped and the
              elevation of the well head and the ground level at each well will be surveyed. 
              Water-table elevations will be measured monthly from the well network and from
              stage plates located in the active stream channell at each study site. 
              Saturated hydraulic conductivities (k) will be calculated from falling-head
              slug tests and continuous tracer injections.  These data will be used to
              calibrate the numerical flow model, MODFLOW, to predict the head observed
              within the network of wells at each study site.  The head distribution
              predicted from the calibrated model will be used to estimate subsurface fluxes.
