Title       : Microevolution in Two Lineages of Upper Ordovician (Cincinnatian) Bryozoans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9506003

Award Number: 9506003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Pachut   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Anstey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Pachut  9506003   This project proposes to study microevolution among fossil
              organisms from a new perspective:  that of the genetics, heritability, and
              selection of characters within preserved lineages.  Such a study would be
              unique in paleontology because it could separate observed temporal variation
              into heritable and non-heritable components, estimate temporal changes in
              levels of heterozygosity, and separate stabilizing from directional selection. 
              Observed microevolutionary phenomena such as stasis, gradualism, or lineage
              splitting could be assessed in terms of their underlying genetic basis.  
              Fossil bryozoans, because they form colonies, are among the few groups in the
              fossil record in which this type of analysis is possible.  The only other
              abundant groups in which a comparable  analysis could be carried out are corals
              and graptolites.  Secondly, bryozoans are very abundant on a bed-by-bed basis
              over lengthy stratigraphic intervals in the Edenian, Maysvillian, and
              Richmondian Stages of the Cincinnatian Series in its type area.  The two
              generic lineages chosen, Peronopora and Parvohallopora, both have continuous
              distributions with numerous branching points over a duration exceeding 10
              million years.  Branching patterns within the lineages are resolvable using
              both cladistic techniques and chronostratigraphy based on both conodonts and
              sequence boundaries.   Testing  several specific microevolutionary hypotheses
              in these lineages.  The first of these is that stabilizing selection underlies
              observed stasis, even stasis lasting millions of years.  The second hypothesis
              is that speciation, or lineage branching, is unrelated to directional selection
              preceding the branching  point, a key test of punctuated equilibrium.  The
              third hypothesis is that heterozygosity levels may be reduced prior to a
              branching event, producing a genetic bottleneck that may break out of stasis. 
              The main disadvantage of this study is that estimates of genetic parameters
              must be based on morphological data; however, r ecent studies of genetic
              heritabilities and covariance and morphological variability in living bryozoan
              species justify the substitution of estimates, calculated from partitioned
              within- and among-colony phenotypic variances, for genetic parameters.  The
              tradeoff, that more than balances this "disadvantage" is that these parameters
              can be studied in two well-sampled branching lineages enduring over a 10
              million year interval.
