Title       : RUI: Biochemical and Genetic Characterization of Membrane- Associated
               VirB-Protein COmplexes in Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1999  
File        : a9506144

Award Number: 9506144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois M. Banta lbanta@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             g   5      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    :z  5  
              :z  5                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                    Oh     +'  0             
                                       $       H       l                                     
                       D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @    _   5            
                           @         e =       e               {                       n     
                                               "       "   "       "       "       "       " 
                   L       L       L       L       L       d       n       L           C   x 
                   |       |       |       |       |       |       |                         
                       #   ?       e               V   T       4                           " 
                   |                 |       |                       |       |              
              |       "       "       |                       x       |       |       |      
              |       "       |       "       |                               6       >      
              "       "       "       "       |               |   4   |                      
                                                                                    9506144
              Banta The plant pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens causes a disease in which
              crown gall tumors form on susceptible plants. The disease results from a
              complex interaction that is initiated when the bacterium binds to the plant
              cell surface at a wound site. The bacterium has the unusual ability to transfer
              a fragment of DNA (the T DNA) into a host plant cell and deliver the DNA to the
              nucleus, where it becomes part of the host plant's genome. Extensive molecular
              characterization over the past several years has helped elucidate the process
              of T DNA production within the bacterium, as well as the mechanism by which a
              molecule of bacterial origin is directed to a specific compartment in a
              eukaryotic cell. One of the fun damental aspects of this plant pathogen
              interaction that remains shrouded in mystery is the actual transport process
              mediating export of the T DNA from the bacterium and delivery into the plant
              cell. A multiprotein channel or pore complex has been hypothesized to allow
              passage of the T DNA (and its associated proteins) through the two membranes
              that surround the bacterium. Several candidate proteins have been identified
              that could make up such a transport apparatus; these proteins are encoded by
              the virB operon on the large tumor inducing (T) plasmid that carries many of
              the virulence associated genes (as well as the T DNA itself). Recent results
              from a number of labs including our own have shed some light on the
              localization and other characteristics of many of the VirB proteins; these
              observations support a model in which several VirB proteins interact to form a
              T DNA transport pore, while others many function as chaperones and/or sources
              of energy for the translocation event. The proposed studies are designed to
              determine which VirB proteins interact to form oligomeric complexes. Genetic
              analyses will take advantage of point mutations in the virB10 gene that result
              in a loss of tumor formation; potentially interacting species will be
              identified by screening for compensatory changes in a second virB gene that can
              suppress the avirulent phenotype of the original mutant. A second genetic
              approach will utilize the "dihybrid" strategy, in which proteins or protein
              fragments are tested for their ability to bring together two domains of a yeast
              transcriptional activator such as the GAL4 protein. These genetic studies will
              be complemented by biochemical experiments designed to explore the composition
              of VirB protein containing aggregates. Together, these studies should provide
              some insight into the mechanism by which a large polar molecule such as the T
              DNA and associated proteins is transported across the two apolar membranes that
              enclose the Agrobacterium cell. Molecular dissection of the structure  and
              function of the putative transfer apparatus will, in turn, help elucidate the
              processes and interactions mediating assembly of what is thought to be an
              elaborate membrane associated complex. %%% The soil bacterium Agrobacterium
              tumefaciens infects susceptible plants, resulting in unregulated cell division
              and crown gall tumor formation. This disease can be thought of as "plant
              cancer" in that, as with human tumors, cells are multiplying at an
              inappropriate time and/or place. Infection by Agrobacterium involves the
              movement of a piece of DNA (the T DNA) from the bacterium into the host plant
              cell. This unusual interaction is the only known naturally occurring example of
              DNA transfer from one kingdom (bacterial) to another (plant). We are especially
              interested in the mechanism by which a large water loving molecule of DNA is
              able to cross the oily membrane that surrounds the bacterial cell. T DNA
              processing and transfer are mediated by a number of bacterial virulence (Vir)
              proteins. One group of Vir proteins, the VirB proteins, are believed to play a
              direct role in allowing the T DNA to exit the bacterial cell, most likely by
              interacting to form an opening in the bacterial membrane through which the T
              DNA is transferred. We plan to test this hypothesis, using both genetic and
              biochemical approaches, by studying defective VirB proteins that do not permit
              T DNA movement, and by isolating complexes of VirB proteins. ***               
                                    ;                                                        
                                                                                    @        
                                                                                             
                                                                            ....()()))()()   
                                                                                    ;
