Title       : Structure of Alpha-CT Domain of E. coli RNA Polymerase by NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9506933

Award Number: 9506933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nuria Assa-Munt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Burnham Institute
	      10901 No. Torrey Pines Road
	      LaJolla, CA  92037    629/455-0181

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506933  Assa-Munt  Transcriptional regulation is modulated by the interaction
              between  transcription factors and their target DNA sequences, as well as by 
              protein protein interactions.  Escherichia coli RNA polymerase  holoenzyme
              (RNAP) is one of the most intensely studied enzymes  since its discovery.  This
              multimeric enzyme consists of a core  protein made up of  2  ' and complexes
              with the major sigma subunit  (sigma 70). This research will concentrate on the
              role and structure  of the   subunit of RNA polymerase, and specifically on the
               carboxyterminal domain of  , ( -CTD).  This domain is known to bind  DNA and
              also to interact with CAP, the catabolite gene activator  protein.  Its small
              size makes it amenable to NMR solution studies  and it has been expressed in
              large amounts.  The solution structure  of the  -CTD will be determined by
              multidimensional NMR studies,  both free in solution and when complexed to DNA.
               Dynamic studies  will probe the role of flexible regions in the protein and
              also in  the protein-DNA complex.  Based on the solved structure, we will 
              identify the topological surfaces involved in protein-protein and  in
              protein-DNA recognition, and use the structures to understand  the available
              biochemical and mutation data.  The  -CTD is an  independently folded domain
              and may be studied as a prototype of  the dual DNA-binding and protein-protein
              functions common to both  eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA-binding proteins.  %%%
               Transcriptional regulation depends on the interaction between  transcription
              factors and their target DNA sequences.  Modulation  of the biological activity
              of these transcription factors via  protein-DNA or protein-protein interactions
              regulates processes  such as cell development, differentiation and oncogenesis.
               One of  the best studied transcription systems is the bacterial RNA 
              polymerase and its interactions with diverse promoters.  This  research on
              fundamental issues of DNA-binding proteins and their  regulatory roles mediated
              by specific pro tein-protein and protein-  DNA associations will focus on the
              domain organization of the RNA-  polymerase   subunit from E. coli; it binds
              DNA and interacts with  the activating region of the Catabolite Gene Activator
              protein  (CAP) in the ternary complex of the lac promoter, RNAP and CAP.  It 
              is, therefore, a good model to study intermolecular interactions.  ***
