Title       : Genetic Analysis of Maternal Functions in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9506237

Award Number: 9506237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184748             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert Perrimon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9506237  Perrimon    A detailed analysis of genes critical for early events
              in cellular  determination is one of the best approaches to the understanding
              of  the mechanics of early development. Embryonic development in  Drosophila
              requires both maternal and zygotic gene products. To  identify genes that
              control specific embryonic patterning events,  maternal functions have been
              detected via mutations isolated from  screens for female sterility, while
              zygotic functions which are  masked by the maternally stored gene product and
              loci with specific  maternal effect lethal phenotypes which are associated with
              pre-  imaginal lethality cannot be identified using these two approaches.  To
              characterize the function of such loci Dr. Perrimon has  previously
              successfully used germline mosaic techniques. These  analyses, which were
              limited to the X-chromosome for technical  reasons, identified a large number
              of new genes that play critical  roles during embryonic development. The goal
              of this proposal is to  conduct near saturation screens for all zygotic lethal
              mutations  located on the second and third chromosomes (80% of the genome) 
              that are associated with specific maternal effect lethal  phenotypes. These
              experiments will provide a complete description  of the kinds of processes
              controlled by the maternal activity of  essential genes. In addition, they will
              provide the foundation for  further detailed analyses of various patterning
              systems that  operate during embryogenesis. Dr. Perrimon's laboratory will
              focus  on the characterization of new terminal class genes. In addition,  since
              these screens will generate a large collection of additional  mutations with
              interesting phenotypes, the collection of mutants  will be made available to
              the fly community. The wealth of  information generated from these studies will
              contribute to our  general understanding of the mechanisms underlying embryonic
               pattern formation in Drosophila and will identify the genetic  functions
              encoded by the Drosophila genome .  ***
