Title       : Acclimation of Photosynthetic Organisms to High Light: Molecular and Genetic
               Dissection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9506254

Award Number: 9506254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Olle E. Bjorkman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506254  Grossman  Photon flux densities that are in excess of what a plant can 
              use for photochemistry result in the activation of processes  that help protect
              the photosynthetic apparatus against  photodamage; specifically, plants can
              dissipate much of the  excess excitation energy as heat.  This nonradiative
              energy  dissipation, which is measured as nonphotochemical quenching  (NPQ) of
              chlorophyll fluorescence, is probably the result of  several processes.  One of
              these processes, the generation  of zeaxanthin (which may directly quench
              excited chlorophyll  molecules) via the xanthophyll cycle, occurs in the light-
               harvesting antenna complexes.  Other energy dissipating  processes, such as
              charge recombination between P680+ and QA-  and a cyclic electron flow around
              photosystem II (PSII), are  associated with the reaction centers.    The
              objective of this grant is to elucidate the mechanisms  underlying these
              processes and their relative importance for  photoprotection, using
              Chlamydomonas as a model organism.  Mutants have been generated by insertional
              mutagensis, which  will allow for the relatively facile isolation of the genes 
              of interest.  Physiological characterizations of the mutant  strains grown in
              high or low light have revealed several  novel classes of mutants, including
              those that appear to be  defective in 1) the xanthophyll cycle, 2) other
              mechanisms  of energy dissipation, 3) the regulation of NPQ, and 4)  scavenging
              of oxygen radicals.    It is proposed to continue physiological, biochemical
              and  genetic analyses of the mutant strains that have already  been isolated. 
              These studies will help us evaluate the  importance of known photoprotective
              processes, discover  specific mechanisms that govern these processes and
              perhaps  even unveil novel mechanisms that contribute to  photoprotection.
