Title       : Initiation of DNA Replication in Quiescent Cell Nuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a9506280

Award Number: 9506280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382744             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald B. Sittman dsittman@biochem.umsmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory H. Leno  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Mississippi Med Cen
	      2500 North State Street
	      Jackson, MS  392164505    601/987-3500

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9506280  Leno    Intact quiescent cell nuclei do not initiate DNA replication 
              in Xenopus egg extract indicating that G1-phase nuclei lose  the capacity to
              replicate following growth arrest.  This  inability can be overcome however, by
              permeabilizing the  nuclear membranes of these intact nuclei prior to
              incubating  them in the egg extract.  The long term objective of this  project
              is to determine the molecular basis for this loss of  replication capacity and
              to determine if this inability is  part of a "molecular switch" designed to
              promote passage of  the egg-phase cell out of the cell cycle and entry into a 
              quiescent state.  These studies will also provide insights  into the
              requirements for the initiation of replication upon  re-entry of the quiescent
              cell into the cell cycle.  The  loss of replication capacity upon growth arrest
              may be due  to: 1) the loss of a replication license; 2) the acquisition  of an
              inhibitor of replication and/or 3) changes in nuclear  membrane structure and
              function.  These possibilities will  be investigated by isolating nuclei from
              BALB/c 3T3 cells,  synchronized in various stages of the cell cycle, and by 
              determining their capacity for DNA replication in a cell-  free system derived
              from Xenopus eggs.  Initially, a novel  nuclear membrane permeabilization and
              repair strategy will  be used to determine whether or not exposure of permeable
              G0  nuclei to the soluble egg extract is required for DNA  replication.  These
              studies will also address whether  changes in nuclear membrane structure are in
              part,  responsible for the loss of replication capacity in  quiescent cell
              nuclei.  Egg extracts devoid of licensing  factor activity will be used to
              determine if G0 nuclei, like  G2 nuclei, lack a replication license. 
              Furthermore, this  permeabilization and repair strategy will also serve as an 
              assay for the identification of a licensing factor or other  essential
              replication factors present in egg extract but  missing from quiescent cell
              nuclei.  To determine if  qu iescent nuclei are prevented from replicating by
              growth  arrest specific inhibitor of replication, extracts from  quiescent
              cells will be used to determine whether they can  convert a replication
              competent G1 nucleus  into an  incompetent form.  Quiescent cell extracts can
              be assayed  for inhibitory factors using this approach.  The timing of,  and
              molecular basis for, the restoration of replication  competence during re-entry
              into the cell cycle will also be  investigated.  Extracts from competent cells
              will be assayed  for their ability to promote replication of G0 nuclei in egg 
              extract.  In this way, a mammalian replication licensing  activity may be
              identified.  The initiation of DNA  replication is one of the most crucial
              points of control of  the eukaryotic cell cycle; therefore, a more through 
              understanding of the regulation mechanisms operating at this  level is
              essential for a more complete understanding of  regulated cell growth and
              division.  %%%  This is a project which examines the regulation od the 
              "quiescent" state which occurs in eggs (African clawed frog  eggs) prior to
              fertilization. The cell cycle, which is  composed of periods which include
              mitosis (M Phase) and  synthesis of DNA (S phase) and the gaps of time in
              between  these phases (G1 and G2), can also be said to have a G0  phase which
              is the phase of inactive or quiescent cells.  The entry of active cells  into
              the quiescent state (G0)  occurs at G1, while reentry from G0 into G1 is
              followed by  initiation of replication of DNA (start of  S phase).  The  entry
              of active cells into the quiescent state can be  thought of as a loss of a
              replication license, since there  is evidence that eggs have a "licensing
              factor" which can  allow replication of DNA. The existence of licensing factor 
              is assayed by exposing nuclei isolated from mammalian cells  to egg extract in
              vitro.  Alternatives to the hypothesis  that there is a loss of  replication
              license include the  possibilities that there are inhibitors of replication 
              acti vity in the egg, or that there are changes in the  nuclear membrane
              structure which somehow block replication.  A novel nuclear membrane and repair
              strategy is used to  address the latter possibility.  The inhibitor hypothesis 
              will be tested by using quiescent egg extracts (not able to  replicate DNA) to
              induce arrest in active mammalian cell  nuclei (competent for DNA replication).
              If the approaches  are successful, the identification of the mammalian 
              licensing factor would be forthcoming.  These studies are  basic to an
              understanding of how growth and division is  regulated in animal cells.  ***
