Title       : Initiation of Geminivirus DNA Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9506038

Award Number: 9506038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Hanley-Bowdoin LINDA@BCHSERVER.BCH.NCSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506038  Hanley-Bowdoin  Geminiviruses constitute a unique family of eucaryotic
              DNA viruses with single-stranded genomes that replicate through a rolling
              circle mechanism in the nuclei of infected plant cells.  They have small
              genomes, encode one protein that is essential for their replicatoin, and
              recruit the replication machineryof their hosts.  These features make
              geminiviruses excellent model systems for studying eucaryotic DNA replication,
              an area of study that has not been pursued extensively in plant systems.  Study
              of plant DNA replication and its integration into the cell division cycle will
              provide valuable insight into the universal mechanisms that underlie these
              processes in all organisms and may reveal important differences that are
              responsible for the fundamentally different developmental pathways of plants
              and animals. This research will study the events that lead to initiation of
              geminivirus replication, and will provide a rare opportunity to examine the
              mechanism of rolling circle replication in a eucaryotic system.  It will also
              from the foundation of our long term research goals to identify and understand
              the functions of host proteins in geminivirus and plant nuclear DNA
              replication.  The well-characterized geminivirus, tomato golden mosaic virus
              (TGMV), will be used for these experiments.  The TGMV replication origin has
              been mapped to an 89-bp sequence.  TGMV encodes two proteins for its
              replication one (AL1) that is absolutely required and a second (AL3) that
              impacts viral DNA accumulation.  The objectives of this research are to examine
              the sequence and structural requirements for function of a geminivirus minimal
              origin of replication, to characterize the functions of an essential
              geminivirus replication protein, to characterize the steps leading to
              initiation of geminivirus replication.  %%%  Geminiviruses constitute a unique
              family of eucaryotic DNA viruses with single-stranded genomes that replicate
              through a rolling circle mechanism in the nuclei of infected plant ce lls. They
              have small genomes, encode one protein that is essential for their replicatoin,
              and recruit the replication machineryof their hosts.  These features make
              geminiviruses excellent model systems for studying eucaryotic DNA replication,
              an area of study that has not been pursued extensively in plant systems. The
              goal of this research is to understand the molecular processes that mediate
              geminivirus replication and to relate these events to plant nuclear DNA
              replication.  Study of plant DNA replication and its integration into the cell
              division cycle will provide valuable insight into the universal mechanisms that
              underlie these processes in all organisms and may reveal important differences
              that are responsible for the fundamentally different developmental pathways of
              plants and animals.  ***
