Title       : Sodium Transport in Renal Tubules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9506128

Award Number: 9506128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry C. Stoner stonerl@vax.cs.hscsyr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY, Upstate Med Univ
	      155 Elizabeth Blackwell
	      Syracuse, NY  132102334    315/473-4570

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9506128  Stoner      Most vertebrates regulate not only the contents of their
              blood plasma but also its volume.  Plasma is filtered into the kidney tubules
              of many animals. The regulation of plasma volume is effected by controlling the
              net  reabsorption of filtered water and the most prevalent cation in the
              filtrate, sodium.  When animals are placed on a sodium restricted diet hormonal
              mechanisms act to enhance the reabsorption of filtered sodium, reducing its
              rate of loss.  Several known control mechanisms for sodium reabsorption effect
              the distal nephron. One important step in sodium reabsorption is sodium
              movement from the lumen of the renal tubule into the cell, via ion channels.
              Many investigators believe that regulated changes in the rate of sodium
              transport are achieved by controlling the sodium channel activity.  Dr. Stoner
              has developed a technique whereby it is possible to turn inside-out fragments
              of the amphibian kidney tubule. This approach exposes the urinary surface for
              study. The utility of everted segments of renal tubule fragments lies in the
              ability to control, independently, the contents of the saline solutions bathing
              the urinary and blood surfaces of the epithelial cells while studying the
              aativity of the channels involved in sodium reabsorption. Control of the ionic
              and hormonal contents of these compartments will allow him for the first time
              to study the expression and regulation ion channels in native tissue.  One
              unique feature of the species used, Ambystoma tigrinum, is that it can be
              purchased in both a land- and aquatic-phase. One type of sodium channel is
              observed in the apical membrane of everted collecting tubules dissected from
              land-phase Ambystoma, while two other types of sodium channels appear in the
              aquatic-phase collecting tubule. This is the first time the latter types of
              sodium channels have been identified in any native collecting tubule. The
              physiological significance of the presence of different channel types during
              different stages of metamorphosis is  unknown.  Dr. Stoner hopes to identify
              the different physiological mechanisms used to activate and inactivate each
              type of sodium channel. The results are certain to clarify the differences in
              control of the sodium reabsorption in terreqtrial and aquatic animals, and
              likely to spark new interest in the developmental aspects of channel expression
              in the kidney.  ***
