Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fluvial Responses to Climate Change and Human
               Activities in Burgundy, France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9506643

Award Number: 9506643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Blum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9506643 Michael D. Blum Eric C. Straffin Southern  Illinois University at
              Carbondale  Dissertation Improvement Research: Fluvial Response to Climate
              Change and Human Activities, Burgundy,France   The proposed research will
              develop a model that relates fluvial processes, flood regimes,land-use
              patterns, and dominant climate regimes for the Arroux-Loire River system in
              Burgundy, France.  The model will provide for the reconstruction of fluvial
              responses to past climate and environmental changes, as well as for the
              prediction of fluvial response to anthropogenic changes in regional climate in
              the near future.  Documentation of over 200 years of changes in the fluvial
              landscape will be developed from cartographic and remotely-sensed data.  Those
              changes will then be interpreted  within the context of  known land-use
              patterns, and historic changes in climate and river discharge  regimes.  Models
              developed for the period of historical monitoring  will then be compared with 
              reconstructions of older alluvial deposits, prehistoric land-use, and
              correlative proxy  paleoenvironmental data to determine the r elationship
              between fluvial depositional and erosional  processes and climate regimes over
              the last 2000 years.  If the model correlates climatic regimes and  fluvial
              styles, and this is valid for older alluvial deposits, then it may be possible
              to predict  fluvial responses to future climate change for the same region.  In
              this way the study provides a  first step towards linking global environmental
              change with changes in landscape, enabling those  regions with critical
              land-use needs to better plan for potential future environmental change        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
