Title       : SBIR Phase II: Defect Reduction in Bulk 6H-SiC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9506072

Award Number: 9506072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrian R. Powell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Tech Matls, Inc.
	      7 Commerce Drive
	      Danbury, CT  06810    203/794-1100

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1501,1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses the
              need for silicon carbide (SiC) in power semiconductor and short wavelength
              optoelectronics.  The availability and quality of SiC substrates, the
              underpinning of any semiconductor technology, has not kept pace with either
              technical or commercial requirements.  In particular, the quality of the
              substrates is degraded by the presence of lattice distortion and `micropipes`. 
              In the Phase I program it was shown that Synchrotron White Beam X-ray
              Topography (SWBXT), a non-destructive characterization technique, is highly
              sensitive to strain in both horizontal and vertical cross-sections of the boule
              and resolves screw dislocations of all sizes.  In addition, it was shown that
              the majority of the lattice distortion in the seed crystal propagates through
              the growing bole, but that the micropipes can be reduced, using a proprietary
              growth process. In the next phase, characterization techniques will be expanded
              in order to reduce the dislocation density in our boules, and to progress from
              1` to 2` diameter ingots.  To achieve this, SWBXT will be complemented with a
              potassium hydroxide (KOH) etching technique.  KOH etching has the advantage
              that it has a quick turnaround relative to SWBXT, and is much less expensive. 
              Although KOH has been used qualitatively on SiC, the quantitative
              identification of defects that exists for chemical etches of silicon and GaAs
              does not yet exist for SiC.  The first part of this program will use SWBXT to
              quantitatively identify the etch pit features. All of these techniques will be
              used to evaluate the value of different seed orientations, new seed preparation
              techniques, and n-type doping to reduce the dislocation density in the boules. 
                   Development of a commercially viable SiC substrate, with low defect
              density, large area and acceptable cost, is required to achieve significant use
              of SiC electronics.  SiC substrates also present a potential substrate for
              III-V nitride optoelectronics.  These technologies will proliferate into many
              commercial electronics and sensor markets, including automotive, industrial
              power, communications and displays.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
