Title       : Signal Mediated Growth Control by Osmotic Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9506987

Award Number: 9506987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Gustin gustin@bioc.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506987  Gustin    The research addresses the fundamental problem of how cells 
              sense and respond to osmotic stress.  In previous work  funded by NSF, it was
              shown that the yeast Saccharomyces  cerevisiae has an osmosensing signal
              transduction pathway  called the HOG kinase (encoded by HOG1) and a MAP kinase 
              kinase (encoded by PBS2).  Mutants lacking either gene have  specific defects
              in the high osmolarity-induced expression  of proteins need for osmoregulation
              and osmotolerance.  This  laboratory recently made the exciting discovery that
              yeast  cells exposed to an increase in osmolarity temporarily  arrest their
              cell cycle in the G2 phase; hog 1 and pbs2  mutants are defective for this
              osmotic stress response.  The  mechanism responsible for this cell cycle arrest
              is  currently unknown, but the working hypothesis is that Hog1p  negatively
              regulates a G2-specific function of the cyclin-  dependent protein kinase
              Cdc28p.  The long-range goal is a  molecular understanding of how the cell
              cycle is regulated  by osmotic stress.  The specific focus of this project is
              to  determine how the HOG pathway induces a G2 phase arrest.  Two major
              objectives are (1) to investigate mechanisms  required for high
              osmolarity-induced, Hog1-dependent  regulation of the function of the
              cyclin-dependent kinase  Cdc28 in G2, and (2) to isolate and characterize the 
              molecular targets of the HOG pathway that mediate G2 arrest.  Specific
              experiments to meet the stated objectives are: (1)  Use G2-phase cells to
              determine the effect of high  osmolarity and HOG pathway mutants on the histone
              H1 kinase  activity of the G2 cyclin/Cdc28 complex, the in vivo  stability of
              the G2 cyclin/Cdc28 complex, and the cellular  content of G2 cyclins.  It will
              be determined whether Cks1  or other known Cdc28-associated proteins mediate
              Hog1  regulation of G2-specific Cdc28 functions. It will also be  determined
              whether changes in Cdc28 phosphorylation mediate  Hog1-induced G2 arrest.  The
              physiological significance of  G2 arrest by Hog1  will be investigated by
              determining  effects of osmotic stress and the hog1 mutation on cell  cycle
              landmark events.  2) Use affinity chromatography and  co-immunoprecipitation to
              isolate and characterize Hog1- or  G2 cyclin/Cdc28-associated proteins
              mediating Hog1-induced  G2 arrest.  Results of this molecular analysis of cell
              cycle  regulation by an osmotically-regulated protein kinase  cascade will
              provide an important experimental paradigm for  studies on similar osmotic
              response pathways active in other  eukaryotic systems.  %%%  This project
              addresses a new feature of a signaling pathway  recently discovered in yeast by
              this investigator in a prior  NSF award.  The signaling pathway is the High
              Osmotic-stress  activated Genes (HOG) which apparently have influence over  the
              normal progression through cell division.  If the cells  are exposed to high
              osmotic conditions, such as high salt or  sugar concentrations,  they normally
              arrest the cell cycle  in the period of time called "G2", the Gap of time
              between  DNA synthesis (S phase) and mitosis (M phase).  Cells with  an
              inactive HOG1 gene, do not arrest in G2, rather they  continue on to divide,
              often abnormally.  The transition  from G2 into M has been shown to be
              controlled, in part, by  the cyclical assembly of complexes of a
              phosphorylating  enzyme, or kinase, which is the product of  the Cdc28 (Cell 
              Division Control 28) gene and proteins called cyclins, which  are, in most
              part, cyclically made during the progression  through the cell cycle. The
              cyclins which are made during G2  and allow progression through the G2/M
              transition are called  the G2 cyclins.  Cyclins which allow progression through
              the  G1 (the Gap of time between mitosis and DNA synthesis)/S  transistion are
              called G1 cyclins. The focus of this project  is how the nature of the complex
              formed by G2 cyclins and  the Cdc28 kinase is influenced by the Hog1. The
              activity,  stability, and associations with other proteins are all  candidates
              for Hog 1 action.  To determine if  other  regulatory components are present in
              the G2cyclin/Cdc28  complex which mediate Hog1-induced cell cycle arrest, the 
              other components will be identified and isolated by virtue  of their
              association with components of the complex. This  work is important because it
              may  serve as a model for  fungal and plant cellular response to a changing 
              environment, such as partial desication or increase in  salinity, both of which
              change the osmotic conditions of the  cell.  ***
