Title       : Quantitative Analysis of Turbidites and Related Sediment Gravity Flow Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9506574

Award Number: 9506574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68290              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Grotzinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Grotzinger  9506574   One year of funding is requested in order to support a
              pilot project designed to conduct quantitative tests of the scaling
              relationships of sediment gravity flow deposits.  The plan is to test the
              hypothesis that the statistical distribution of bed thicknesses of subaqueous
              sediment gravity flow deposits with minimal erosional truncation and
              amalgamation should obey the power law N(h) h-B where N(h) is the number of
              layers of thickness greater than h and B is the scaling exponent (as suggested
              by Rothman et al, 1994).  This indicates that, at least in some cases, sediment
              gravity flow deposition is scale invariant (fractal).  We will determine (or at
              least devise a strategy for future research) whether power-law scaling for
              sediment gravity flow deposits represents an intrinsic dynamical property of
              the depositional system itself (e.g. self-organized criticality), or whether it
              indirectly reflects the power-law scaling of external, causal mechanisms (e.g.
              earthquakes, floods).  Furthermore, if it can be demonstrated (regardless of
              its cause) that the sediment gravity flow triggering and deposition process is
              indeed scale invariant, then departures of bed thickness statistics from the
              predicted power law may possibly be interpreted as quantitative evidence of
              erosional and/or non-depositional processes that influence completeness of the
              stratigraphic record.   The research effort itself will consist of a close
              collaboration between the PI's whose backgrounds are widely divergent, and a
              graduate research assistant.  Several recently obtained data sets will be
              analyzed.  Additional data will be collected that pertains specifically to the
              temporal scaling of sediment gravity flow deposits.  Finally, data collection
              will proceed in parallel with development of new, physically-based theory that
              relates bed thickness, volume, and geometry.   The results of this research
              will be of broad interest to members of the physics as well as earth science
              communities. Additionally, the rese arch has clear relevance to the petroleum
              industry where there is growing evidence that thin-bedded turbidite reservoirs
              may be of great economic importance.
