Title       : NSF-CONACyT: The Intelligent Observer: A Tool for Collaborative Experimental
               Research Among Geographically Dispersed Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9506064

Award Number: 9506064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Claude Latombe latombe@robotics.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlo Tomasi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,9146,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award in the CONACyT Initiative funds a joint research project  between two
              groups: the Robotics Laboratory of the Department of  Computer Science at
              Stanford University and the Center for  Artificial Intelligence at ITESM in
              Monterrey (Mexico). There have  been several mutually beneficial exchanges
              (visits, courses,  research) between these two groups over the last four years.
               The  purpose of this project to expand this cooperation, not only in  basic
              research, but also on applications such as manufacturing and  robot-assisted
              surgery.  The technical goal of this project is to  integrate object-tracking
              techniques from computer vision and  motion-planning techniques from robotics,
              in order to build a new  tool, called the Intelligent Observer (IO for short),
              that will  facilitate collaborative experimental research among geographically 
              dispersed groups. While this project builds upon the two groups'  strength in
              vision, planning, control, and robotics, the resulting  Intelligent Observer
              will be a tool to enhance their future  research capabilities in these domains.
              This tool will be used  interactively by people at one or several geographical
              locations to  observe and participate in an experiment implemented at another 
              site.  The hardware of the IO will consist of one or more vision  sensors
              mounted on mobile platforms available at the experimental  site.  The software
              of the IO will accept high-level commands input  by the users on their
              workstations, plan and control the motions of  the platforms to allow the
              vision sensors to acquire enough visual  information to meet the users'
              requests, apply image understanding  techniques to extract information
              pertinent to the users' requests,  and for each user, provide a pertinent
              graphic rendering of the  experimental scene on a display.  In addition to
              facilitating  remote collaborations in research, the IO technologies should
              also  benefit operations such as telepresence, teleconferencing,  surveillance,
              and interactive TV.
