Title       : Regulation of Cell Motility by the Intracellular Messengers, Ca2+ and cAMP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1998  
File        : a9506838

Award Number: 9506838
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261252             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duanqing Pei   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Sammak  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB9506838  Paul Sammak   The regulatory mechanisms that convert a stationary,
              quiescent cell into an active motile cell are not known. Confluent cells in
              culture, made quiescent by serum starvation and contact inhibition, can be
              induced to move by mechanically denuding a zone for cells to move into.
              Scraping does more than provide space for cell movement since we have found
              that specific signals are derived from injured cells to initiate motility. The
              injury produced a brief wave of elevated intracellular free Ca2+ ( Ca2+ i) that
              propagated for a limited distance through the monolayer. The transient
              elevation of  Ca2+ i determined the rate of   motility for hours after motility
              was initiated. We also have pharmacological evidence that intracellular free
              cyclic AMP ( cAMP i) is modulated during scrape injury and that elevation of 
              cAMP i can either stimulate or inhibit movement depending on the time of
              treatment. It is not known how the transient  Ca2+ i and  cAMP i -- dependent
              signals might control the long term rate of cell locomotion. The requirement
              for changes of  cAMP i and  Ca2+ i during relief from contact inhibition in
              confluent monolayers will be measured. The requirement for these intracellular
              messengers for the maintenance of steady state cell motility will also be
              examined. I. Measure the  Ca2+ i elevation induced by release from contact
              inhibition by fura-2 and BTC fluorescence ratio imaging and determine whether
              the  Ca2+ i wave  is necessary and sufficient for stimulation of motility.
              Necessity will be tested by blocking Ca2+ influx and stores release.
              Sufficiency will be tested by artificially inducing  Ca2+ i elevations with
              Nitr-5.  II. Measure  cAMP i dynamics induced by release from contact
              inhibition and determine whether changes in  cAMP i are necessary and
              sufficient for stimulation of motility. Cyclic AMP will be measured by
              fluorescence ratio imaging of the  cAMP i indicator, FlCRhR (Fluorescein
              Catalytic, Rhodamine   Regulatory, pronounced flicker), the fluorescently 
              derivatized cAMP dependent protein kinase. If endogenous changes are
              discovered, they will be perturbed with the inhibitor, RpcAMPS and the
              stimulator, SpcAMPS. We have evidence that one of the few known functions for
              the  Ca2+ i wave is   the stimulation of wound healing. We have shown that Ca2+
              influx is necessary for the full rate of cell motility, but it is not known
              whether  Ca2+ i mobilization is sufficient to induce motility or whether
              release of  Ca2+ i stores is necessary for motility. The role of  cAMP i in
              motility is less certain than that of  Ca2+ i. Our knowledge has been hampered
              by cAMP detection methods that require biochemical averages of millions of
              cells. Only recently has a method been developed to measure dynamics of  cAMP i
              in single living cells. There have been no direct determinations of whether
              cells normally modulate  cAMP i to control whole cell locomotion, although we
              have indirect evidence that they might. If our hypothesis is correct, we will
              acquire significant insight into the second messenger control of cell motility.
               %%%  This project will investigate the intracellular messages that change cell
              behavior and initiate cell motility. It is known that  Ca2+ i and  cAMP i -are
              messengers that activate enzymes within the cell and can change cell behavior. 
              This project will measure both  Ca2+ i and  cAMP i in single living cells as
              they begin to move. Changes in the concentration of Ca2+ and cAMP will be
              measured to see if cells make use of these messengers as they begin to move.
              These changes will then be blocked  to see if they were necessary for cell
              movement and will artificially induce these changes to see if these messengers
              are sufficient in themselves to make cells move, or whether other signals might
              be required at the same time. The role of  cAMP i in motility is less certain
              than that of  Ca2+ i.  Acquisition of  knowledge has been hampered by cAMP
              detection methods that require biochemical averages of millions of cells. Only
              recently has a method been  developed to measure dynamics of  cAMP i in single
              living cells. There have been no direct determinations of whether cells
              normally modulate  cAMP i to control whole cell locomotion, although  indirect
              evidence that they might.  This project will provide insight into the control
              of cell motility by second messengers.  ***
