Title       : Early Muscle Cell Fate Determination During Embryogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9506346

Award Number: 9506346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith M. Venuti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9506346  Venuti    Studies on the MyoD family of muscle specific gene
              regulatory  factors have provided enormous insight into the mechanisms that 
              regulate myoblast determination and differentiation. But a  fundamental
              question that remains in muscle developmental biology  is: what activates the
              myogenic transcription factors? The prime  objective of this proposed research
              is to identify the earliest  molecular events that commit a pluripotent
              mesodermal stem cell to  a myogenic fate. These experiments are designed to
              identify factors  that influence early embryonic muscle cell determination and 
              explore the capacity of embryonic cells which are not part of the  myogenic
              program to differentiate as muscle cells. The sea urchin  embryo, whose
              development is extremely well understood and whose  embryos are particularly
              amenable to micromanipulation during early  development, will be the
              experimental organism. Dr. Venuti has  developed an in vitro assay that will
              enable her to ask if and when  extracellular signaling is required for the
              determination and  differentiation of muscle precursors or if they develop cell
               autonomouqly. These experiments should identify the signals or cues  that
              initiate the decision to follow a muscle fate and determine  when muscle
              progenitors first become committed. Dr. Venuti has  cloned and characterized
              the muscle specific basic helix-loop-helix  (b-HLH) transcription factor,
              SUM-1, from the sea urchin embryo and  shown that it is activated very early in
              the muscle differentiation  program. She has shown that SUM-1 can activate
              muscle specific  reporter elements in vertebrate tissue culture cells and in 
              microinjected sea urchin embryos. She will examine the consequences  of
              expressing SUM-1 at premature times and at ectopic locations in  the embryo
              either alone or in combination with interacting factors.  To identify factors
              that act directly to regulate the transcription  of SUM-1, the cis regulatory
              elements and trans acting factors of  the SUM-1 promoter wil l be
              characterized. Once important temporal  and spatial regulatory elements of the
              SUM-1 promoter are  identified, she will test the effects of the extracellular
              signals  identified in in vitro assays on these elements. The combination of 
              these experiments will help direct long term investigations into  muscle cell
              fate determination and the role of extracellular  signals in the decision of
              embryonic cells to commit to a myogenic  fate. They will also provide a better
              understanding of the role of  the myogenic transcription factor, SUM-1, and
              other regulatory  molecules in these determination events.  ***
