Title       : Assembly of the Bacteriophage T4 DNA Replication Sliding Clamp: A Functional
               Analysis of Protein-Protein Subassemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9506139

Award Number: 9506139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Reddy mkr@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506139  Reddy  This research will determine the key steps by which a
              multicomponent complex involved in the replication bacteriophage T4 DNA is
              assembled.  In particular, this research will yield a precise understanding of
              how complex termed the "clamp loader" (gp44/62, a hetero-oligomeric protein
              possessing an intrinsic ATPase activity) specifically interacts with a second
              protein, termed the "sliding clamp" (gp45, a homo-oligomeric protein) to
              subsequently "load" the sliding clamp onto DNA.  A variety of inter- and
              intracrosslinking methodologies, including both chemical as well as molecular
              biological approaches will be employed.  Using a recently refined version of
              the nitrocellulose filter binding assay, a thorough kinetic analysis of the
              binding and release of ADP to the ATP-dependent clamp loader protein complex
              will be done.  Development of novel protein chromatographic schemes such as
              affinity chromatography in the presence of a macromolecular crowding agent
              (polyethylene glycol) or specific retention of protein-protein complexes by the
              inclusion of Mg-ATP in all chromatographic buffers will be explored in order to
              facilitate the purification of intact protein-protein complexes directly from
              biological sources. The nature of the macromolecular interactions observed in
              the T4 system appear to closely parallel those currently under investigation in
              the field of molecular chaperones.  Therefore, insights garnered from these
              studies will add to the growing understanding of the molecular basis underlying
              the specificity and regulation of protein-protein interactions.  Current
              avenues of investigations in molecular and cellular biochemistry will be
              presented to both undergraduate and graduate students by a research-level
              analysis (lectures and assignments) in which understanding is considerably
              valued over rote memorization. Two "Special Topics in Biochemistry" courses
              entitled "The Enzymology of DNA Replication" and Cells as Macromolecular
              Assemblies" will provide students with a breath of  knowledge that enables them
              to independently think about molecular mechanisms of biological relevance. 
              These courses combine formal lectures with class-sessions during which there is
              a critical assessment of directly relevant papers assigned from the primary
              scientific literature.  Modernization of a general biochemistry course will be
              accomplished by complementing molecular biology lectures with student
              assignments such as searching for DNA sequence homologies, designing
              oligonucleohdes for use in PCR, and performing secondary structure predictions.
              These tasks will require of the students that they learn how to navigate, using
              computers, the Internet (in particular, the World Wide Web).  An undergraduate
              Experimental Biochemistry Laboratory course has been designed as a
              mini-research project around the enzyme bacterial luciferase.  A laboratory
              manual also has been written for this course.  The structure of the course
              provides the students with an excellent and exciting model system by which to
              learn various common and important techniques in biochemistry and molecular
              biology.  %%%  This research will determine the key steps by which a
              multiprotein complex involved in the replication of bacteriophage T4 DNA is
              assembled.  Crucial features of the mechanism of DNA replication are conserved
              throughout Nature.  Therefore, insights garnered from these studies will add to
              the growing understanding of the molecular basis underlying the specificity and
              regulation of protein-protein interactions in general and of DNA replication in
              particular.  Current avenues of investigations in molecular and cellular
              biochemistry will be presented to both undergraduate and graduate students by a
              research-level analysis (lectures and assignments) in which understanding is
              considerably valued over rote memorization. Two "Special Topics in
              Biochemistry" courses entitled "The Enzymology of DNA Replication" and Cells as
              Macromolecular Assemblies" will provide students with a breath of knowledge
              that enables them to ind ependently think about molecular mechanisms of
              biological relevance.  These courses combine formal lectures with
              class-sessions during which there is a critical assessment of directly relevant
              papers assigned from the primary scientific literature.  Modernization of a
              general biochemistry course will be accomplished by complementing molecular
              biology lectures with student assignments such as searching for DNA sequence
              homologies, designing oligonucleohdes for use in PCR, and performing secondary
              structure predictions. These tasks will require of the students that they learn
              how to navigate, using computers, the Internet (in particular, the World Wide
              Web).  An undergraduate Experimental Biochemistry Laboratory course has been
              designed as a mini-research project around the enzyme bacterial luciferase.  A
              laboratory manual also has been written for this course.  The structure of the
              course provides the students with an excellent and exciting model system by
              which to learn various common and important techniques in biochemistry and
              molecular biology.  ***
