Title       : Nitrogenase in a Methanogenic Archaeon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9506330

Award Number: 9506330
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Zinder shz1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             }>a J                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       L       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    P ` J   P
              ` J                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       ?   @   A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H   I             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                Zinder,
              Stephen H. MCB-9506330  In 1984, the discovery of nitrogen fixation was
              reported in methanogenic Archaea (Archaebacteria), the first discovery of this
              process outside the eubacterial domain.  Methanosarcina  backeri has two sets
              of nitrogenase (nif) genes, one which clusters with the nitrogenase from the
              eubacterium Clostridium pasteurianum, N-terminal sequencing of the purified Fe
              protein and RNA-blot analysis showed that the latter nitrogenase was expressed
              in M. barkeri cells growing on Mo-containing medium.  Phylogenetic anayses of
              the nitrogenase sequences have found groupings which are not easily reconciled
              with the 16S rRNA phylogenetic tree, raising interesting evolutionary questions
              concerning nitrogenase diversity.  Additional nif genes will be cloned and
              sequenced from M. barkeri.  At the present time there are only two nifD
              sequences for methanogens known, two partial nifK sequences, and no sequences
              of any other nif genes.  The polymerase chain reaction and related cloning
              techniques are being used to obtain DNA sequences from a wider diversity of
              Eubacteria and Archaea, includi ng relatives of Methanosarcina and diverse
              other eubacteria known to fix nitrogen, but which have not had their nif genes
              sequenced, such as Chlorobium and Heliobacterium.  The similarities between
              methanogenic and clostridial nitrogenases will be examined further in the hope
              that important gaps can be filled in the phylogenetic tree for nitrogenases and
              in our understanding of nitrogenase evolution and diversity. %%% Nitrogen is
              second only to carbon in its importance to animal, plant, and microbial
              nutrition.  Although, we are surrounded by an atmosphere of nitrogen gas, only
              certain nitrogen-fixing bacteria re able to convert nitrogen to forms which can
              be used by organisms.  A chemical process for fixing nitrogen requires
              temperatures near 1000 F and pressures over 10,000 pounds per square inch,
              while bacteria can fix nitrogen at room temperature using the enzyme complex
              called nitrogenase.  This reaction is crucial to nutrient cycling in nearly all
              ecosystems, including agricultural ones.  This laboratory discovered that
              methane-producing bacteria (or methanogens) can fix nitrogen.  Not only are
              these bacteria of obvious practical significance, but molecular studies have
              shown that they are members of the Archaebacteria or Archaea, a group
              completely unrelated to the bacteria previously shown to fix nitrogen
              (eubacteria), and, in fact, probably more closely related to eucaryotes--cells
              with nuclei.  Studies of the biochemistry and molecular biology of nitrogen
              fixation in Methanosarcina barkeri were performed.  Interestingly, the sequence
              of amino acids in its nitrogenase resembles that from the eubacterium,
              Clostridium parteurianum, suggesting that genes were transferred between two
              distantly related organisms.  The differents will be examined further with
              nitrogenases from a wide variety of cells in order to better understand the
              evolution and biodiversity of these enzyme complexes. ***                      
                ;                                     Oh     +'  0                           
                          $       H       l                             S u m m a r y I n f o
              r m a t i o n                           (                                      
                          >                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          D       h                                          
                      R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                      
              Zinder, Stephen H.                  Robert Uffen                        Robert
              Uffen                @    E   J                          @                     
                           @      ? J                                                        
                                                       @    L                                
                   Microsoft Word 6.0                                                      2 
                                                                                             
                   ;                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              e =       e                   L                                                
                        j       j   j       j       j       j       j                        
                                                                1                            
                                                                                %
