Title       : Intercellular Signalling in Vibrio harveyi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1999     
File        : a9506033

Award Number: 9506033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $451000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie L. Bassler bbassler@molbiol.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506033  Bassler  The broad goal of this research is to explore the molecular
              mechanisms that bacteria use for intercellular communication. This work focuses
              on a luminous bacterium, Vibrio harveyi, with the objective of examining
              genetically and biochemically the pathways of inter- and intracellular
              signalling. Definition of the genes, proteins, interactions, chemical
              modifications, and signals involved in intercellular communication could lead
              to a molecular understanding of how signals are detected and how this
              information is integrated, processed, and transduced to control expression of
              luminescence genes (lux) and other genes in the same control network or
              regulon. Regulation of the expression of luminescence genes in V. harveyi is
              complex and appears to consist of interconnected pathways of signal
              transduction which modulate the transcription of the operon (luxCDABEGH)
              encoding the luminescence enzymes. The expression of the luxCDABEGH operon is
              strongly influenced by the density of the culture. V. harveyi secretes and
              responds to extracellular signal molecules, called autoinducers, which
              accumulate in the culture medium and induce the expression of luminescence. One
              Lux signal-response system is encoded by the luxLMN locus.  The luxL and luxM
              genes are required for the production of an autoinducer (probably
              (hydroxybutryl homoserine lactone), and the luxN gene is required for the
              response to that autoinducer.  Analysis of the phenotypes of LuxL, M and N
              mutants indicated that an additional signal-response system also controls
              density sensing. Two genes, luxP and luxQ, were identified, cloned and
              sequenced and encode functions required for this second density-sensing system.
              Mutants with defects in luxP and luxQ are defective in response to a second
              autoinducer substance. LuxQ and LuxN are similar to members of the family of
              two-component, signal transduction proteins and each contains regions of
              sequence resembling both the histidine protein kinase and the response
              regulator domains. Anal ysis of mutant LuxN and LuxQ signalling phenotypes
              indicated that these two signal-response pathways converge to regulate
              expression of luminescence in Vibrio harveyi.  Another function, luxO, is
              required for the integration of the two density-dependent signals.  LuxO, which
              is similar in amino acid sequence to the response regulator domain of the
              family of two-component, signal transduction proteins, acts negatively to
              control expression of luminescence.  Relief of repression by LuxO in the
              wild-type could result from interactions with other components in the Lux
              signalling system. Since the regulatory process is complex and involves both
              intercellular and intracellular signal transmission interesting new mechanisms
              could be revealed.  However, complexity should not be a barrier because the
              sensory input (chemical signal) and the output (light emission) can be defined
              and can be conveniently controlled and measured, and the genetic and
              biochemical methodology are well-developed.  This research includes an
              exploration of the Lux system 1 signal relay.  The studies are focused on
              system 1 because the autoinducer signal has been identified and is obtainable.
              Mutagenesis procedures will be employed to construct lux genes encoding
              proteins containing defects that should result in termination of the Lux signal
              at different points in the transduction sequence. The mutant genes will be
              identified by in trans analysis and the specific defects determined. The
              mutated lux regulatory loci will be transferred to the genome of V. harveyi
              followed by in vivo phenotype analysis.  In vitro biochemical analyses will be
              used to study combinations of wildtype and mutant Lux signallers to determine
              which Lux system 1 components interact and the sequence of events involved in
              signal relay.  DNA binding by Lux regulatory proteins will be analyzed. Gel
              mobility shift assays and DNase I footprint analyses will be employed to
              determine the DNA binding sites of the positive and negative regulatory
              proteins LuxR and LuxO.  Using a combination of in vitro biochemistry and in
              vivo genetics should aid in development of a comprehensive explanation of the
              signalling mechanism.  Educational responsibilities include both the design and
              instruction of an Advanced Microbial  Genetics course for graduate students and
              a Microbial Diversity course for undergraduates at Princeton.  The principal
              investigator will also teach the Advanced Bacterial Genetics course at Cold
              Spring Harbor from 1996-2000.  Other educational plans include mentoring of
              both undergraduate and graduate students in my laboratory, counseling minority
              summer students, and participating in a science outreach program for high
              school teachers.  Additionally, the principal investigator will be her
              department's undergraduate representative, advise at one of the five Princeton
              undergraduate colleges, and serve on the committee for reviewing curriculum. 
              %%%  Analyzing the light-producing genes of a marine bacterium will lead to an
              understalding of how these bacteria respond to their environment.  This could,
              in turn, lead to practical applications.  Light emission is a relatively easy
              measure of gene expression, and so can be used to improve bacterial gene
              expression in applications related to biotechnology.  ***
