Title       : CAREER: Virus Structure in Plant Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9506849

Award Number: 9506849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326670             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Culver James_N_Culver@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                 @      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                        @    
                @                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    $       H       l                                        
                    D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       jack cohen 
                                      jack cohen                  @     d  @                 
                      @     B<  e =       e                                                  
                                                                                             
              D       D       D       D       D       \       f       D           C   p      
              t       t       t       t       t       t       t                              
                              S               D   T       (                                  
              t                 t       t                       t       t               t    
                                t                       p       t       t       t       t    
                        t               t                               .       6            
                                        t               t   /   t                            
                                                                              Culver 9506849
              Plant disease resistance has been widely studied because of its economic
              importance to agriculture. Much of this effort has focused on the
              hypersensitive response (HR) conferred by single plant genes. This type of
              resistance is dependent upon host recognition of the invading pathogen,
              possibly via plant receptors that specifically bind molecules of pathogen
              origin, called elicitors. The recent cloning and characterization of several
              plant resistance genes has been a major breakthrough in the field of plant
              biology and has added support to the elicitor receptor hypothesis. Future
              studies defining the molecular interaction between pathogen elicitors and plant
              resistance genes will be critical in understanding  the molecular basis of
              plant disease resistance and in developing practical ways to utilize this
              resistance in the field.  Using the interaction between the tobamovirus coat
              protein (CP) and the N' gene HR of Nicotiana sylvestris as a model system, this
              proposal seeks to molecularly characterize elicitor specificity. Current
              evidence indicates that CPs with "weaker" quaternary structures act as
              elicitors of the HR while CPs with "stronger" quaternary structures do not.
              Identifying the structural motifs required for HR induction will be an
              important first step in defining putative elicitor receptor interactions. Three
              objectives will be addressed: 1) identify the form (monomer, dimer, trimer,
              etc.) of CP that is recognized by the N' gene host; 2) identify a putative
              receptor binding site within the CP three dimensional structure; 3) investigate
              structural alterations in CP that allow some tobamoviruses to elude N' gene
              resistance.  An important aspect of this proposal is to provide undergraduate
              and graduate students with training in both molecular biology and protein
              biophysical studies. The wide range of scientific matters involved in this
              investigation provide an ideal interdisciplinary "training matrix" for students
              interested in research careers. Students will learn the skills needed to
              manipulate protein sequences (gene cloning, site specific mutagenesis, etc.),
              determine the biophysical consequences of those manipulations (analytical
              ultracentrifugation, circular dichroism, and electron microscopy), and relate
              these changes to biological function (virion structure and plant resistance).
              In addition to technical skills, students will organize and present their
              research at a planned yearly miniconference. %%% Plant disease resistance has
              been widely studied because of its economic importance to agriculture. Much of
              this effort has focused on the hypersensitive response (HR) conferred by single
              plant genes. This type of resistance is dependent upon host recognition of the
              invading pathogen, p ossibly via plant receptors that specifically bind
              molecules of pathogen origin, called elicitors. The recent cloning of several
              plant resistance genes has added support to the elicitor receptor hypothesis.
              Using the interaction between the tobamovirus coat protein (CP) and the N' gene
              HR of Nicotiana sylvestris as a model system, this proposal seeks to
              molecularly characterize elicitor specificity. Specifically, what makes one
              pathogen elicit a resistance response while another does not? Three objectives
              will be addressed: 1) identify the form (monomer, dimer, trimer, etc.) of CP
              that is recognized by the N' gene host; 2,1 identify and analyze the putative
              receptor binding site within the CP three dimensional structure; 3) investigate
              the structural differences between CPs that allow some tobamoviruses to elude
              N' gene resistance. Information from this study will be important to
              understanding the molecular basis of plant disease resistance and in developing
              practical ways to more fully utilize this resistance in the field. ***         
                                                          @                                  
                                                                                             
                                                  ....()()))()()                             
                                                          ;                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         S u m m a r y I n f
              o r m a t i o n                           (
