Title       : Structure-Function Studies of Lipid Binding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1995    
File        : a9506088

Award Number: 9506088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bernlohr david-b@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1167,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             Ek  9      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    Ek  9  
              Ek  9                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                    Oh     +'  0             
                                       $       H       l                                     
                       D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @     >  9            
                           @         e =       e                                             
                                               j       j   j       j       j       j       j 
                                                                                   B   L     
                                                                                             
                       #                   $           T       4   B                       j 
                                                                                     B       
                     j       j                                                               
                     j               j                                       ~              
              j       j       j       j                           7                          
                                                                                    9506088
              Bernlohr Just as there are carrier proteins that function to solubilize and
              deliver hydrophobic molecules in the circulatory system, there exists an
              analogous family of proteins that are found intracellularly. These proteins,
              which have been termed the lipid binding proteins, are responsible for the
              intracellular solubilization and delivery of hydrophobic ligands within a cell.
              The members of the lipid binding protein family are expressed in a more or less
              tissue specific manner, hence the naming of each member based upon the cell
              type it is expressed in. The lipid binding proteins bind most avidly to fatty
              acids and retinoids although some weak association with such molecules as heme
              and lysophospholipids does occ ur. Despite the wide variability in primary
              sequence, the three dimensional structure of the family members, as determined
              by multidimensional NMR and X ray crystallography, are remarkably
              superimposable. The unique feature of all the lipid binding proteins is the
              presence of an internal water filled cavity that serves as the ligand binding
              domain within a beta barrel folding motif. A l:l complex is formed between the
              proteins and the ligand within the cavity. Once inside, the ligand is
              sequestered from the external milieu and is held rigidly along one wall of the
              binding domain. Despite the finding of the ligand bound to the protein within
              the cavity, there is no obvious site for ligand entry/exit. A large water
              filled cavity that serves as the ligand binding domain seems intuitively
              contradictory to the purpose of the proteins. If the proteins facilitate the
              solubilization of water  insoluble lipids why enclose them in a cavity filled
              with water? How do ligands enter and exit the cavity? What are the
              thermodynamic factors which govern protein structure and lipid binding? What
              determines the ligand binding specificity?  The goals for this project are to
              understand in molecular terms the factors which contribute to ligand binding by
              the adipocyte lipid binding protein. A long term goal is to engineer the
              molecule to be of general use as a hydrophobic ligand carrier capable of high
              affinity association with a wide number of poorly soluble molecules such as
              environmental carcinogens and mutagens. To achieve these goals a more complete
              understanding of the basis for protein fatty acid interaction is needed. %%%
              Molecules that cannot dissolve readily in water pose special problems in
              biological systems. While water soluble biological molecules such as sugars and
              amino acids readily diffuse throughout aqueous space, water insoluble compounds
              in biological systems must be carried on proteins. The focus of these studies
              is on the most common type of hydrophobic ligand carrier proteins, the lipid
              bindin g proteins. In particular the P.I. studies in detail the adipocyte lipid
              binding protein. This protein is the prototype for over 50 different proteins,
              all of which facilitate the solubilization of hydrophobic compounds in
              biological systems. The adipocyte lipid binding protein associates with high
              affinity and selectivity with long chain fatty acids. The X pay crystal
              structure of the protein has been solved to high resolution and reveals the
              surprising finding that the hydrophobic, insoluble fatty acids are bound within
              a large central, water filled cavity. The binding of insoluble molecules into a
              water filled cavity is intuitively contradictory. By altering the amino acids
              in the binding domain and by measuring the properties of the protein lipid
              interactions, the P.I. is trying to understand the "rules" which govern the
              binding of such insoluble molecules. Once such rules are identified, new
              proteins might be engineered that are capable of binding  hydrophobic compounds
              such as environmental pollutants and carcinogens that accumulate in the
              biosphere. ***          @     @                         ;                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t
              i o n                           (
