Title       : Genetic Analysis of Complex Membrane Protein Insertion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9506989

Award Number: 9506989
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin C. Manoil manoil@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506989  Manoil, Colin C.  The project investigates how Escherichia coli lac
              permease is assembled in the membrane and how mutational changes disrupt the
              process.  1. We aim to determine whether the translocation of an internal polar
              domain (P6) of lac permease across the membrane is redundantly determined by
              each of the transmembrane sequences adjacent to the domain. To do this, we will
              examine whether mutations inactivating the individual export function of the
              more N-terminal transmembrane sequence (TM11 ) are suppressed when the
              C-terminal transmembrane sequence (TM12) is present.  2. We will identify a
              large set of missense mutations inactivating lac permease. Many of the changes
              should alter folding of the membrane-inserted protein, and the mutant set
              should provide a foundation for a systematic molecular genetic analysis of this
              process. Mutant proteins will be assayed for cellular stability, membrane
              topology and ability to fold normally.  3. We are identifying lac permease TM12
              mutations that cause the protein to be highly toxic to cells. We will
              investigate the mechanism of toxicity by analyzing mutants that show increased
              or decreased sensitivity to the toxic proteins.  4. We will identify
              inactivating and neutral mutations altering the most C-terminal transmembrane
              sequence (TM5) of the L subunit of the photosynthetic reaction from Rhodobacter
              sphaeroides. We will characterize the relative sensitivity to different
              substitution types of the side of the spanning segment facing other parts of
              the protein versus the side facing lipid. This analysis will serve as a guide
              for interpreting analogous studies of membrane proteins of unknown structure.
              In addition, we will determine whether second site revertant analysis can
              identify residues in transmembrane sequences adjacent to TM5. If so, the study
              of revertants may provide a general method for identifying elements of the
              folded structure of other membrane proteins of unknown structure, such as lac
              permease.  5. We are constructing a trans poson derivative that will function
              to fuse all of lac permease except its last transmembrane sequence (TM12) to
              target gene products. Analysis of LacY+ transposon insertions should make it
              possible to determine what sequences can functionally substitute for TM12 and
              may provide a way to identify genes for proteins related to lac permease.  %%% 
              Membrane proteins play fundamental roles in a variety of cellular functions,
              such as photosynthesis.  This research will lead to an understanding of how
              proteins are inserted into membranes and how they function there.  New membrane
              proteins with desired structures and functions may be able to be created using
              this information.  ***  ??
