Title       : RUI: The Biosynthetic Incorporation and Characterization of Seleno-and
               Telluromethionine in Both Control and Novel Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9506296

Award Number: 9506296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey O. Boles jboles@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             K `P:      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    K `P:   K
              `P:                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       ?   @   A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9506296 Boles
              The overall goal of this project is the incorporation of unusual heavy atom
              containing amino acids into protein for use as diffraction labels and nuclear
              magnetic resonance (NMR) probes. The  method of unusual amino acid
              incorporation is a biosynthetic one, where selenomethionine (SeMet) and
              telluromethionine (TeMet) are introduced in vivo during protein biosynthesis in
              place of wild type methionine. This introduces a selenium or tellurium atom in
              place of the lighter sulfur atom of methionine. The overall long term
              objectives of the research are, 1) to develop chemically defined bacterial
              growth protocols that allow maximal uptake of SeMet and TeMet into cellular
              protein, 2 ) purify, characterize and crystallize resultant control and novel
              proteins, and 3) prepare these proteins for analysis by x ray diffraction
              and/or NMR spectroscopy. Telluromethionine is a proposed in situ isomorphous
              replacement which may be capable of simplifying the phase problem of
              macromolecular crystallography simplifying three dimensional structure
              determinations.  Undergraduate students will be independentl y integrated into
              this program at the appropriate level. Each student researcher will realize how
              their individual research project works collectively toward the latter
              objective. %%% Elucidation of the three dimensional structure of proteins is
              central to both our understanding of biological mechanisms as well as to the
              targeted design of new drugs. Currently, structural determinations must
              overcome two well known hurdles, firstly, the crystallization of a protein and
              secondly, solving the well known phase problem of protein crystallography.
              Crystallization is largely perceived as more art than science, thus, this P.I.
              is focusing on the latter problem: the phase problem. The atoms found in
              proteins are too light (lacking sufficient mass) to allow a satisfactory
              structural determination. It is the goal of this research to incorporate
              selenomethionine or telluromethionine into proteins via a biological mechanism,
              thus introducing two heavier atoms into the biological system: Selenium or
              Tellurium. These atoms are much heavier than the typical atoms found in
              proteins (carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur and hydrogen). These atoms can be
              exploited by two different available technologies, x ray diffraction and multi
              nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, both of which are used in the
              determination of three dimensional structure and the study of enzyme function.
              It is hoped to introduce novel avenues in the simplification of structural
              determinations which may eventually lead to a better atomic level understanding
              of biological events. ***                                      ;               
                                                           ;                                 
                                      @                                                      
                                                                                             
                              ....()()))()()                                                 
                                                                    Oh     +'  0             
                                        $       H       l                             S u m m
              a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (                        
                                        >                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        D       h                            
                                    R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                            
                        marcia steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @    
              " N:                          @                                   @      TP:   
                                                                                             
                            @    v A                                    Microsoft Word 6.0   
                                                                2                            
                                                                            ;                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      e =       e                                       u                    
                                                                                    D       D
                    D       D       D       \       f       D           C   p       t       t
                    t       t       t       t       t                                   #
