Title       : Genetic and Developmental Mechanisms of a Morphogenetic Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9506844

Award Number: 9506844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Fitch david.fitch@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Fitch, David  IBN-9506844         To understand how morphological diversity in
              multicellular  animals has arisen by the accumulation of evolutionary changes
              in  genes, an understanding is first required of how morphology is  specified
              by genes and developmental mechanisms.  The 4-celled tail  tip of the nematode,
              Caenorhabditis elegans, is being studied as a  model for elucidating the genes
              and developmental processes  involved in producing its morphology.  Because
              this structure  adopts different morphologies in related species, the tail tip 
              provides a model for the evolution of morphogenesis as well.  In C.  elegans,
              the shape of the tail tip is pointy in adult  hermaphrodites and blunt in adult
              males.  The pointy shape in  hermaphrodites results from retention of the
              larval state, whereas  the blunt shape in males results from cell fusions and
              changes in  cell size, shape and possible adhesion that occur rapidly, just 
              before the last larval molt.  Additionally, a cell-cell signalling  event may
              induce the coordinated expression of these events.  To  identify genes involved
              in male tail tip morphogenesis,  morphological mutants are being isolated and
              characterized.  One  such gene, lep-1, acts specifically to control adult fate
              in male  tail tip cells and is being cloned to determine its molecular 
              function and expression pattern.  Epistatic interactions among  identified
              genes will eventually be studied.  The hypothesized  cell-cell interactions in
              the induction of tail tip morphogenesis  are being tested by selective ablation
              of multiple or single  candidate cells with a laser microbeam.  Other cellular
              processes  potentially involved in tail tip morphogenesis are being 
              investigated with markers and inhibitors of cellular components.   To provide a
              precise microanatomical framework for these genetic  and developmental
              analyses, the cellular architecture of the tail  tip is being detailed by
              electron microscopy.         The major educational activities take the form of 
              undergraduate and  graduate courses (mainly on evolution and  evolutionary
              developmental biology), but participation in pre-  service teacher education,
              undergraduate advising, and supervision  of high school, undergraduate and
              graduate student research  projects in the laboratory are also important.  In
              the courses and  laboratories, emphasis is placed on inquiry-centered, hands-on
               learning.  Students are guided by question-based approaches to  construct
              their own knowledge and skills.  In particular  activities, cooperature
              learning is encouraged to develop  communication skills and the ability to work
              collaboratively as  well as independently.  A continuing emphasis in both
              coursework  and assessment will be the development of language and problem- 
              solving skills.  The objectives of all of these activities are to  develop in
              all of the participating students a solid foundation of  knowledge in biology,
              a hearthy skepticism and creative ability to  formulate constructive questions
              and hypothesis (and thus an  appreciation of science as an approachable,
              dynamic, creative,  human activity), a practical knowledge of the scientific
              method as  a general problem-solving tool, and an ability to effectively 
              communicate findings and concepts in both oral and written  language.
