Title       : RUI: CNC Gene and Head Development in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9506358

Award Number: 9506358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250268             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Mohler jmohler@barnard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9506358  Mohler    The identity of individual segments in Drosophila is
              regulated by  the expression of the homeotic genes within specific segments. 
              These homeotic genes encode transcription factors that regulate  segment
              specific expression of other morphogenetic genes.  Homologues of many
              Drosophila homeotic genes have been identified  throughout much of the animal
              kingdom, where they are often  expressed in analogous portions of the embryonic
              body plan.  Analysis of the roles of the Drosophila homeotic genes and of the 
              interrelationships among these genes during Drosophila embryology  is likely to
              provide important developmental principles involved  generally in animal
              development. The cap'n collar (cnc) gene of  Drosophila is a recently
              identified homeotic gene, which is  important in defining the identity of the
              mandibular and labral  segments during embryonic development. The research
              proposed here  will continue the analysis of the role of this gene in
              Drosophila  development and initiate studies into the biochemical mechanisms of
               its function. In particular, this study will characterize the role  of cnc in
              post-embryonic development by the identification of  tissues expressing CNC
              protein during post-embryonic development  and by the analysis of the effects
              of cnc- clones within those  tissues. This study will also further define cnc's
              function as a  selector gene through the analysis of developmental defects 
              associated with expression of cnc in inappropriate tissues. Unlike  most other
              homeotic genes which encode monomeric DNA-binding  proteins, cnc is unique in
              encoding a subunit of a dimeric bZIP  transcription factor, which is closely
              related to the p45 subunit  of mammalian NF-E2. To investigate the potential
              role of  differential heterodimer formation in specifying alternative 
              developmental fates, other bZIP genes that encode potential  heterodimeric
              partners of CNC will be identified: both potential  Drosophila homologs of the
              Maf subunit of NF-E2 and Drosophila  cDNAs en coding peptides capable of
              binding the CNC leucine zipper  domain. The DNA binding specificities of
              homodimeric CNC and of  heterodimeric complexes containing CNC will be
              investigated.  ***
