Title       : Flagellar Glycoprotein Dynamics and Whole Cell Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9506230

Award Number: 9506230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Bloodgood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506230  Bloodgood    Whole cell locomotion alone a solid substrate involves a 
              carefully choreographed sequence of events that requires the  cell surface to
              exhibit both sensory and motor functions,  which must be carefully integrated. 
              Chlamydomonas exhibits  gliding motility along a solid substrate, and this form
              of  whole cell locomotion is dependent upon the activities of  the flagellar
              surface.  Previous work from this laboratory  suggests the existence of a
              signaling pathway (involving c  calcium and protein phosphorylation) that
              couples the  sensory and motor functions of the flagellar surface. 
              Crosslinking of a population of 350 kD flagellar membrane  glycoproteins
              results in calcium influx followed by the  dephosphorylation of a 60 kD
              flagellar phosphoprotein that  binds to the cytoplasmic surface of the
              flagellar membrane  through its association with the 350 kD glycoprotein.  In a
               manner not yet understood, these initial signaling events  result in
              activation of a flagellar motor protein complex  that derives the movement of
              the 350 kD glycoproteins within  the plane of the flagellar membrane thereby
              bringing about  locomotion.  The experiments outlined in this proposal will 
              extend our understanding of the flagellar signaling pathway  by which sensory
              and motor events at the flagellar surface  are coupled.  In  particular,
              efforts will be focused on  characterizing the functions performed by the 350
              kD  flagellar membrane glycoprotein and the 60 kD flagellar  phosphoprotein. 
              These proteins will be cloned sequenced.  A  library of non-gliding mutant cell
              lines obtained by  Kozminski and Rosenbaum using insertional 
              mutagenesis/tagging will be screened for defects in the 350  kD glycoproteins,
              the 60 kD phosphoprotein, and steps in the  signaling pathway that induces the
              dephosphorylation of the  60 kD phosphoprotein.  These mutants hold the promise
              of  providing an alternative approach to cloning genes encoding  the 350 kD
              glycoprotein, the 60 kD phosphoprotein, and  other, curren tly unknown,
              components in the signal  components of the signaling pathway.  Functional
              analysis of  the 350 kD flagellar membrane glycoprotein and the 60 kD 
              phosphoprotein will be performed by directed mutagenesis of  cloned DNAs
              coupled with transformation of Chlamydomonas and  characterization of the
              transformants.  In parallel with the  molecular approaches to understanding
              this signaling pathway  and, in particular, the function of the two key players
               identified to date, biochemical approaches will be utilized  to ask a number
              of functional questions: 1) Is the 60 kD  phosphoprotein a protein kinase? 2)
              Does the phosphorylation  of the 60 kD phosphoprotein regulate its function
              and/or its  association with he 350 kD membrane glycoprotein? 3) What is  the
              binding site on the 350 kD glycoprotein to which 60 kD  phosphoprotein  binds?
              and 4) Does the Chlamydomonas  flagellar homologue of the calcium dependent
              protein kinase  (CDPK) from higher plants play a role in the signaling 
              pathway?  Monoclonal antibodies to the 60 KD phosphoprotein  will be obtained
              and utilized for quantitating the 60 kD  phosphoprotein using ELISA and Western
              blots, purifying the  60 kD phosphoprotein by immunoaffinity chromatography,
              for  characterizing the non-gliding cell mutants and for  screening a lambda
              gt11 expression library.  These  experiments, utilizing a combining of
              biochemical and  molecular approaches, hold the promise of greatly extending 
              our understanding of the regulation of whole cell  locomotion.  %%%  The
              unicellular green alga, Chlamydomonas, is a model system  for studying gliding
              (not swimming) motion of cells with a  whiplike "tail" or flagellum. This study
              explores the  coordination of events which bring about the gliding motion  in
              Chlamydomonas.  A complex of proteins found within the  flagellum mediates the
              gliding motion.  The complex is  comprised of a larger protein containing
              covalently-attached  sugars (350 kD glycoprotein) and a smaller protein 
              containing covalently attached pho sphates (60 kD  phosphoprotein).   The genes
              for these proteins are cloned  and sequenced.  Mutant forms of the genes are
              identified in  existing mutant libraries of non-gliding Chlamydomonas.  These
              mutant libraries are also the source of  genes  important in the signaling
              mechanisms involved in flagellar  gliding.  Mutant forms of the genes will also
              be synthesized  and re-expressed in Chlamydomonas.  Biochemical analysis of 
              proteins which mediate the gliding motion are pursued to  identify the
              biochemical function of the proteins.  the 60  kD phosphoprotein will be
              purified and the following  questions answered: Does it phosphorylate
              components of the  flagella?  Is the phosphorylation which it shows necessary 
              for its activity? How does it interact with the 350 kD  glycoprotein?   Other
              proteins known to be signaling  mediators and also found in Chlamydomonas will
              be identified  as candidates for coordinating a part of the gliding motion. 
              This work is part of a larger question about the mechanism  of cell motility
              and how cellular motors are coordinated to  produce motion.  Application for
              this work could be found in  the area of how molecular machines are coordinated
              and  synthesized.  ***
