Title       : Biosynthesis of Heme and Chlorophyll Precursors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9506901

Award Number: 9506901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel I. Beale sib@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9197,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F               ÕwA                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                       wA    
               wA        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                           0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8 
               9   :                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9506901 Beale
              Tetrapyrrole pigments comprise a family of biomolecules including hemes,
              chlorophyll, bilins, and vitamin B12.  These pigments function as essential
              components in the processes of respiration and photosynthesis, and also exist
              as cofactors in other important enzyme reactions.  All tetrapyrroles arise from
              a branched biosynthetic pathway that has (-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) as its
              first committed member.  The long term goals of this project are to understand
              the structure, mechanisms of action, and regulation of the enzymes that
              catalyze ALA formation in plants and algae, and how ALA formation controls the
              photosynthetic pigment content of these organisms.  Efforts have recently been
              directed to exploiting the unique genetic and biochemical potentials of the
              unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to achieve these goals.  Two light
              regulated genes have been cloned that encode enzymes which catalyze the
              formation and utilization of ALA, and these genes are being used to study
              enzyme mechanisms and regulation.  It is proposed to isolate and purify the
              enzymes mf the ALA-forming pathway , to characterize their physical and kinetic
              properties, their cofactor requirements, their reaction mechanisms and possible
              enzyme interactions, to study the regulation of enzyme activity by allosteric
              modulators, and to determine changes in the enzyme abundance in response to
              light and cellular developmental status.  Using cloned genes as molecular
              probes, cellular development processes, and mechanisms of regulation and
              expression of components of the chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway will be
              studied during adaptation of the cells to light. %%% Chlorophyll is the
              essential biological pigment which plants use to harvest sunlight for
              conversion into the biological energy that sustains all life on earth.  The
              goals of this research project are to determine the biochemical reactions that
              plants employ to carry out the initial steps of chlorophyll formation, and to
              understand how plants control these reactions to achieve their ability to
              efficiently use the energy in sunlight. ***                                    
               Oh     +'  0                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n          
                              (                                                   /          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  $       H       l                                               D       h  
                                                              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT  
                                                  METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY              Shelley
              A. Graves                   Shelley A. Graves           @    M  wA             
                          @                                   @    M  wA                     
                                                                                           @ 
                F #                                    Microsoft Word 6.0                    
                                               3                                             
                                                       ;                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 e =       e               < 
                                   <                                       j       j   j     
               j       j       j       j                                                     
                                   H                                                         
                                                   #           A               7   T       L 
                                       j                                                     
                                                 j       j                                   
                                                 j               j                           
                         ~               j       j       j       j                           
                                                                                             
                               9506901 Beale Tetrapyrrole pigments comprise a family of
              biomolecules including hemes, chlorophyll, bilins, and vitamin B12.  These
              pigments function as essential components in the processes of respiration and
              photosynthesis, and also exist as cofactors in other important enzyme
              reactions.  All tetrapyrroles arise from a branched biosynthetic pathway that
              has (-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) as its first committed member.  The long term
              goals of this project are to understand the structure, mechanisms of action,
              and regulation of the enzymes that catalyze ALA formation in
