Title       : Theoretical Studies of Antibody-Antigen Binding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9506900

Award Number: 9506900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim A. Sharp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506900  Sharp  This research is directed at understanding the physical and
              chemical basis of specific antibody-antigen binding.  The system for study
              consists of three antibody/protein complexes and four antibody/hapten complexes
              for which high resolution X-ray structures and binding data are available, plus
              data on binding differences for point amino acid mutations and hapten analogue
              binding. The study will focus on: 1) The role of solvation, including both
              electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions.  2)'Association entropy' changes
              arising from translational/rotational entropy loss upon binding, and
              conformational entropy changes.  A combination of theoretical approaches will
              be used, in order to develop computationally feasible yet quantitative methods
              for calculating binding energies.  Electrostatics will be treated using a
              continuum treatment of solvent with an atomic detail representation of the
              molecule, using the Finite Difference Poisson-Boltzmann (FDPB)method.  Dynamic
              aspects will be handled by a method which combines the FDPB method with
              molecular mechanics (FDPB/MD).  Hydrophobic interactions will be treated using
              surface free energy relationships.  Conformational entropy changes will be
              assessed by quasi-harmonic analysis using dynamics.  %%%  This research will
              have general significance both for understanding how antibodies recognize (bind
              tightly) to specific antigens, and for biological recognition in general.  The
              specific recognition of antigens by antibodies is a fundamental part of the
              immune response.  Also the antibody-antigen interaction is a paradigm for
              molecular recognition in biology.  specific binding is also a key requirement
              of effective inhibitors and drugs.  The ability to calculate binding energies
              from antibody-antigen structures has significance for indentifying the driving
              force for binding, the origins of specificity, the role of antigen-antibody
              complementarity and the intrinsic antigenicity of surface groups, and for the
              design of inhibitors and drugs.    ***
