Title       : A Global Regulon in E.coli Controlled by the Leucine-Responsive Regulatory
               Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9506911

Award Number: 9506911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rowena G. Matthews   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Blumenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9197,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506911  Matthews  The leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) is a recently
              discovered transcriptional regulator in Escherichia coli that mediates changes
              in the expression of more than 30 known genes and operons, and at least as many
              more unidentified genes and operons. In attempting to understand the response
              of E. coli and other unicellular organisms to changes in nutrient availability,
              it is important to understand how shifts in the regulation of whole blocks of
              genes are mediated, and how a small number of regulatory proteins can work
              together to integrate physiological responses.  Lrp induces a particularly
              diverse set of regulatory responses among operons in the regulon, inhibiting
              the expression of some operons and activating the expression of others. In
              addition, target operons differ greatly with respect to their sensitivity to
              the co-regulator, leucine; leucine antagonizes the effect of Lrp on some
              operons, is required for the effect of Lrp on others; and has little or no
              effect on regulation of still other operons by Lrp. Lrp thus has unusual
              properties as a DNA-binding regulatory protein. A long term goal of the
              research is to understand at a molecular level how Lrp mediates these diverse
              effects. These studies should also clarify the role of Lrp in regulating
              metabolic processes in E. coli and other Gram-negative bacteria.  A major focus
              of the research will be the comparison of in vivo and in vitro studies on
              regulation of genes and operons by Lrp. These comparisons initially will focus
              on the regulation by Lrp of the gltBDF operon, which codes for the subunits of
              glutamate synthase. This enzyme plays an essential role in the assimilation of
              low levels of ammonia during growth of E. coli in glucose minimal medium. Under
              these conditions, the net rate of transcription of gltBDF is 44-fold higher in
              an lrpt strain than in an isogenic Irp::Tn10 strain.  In vivo studies of gltBDF
              regulation will employ a strain, AAEC546, in which the Irp gene has been placed
              under the control of  the lacUVS promoter so that the synthesis of Lrp is
              controlled by addition of an inducer (IPTG) to the medium, and which contains a
              transcriptional fusion of the gltBDF promoter to the lacZ+ gene coding for
              (-galactosidase.   In this strain, the effect of varying concentrations of Lrp
              on the expression of gltBDF can be studied, and compared with effects of Lrp on
              transcriptional activation of gltBDF in vitro.  Preliminary studies have
              established that Lrp binds to the promoter region of gltBDF both in the
              presence and in the absence of leucine, but that the ability of bound Lrp to
              activate transcription is markedly reduced (~4-fold) in the presence of
              leucine.  Further studies will seek to define the differences between the
              interaction of Lrp with gltBDF in the presence and in the absence of leucine.
              Using derivatives of strain AAEC546 containing transcriptional lacZ+ fusions to
              other genes in the Lrp regulon, the effect of leucine on the transcriptional
              regulation of these genes will be compared with results obtained with gltBDF. 
              Strain AAEC546 has also been used to identify genes and operons in the Lrp
              regulon by mutational analysis following random insertions of (placmu into the
              chromosome.  In contrast to the methods used to identify such genes in other
              laboratories, the strategy employed does not depend on effects of leucine on
              the Lrp-dependent regulation of gene expression. Ten fusions, displaying highly
              varied patterns of regulation by Lrp and by leucine, have been isolated. These
              fusions will now be cloned, permitting the identification of the operons into
              which the fusion has been inserted. Future research will involve
              characterization of the effect of Lrp and leucine on the expression of these
              operons in vitro and in vivo.  In the classical models for prokaryotic
              transcriptional regulation, for instance in regulation by LacI or Crp, the
              coregulator primarily modulates the affinity of the regulatory protein for its
              specific binding sites on the target DNA. The initial studies of trans
              criptional regulation by Lrp fit a very different paradigm, in which the
              coregulator, leucine, affects both the affinity of Lrp for specific sites
              upstream of target genes and the efficacy of bound Lrp as a transcriptional
              regulator. In this way, Lrp resembles AraC and MerR more than it does Crp and
              LacI.  The studies seek to provide an understanding of this phenomenon at the
              molecular level.  By these means, our understanding of the way in which a
              single regulatory protein modulates the activity of so many other genes and
              operons in E. coli, with such large variations in the type and degree of
              modulation of expression, should be improved.  %%%  The growth of  bacteria is
              affected by the environment in which they are growing.  These studies will lead
              to an understanding of how large groups of genes are regulated by environmental
              signals.  This knowledge is potentially useful in modulating the growth of
              bacteria for applications to biotechnology, as well as understanding how
              bacteria function in a variety of environments.  ***
