Title       : Design of Reaction Catalysts Based on Fatty Acid Binding Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1995       
File        : a9506793

Award Number: 9506793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Distefano distefan@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Mark D. Distefano, Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota -   Twin
              Cities, is supported by the Inorganic,  Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic
              Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division under a   Faculty Early Career
              Advancement Award to design semi-synthetic  enzymes   which will catalyze
              regioselective transformations of organic molecules,   to undertake course and
              curriculum development at the graduate and   undergraduate level, and to engage
               in community outreach programs. By   attaching a transition metal catalyst to
              a fatty acid binding protein and   by introducing a thiazolium heterocycle into
              the interior of the same   type of protein, catalysts for the regio- and
              stereo-selective oxidation   of polyolefinic species and for enantioselective
              carbon-carbon   bond   forming reactions will be prepared. To obtain catalysts
              using proteins   without covalent modification, cofactor binding domains will
              be   introduced into the protein by mutagenesis or by fusion enzymes. Using  
              current educational theory a large organic chemistry course and a   graduate
              course in reaction mechanisms will be redesigned to increase the  
              effectiveness and  intellectual stimulation of these experiences. To  
              communicate the excitement of science out-reach programs to local schools  
              will be expanded.  Many synthetic chemicals are made using processes that
              involve toxic   materials and the disposal of the resulting waste products has
              created   enormous environmental problems. One solution to these difficulties  
              employs enzymes (protein based catalysts) to catalyze chemical reactions.   The
              goal of this project is to prepare new enzymes which will accomplish  
              important chemical transformations. Success in this project would lead to   the
              ability to prepare semi-synthetic enzymes which are capable of   performing
              very efficient transformations for which no natural enzymes   are know. The
              educational activities are designed toward increasing   student appreciation of
              chemistry and will involve school children to   graduate students.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
