Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Study of Vortex Sheet Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9506452

Award Number: 9506452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Krasny krasny@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The investigator will  develop  improved  numerical  methods  for simulating 
              fluid  flow, with emphasis on the vortex sheet model. The approach is based on
              the vortex method, in  which  Lagrangian points  carry  the vorticity. The
              working hypothesis is Prandtl's idea that the vortex sheet is an  asymptotic 
              model  for  a  free shear layer in slightly viscous flow. The first task in
              this pro- posal is to develop a fast summation method to study spiral scal- ing
               properties  in  the Kelvin-Helmholtz problem. Other projects are a simulation
              of splitter plate flow with  realistic  boundary conditions,  and  a 
              comparison of planar and axisymmetric vortex sheet roll-up. The investigator
              will compare  vortex  simulations with  finite-difference  solutions of the
              Navier-Stokes equations and with the available laboratory experiments. A key 
              concern  is to  obtain  accurate numerical solutions in order to make precise
              statements about the validity of the  various  modelling  assump- tions.  Fluid
              dynamics is concerned with the motion of gas (e.g. air) and liquid (e.g.
              water). A key goal is to understand the forces which act between the fluid and
              an immersed solid surface. For example, air  flow  past  the wing is
              responsible for the lift force which supports an aircraft in flight.  Fluid
              flow is important in  many areas of science and technology, from internal
              combustion engines to weather prediction to blood flow. The  mathematical 
              equations which describe fluid motion are difficult to solve, and hence the
              investigator is developing numerical algorithms for use  on  high speed
              computers.  The goal is to provide insight into the physics of fluid motion,
              and to create modelling tools to help  engineers solve design problems.
