Title       : Phylogenetic and Biological Studies of Dinosaur Bone Histology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9506694

Award Number: 9506694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Dodson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dodson  9506694   Bone histology is a complex biological phenomenon.  The nature
              of bone reflects phylogeny, ontogeny and events that punctuate the life history
              of the individual.  Genuine progress in the study of dinosaur bone histology
              has resulted from disciplined studies of ontogenetic series of homologous
              bones.  Such studies offer the best possible basis for physiological inferences
              about dinosaurs.    Living and fossil ectotherms typically show bone structure
              termed lamellar-zonal, having wide zones alternating with narrow annuli,
              reflecting annual periods of rapid and slow bone deposition respectively.  In
              living endotherms fibro-lamellar bone records rapid growth, typically without
              seasonal interruptions.  Dinosaurs bone shows features characteristic of both
              endotherms and ectotherms.  It is now evident that azonal fibrolamellar bone is
              not a character of basal dinosaurs, but is a derived character state that
              evolved independently several times in different lineages within the
              Dinosauria.   Histology promises a privileged and powerful insight into
              dinosaur biology.  In considering the paleobiology of dinosaurs, we will assess
              these animals on their own unique merits, without forcing them into stereotypes
              based on living endotherms and ectotherms.  Four aspects of the proposed
              research are especially noteworthy:  the standardized study of ontogenetic
              series of the same species; the phylogenetic study of the variation of bone
              tissue types; the stratigraphic distribution of bone types; and the
              investigation of the bone biology of living endotherms and ectotherms.  In the
              proposed research the phylogenetic scope of growth series of dinosaurs will be
              extended to include basal dinosaurs , thyreophorans, and marginocephalians, as
              well as more derived forms such as hypsilophodontids, maniraptorans and basal
              birds.  As a result, the evolution and distribution of bone types will be drawn
              into sharper phylogenetic focus than was previously possible.  The proposed
              studies span the entire stratigrap hic distribution of dinosaurs, from the Late
              Triassic to the Late Cretaceous.  A particularly valuable aspect of this study
              is the inclusion of growth series of the Chinese dinosaurs Lufengosaurus,
              Shunosaurus, and Protoceratops.  Equally important, these studies will
              encompass a diverse array of extant ectotherms and endotherms.  Studies of
              living animals of known environmental and biological history will elucidate
              factors that influence the structure of bone.   The result of these
              investigations will be deeper insight into the phylogenetic and paleobiological
              significance of the histological structures of fossil bone.
