Title       : Collaborative Research: Hydrologic Implications of Carbonate Cementation in an
               Alluvial Aquifer, Sierra Ladrones Formation, NM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9506008

Award Number: 9506008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56173              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Mozley mozley@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9506008  Mozley  This proposal is for a collaborative research project
              investigating the relationships between groundwater flow and diagenesis in
              alluvial aquifers. Geologists have long recognized the importance of
              groundwater in the physical and chemical alteration of sediments.  However,
              relatively few studies have been conducted that explicitly and quantitatively
              account for groundwater flow.  Groundwater controls on the spatial distribution
              of diagenetic fabrics have received even less attention.  Hydrogeologists, on
              the other hand, are beginning to formulate quantitative models describing the
              spatial distribution of hydraulic conductivity.  From a geological perspective,
              the spatial distribution of hydraulic conductivity is a result of the processes
              of deposition and diagenesis. Incorporating information about geological
              processes into quantitative models of heterogeneity requires an understanding
              of the relationship between the processes and the spatial distribution of
              hydraulic conductivity.  In this study, the relationship between groundwater
              flow and diagenesis will be investigated in the Plio-Pleistocene Sierra
              Ladrones Formation, an alluvial aquifer in the Albuquerque Basin of central New
              Mexico.  Previous work has resulted in a comprehensive understanding of the
              depositional and paleogeographic setting of the study area.  The proposed
              research has two principal objectives:  (1) to determine the influence of early
              carbonate cementation on heterogeneity, and (2) to understand the controls on
              the origin and spatial distribution of early carbonate cement, the main
              diagenetic alteration influencing permeability in the unit.  The first
              objective is a natural extension of previous work at the study site by Davis
              and colleagues, investigating the relationship of depositional features to
              heterogeneity.  The second objective builds upon preliminary work at the site
              that indicates a close relationship between cementation and past fluid flow
              conditions.  The hydrological aspects of the study wil l be the responsibility
              of J. M. Davis (University of New Hampshire) and the diagenetic/geochemical
              aspects will be the responsibility of P.S. Mozley (New Mexico Tech).  The study
              will involved mapping the distribution and orientation of cemented zones in the
              field, and petrographic and geochemical analysis of the cements.  The principal
              questions addressed by the proposed research are: (1) What are the types and
              spatial distributions of the calcite cements? (2) What is the origin of the
              various types of cements? (3) What are the permeability characteristics of the
              different types of cemented zones? (4) Can the spatial distribution of the
              cements and the orientation of elongate concretions be used to infer past
              groundwater flow conditions in the saturated zone?
