Title       : Studies of Signal Transduction by the B-Lymphocyte Antigen Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9506893

Award Number: 9506893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Stern stern@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9506893  Lawrence J. Stern     This project investigates the mechanisms of
              B-cell activation, and combines membrane biochemistry and protein engineering.
              B cells comprise the branch of the immune system that is responsible for
              producing antibodies against foreign material.  When a foreign antigen binds to
              a receptor on the B cell surface, the B cell becomes stimulated to interact
              with other immune cells, and to proliferate and produce antibodies.  The
              mechanism that triggers this process is poorly understood but appears to
              involve a clustering of receptors on the cell surface. Similar clustering
              mechanisms activate other cells in the immune and nervous systems. How such
              clustering on the membrane surface activates signaling events within the cell
              is unknown.  Investigation of this mechanism has been hampered by the
              complexity of working with whole-cell systems, and in particular,
              membrane-bound components. To better understand the B-cell activation
              mechanism, a model system will be developed in which the components of the
              activation mechanism can be studied apart from the membrane.  Analogues of the
              B-cell receptor that mimic single receptors, and clusters of two, three, and
              four receptors, will be constructed.  Research into the basic structure of
              proteins has identified small protein modules that interact in different
              combinations.  These modules will be grafted onto the components of the B-cell
              receptor in place of the parts that anchor the receptor to the membrane. 
              Different modules will provide soluble analogues of the receptor in different
              size clusters.  These clusters will be used to determine the requirements for
              triggering the signaling mechanism, and to investigate the interactions of the
              B-cell receptor with other signaling proteins.  Studies of the B-cell receptor
              and its interactions will contribute to a description of this important
              signaling mechanism, and to our understanding of cellular activation processes.
                Concurrent with this research program, the Principal Investigat or will
              execute a multi-faceted education program.  One goal of this program is the
              introduction of innovative computational and molecular graphic methods into the
              undergraduate and graduate educational experience.  The ability to access and
              utilize information in nucleotide and protein databases has become an essential
              scientific skill.  A module will be introduced into the undergraduate
              biochemistry laboratory that teaches students how to access the information in
              these databases.  Another module will comprise exercises that teach students
              the use of computer graphics workstations to visualize and manipulate protein
              and nucleic acid structures in three dimensions.  The use of a campus-wide
              computer network to provide supplemental course material and evaluation and
              assessment of course content and presentation will also be explored.  Another
              goal of the education program is revision of the undergraduate biochemistry
              curriculum to keep students apace with recent developments in biochemistry that
              affect society at large. The introductory biochemistry course will be expanded
              to include recent technological and biomedical advances, and to allow students
              to critically evaluate developments in medicine, forensics, pharmaceuticals,
              biotechnology, and other areas of current biochemical research.  A new course
              in protein structure and function also will be introduced.  In addition to
              traditional teaching activities, the education program has important provisions
              for involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in research projects,
              community outreach, involvement of students from traditionally under-
              represented groups, pre-college educational projects, and student mentoring and
              advising.  %%%  This project provides insight into mechanisms that regulate the
              way cells interact.  Interactions between cells are the basis for the formation
              of a multi-cellular organism and a major question in the field of cell biology.
               The education plan of this award includes the introduction of macromolecular
              comput er graphics and database search techniques into an undergraduate
              laboratory, extension of biochemistry curriculum, and development of innovative
              education assessment techniques.
