Title       : Transcriptional Activation by Rhizobium meliloti DCTD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9506333

Award Number: 9506333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92076              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Hoover TRHOOVER@ARCHES.UGA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506333  Hoover  Rhizobium meliloti DCTD activates transcription from dctA
              (which encodes a C4-dicarboxylate transport protein) and belongs to a family of
              (54-dependent activators that probably operate by a common mechanism.  Sigma54 
              -dependent genes encode products that are involved in important and diverse
              metabolic processes, including nitrogen assimilation, nitrogen fixation,
              C4-dicarboxylate acid transport, toluene degradation, hydrogen metabolism, and
              pilin formation.  The long term goal of this lab is to understand the molecular
              mechanisms involved in transcriptional activation by (54   -dependent
              activators.  Examining how (54-dependent activators like DCTD facilitate
              transcriptional activation will contribute greatly to the understanding of
              bacterial gene regulation and physiology.  The transcription mechanism for (54
              -RNA polymerase holoenzyme (E(54) differs significantly from that of the major
              form of RNA polymerase holoenzyme (E(70) in several notable ways.  For example,
              ATP hydrolysis by the activator is coupled to open complex formation with E(54,
              while no examples of such a requirement for ATP exist among the numerous genes
              transcribed by E(70.  Towards this long term goal, the following shorter term
              objectives will be addressed in this research.  First, DCTD mutants that are
              defective in activating transcription will be generated and characterized.  For
              these experiments, a truncated form of DCTD (referred to as DCTDL143) that
              constitutively activates transcription and hydrolyzes ATP will be used.  Mutant
              DCTDL143 proteins will be purified and analyzed for their abilities to activate
              transcription in vitro, hydrolyze ATP, bind DNA, and interact with E(54.  DCTD
              can be crosslinked to (54 and the ( subunit of RNA polymerase, and interactions
              between DCTDL143 mutants and these subunits of E(54 will be examined using this
              crosslinking assay.  These biochemical and genetic approaches will be valuable
              for dissecting protein-protein interactions required for transcriptional
              activation.  Second, studies on the ATPase activity of DCTDL143 will be
              extended to include examination of  potential inhibitors, determination of
              temperature and pH optima, and determination of dissociation constants for ATP.
               Photocrosslinking ATP (or analogs of ATP) to DCTD will be used to identify
              regions of the protein involved in ATP binding.  Examining ATP binding and
              hydrolysis by DCTDL143 and DCTDLl43 mutants is likely to yield insights into
              how ATP hydrolysis is coupled to transcriptional activation.  Together, these
              data will provide useful information on how DCTD activates transcription from
              the dctA promoter.  %%%  Despite the large number of transcriptional activators
              that have been identified in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, the ways in
              which these proteins facilitate transcriptional activation are poorly
              understood.  The long term goal of this laboratory is to characterize the
              molecular mechanism of transcriptional activation by a class of activators ((54
              -dependent) in bacteria.  One such activator, DCTD of Rhizobium meliloti will
              be studied.  Mutant activators that are deficient in their ability to activate
              transcription will be generated using both random and localized mutagenesis. 
              These mutant proteins will be examined for their abilities to activate
              transcription, bind and hydrolyze ATP, and interact with E(54.  Studies on the
              ATPase activity of a truncated form of DCTD will be extended to include
              examination of potential inhibitors, determining temperature and pH optima for
              ATP hydrolysis, determining dissociation constants for MgATP, and identifying
              regions involved in MgATP binding.  This work will help increase our
              understanding of how cells activate those genes which are appropriate for a
              given environment.  ***
