Title       : Somitogenesis in Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9506156

Award Number: 9506156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Achim Gossler ago@aretha.jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9506156  Gossler    Somitogenesis is a fundamental pattern forming process
              in  vertebrates that subdivides the paraxial mesoderm along the 
              anterior-posterior body axis into a series of homologous subunits  called
              somites. The somites acquire distinct identities according  to their axial
              position and during subsequent differentiation, they  give rise to specific
              anatomical structures along the anterior  posterior body axis. The molecular
              mechanisms that control the  formation of somites from the presomitic
              (unsegmented) mesoderm  remain to be elucidated. Mouse mutations that
              specifically perturb  normal somite formation and consequently lead to severe 
              malformations of the axial skeleton indicate that different genetic  elements
              control distinct aspects of somitogenesis, such as the  formation of individual
              somites, or their size and shape. To  understand the molecular mechanisms
              underlying somitogenesis and  thus controlling the generation of the segmented
              mesodermal body  parts, the isolation and functional characterization of genes 
              involved in the regulation of these processes are essential. In  this proposal
              Dr. Gossler will focus on the functional analysis in  vivo of a recently
              isolated mouse gene Dll1 (delta like gene 1).  Dll1 is closely related to the
              Drosophila Delta gene which is  required for various cell fate decisions during
              fly development.  Dll1 is transiently expressed during embryogenesis and
              expression  is closely correlated with somitogenesis. The expression pattern 
              and homology to Drosophila Delta strongly suggest a role for Dll1  in cell to
              cell interactions underling somitogenesis. To test this  hypothesis Dr. Gossler
              will generate a null allele of Dll1 by  homologous recombination in ES cells
              and study the consequences of  this mutation during embryogenesis. To address
              the consequences of  a mutation in Dll1 on the cellular level he will assess
              the  developmental potential of cells carrying this mutation in chimeric 
              embryos. Finally, he will determine the expressio n of the Dll1 gene  and the
              distribution of its product in embryos that carry mutations  affecting
              somitogenesis in comparison with wild type embryos.  ***
