Title       : Regulation of variable surface protein gene expression in paramecium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9506009

Award Number: 9506009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Forney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506009  Forney  This project will investigate the molecular mechanism that
              controls the expression of variable surface proteins in Paramecium.  A single
              cell line of Paramecium tetraurelia, stock 51 can express at least 11 different
              surface proteins, yet only a single type is found on the surface at any one
              time. We will perform a series of experiments to test the hypothesis that the
              coding regions of surface protein genes are involved in the regulation of this
              mutually exclusive expression. Portions of the 51A and 51B genes will be joined
              using recombinant DNA techniques to form chimeras which will then be
              transformed into mutants that have deletions of the A and B genes. Normally,
              the A and B proteins exhibit mutual exclusion from the cell surface, therefore
              the chimeric proteins will be assayed to determine if they can be coexpressed
              with the normal A surface protein, the B protein, both or neither. Our
              preliminary studies have shown that the 51A and 51B genes are regulated at the
              level of transcription, yet the sequences upstream of the A gene are not
              sufficient to control the regulation of this transcription. An important
              preliminary experiment has shown that substitution of -1649 to +885 of the B
              gene into the A gene results in coexpression of the chimeric gene with the wild
              type B gene. This remarkable result is the first evidence that a portion of the
              coding region is important in controlling mutual exclusion. Additional
              experiments will define the region required for coexpression and investigate
              its mode of action.  Evidence for post-transcriptional mechanisms that control
              mutual exclusion will be examined by simultaneously transcribing both the A and
              B genes using the calmodulin gene promoter. Sequence specific antibodies will
              be produced against the A and B proteins and used as tools to analyze both the
              structure and expression of surface proteins.  %%%  This project will
              investigate the molecular mechanism(s) that control the expression of variable
              surface proteins in Paramecium.  A  single line of  Paramecium tetraurelia
              stock 51 can express at least 11 different surface proteins, yet only a single
              type is found on the surface at any one time.  Using recombinant DNA
              techniques, chimeras of appropriate genes will be formed and inserted into the
              organism in order to identify relevant sequences.  Preliminary evidence
              indicates that a portion of the coding region is important in controlling
              mutual exclusion.  Additional experiments will define the region required for
              coexpression and investigate its mode of action.  It is possible that
              information resulting from this work could have implications for understanding
              such genetic phenomenon in higher organisms.  ***
