Title       : RPG: Nonionic Organic Pollutant Sorption Mechanisms in Natural Clay-Rich
               Aquitards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9506403

Award Number: 9506403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richelle M. Allen-King allenkng@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    EAR-9506403  Allen-King    Clay-rich aquitards and constructed
              clay-liners provide low permeability barriers to contaminant migration and are
              used for hazardous waste disposal because of the margin of protection provided
              to underlying groundwater resources.  Sorption in the aquitard matrix retards
              transport and provides a sink for uptake and release of organic contaminant
              mass over time.  However, the mechanisms of sorption in clay-rich aquitards are
              not well understood.  Recent observations, for example, have shown that
              perchloroethene (PCE) sorption in several natural clay-rich and relatively low
              carbon aquitards is significantly under-predicted by existing methods.      It
              is hypothesized that in natural, low-fraction organic content (foc) and
              clay-rich aquitards, organic matter is the primary sorbing medium for nonionic
              organic compounds (NIOCs) such as PCE.  The objectives of the proposed research
              are: (1) to determine the relative importance of organic carbon and/or direct
              sorption to clay minerals; (2) to determine the effects of differences in
              oxidation and distribution of organic matter on the magnitude and form of
              sorptionO and (3) to test for competitive sorption between similar solutes. 
              Using the Planning Grant, the hypothesis will be tested using two contrasting
              natural aquitard samples with similar clay mineralogy and foc, but markedly
              different PCE sorption behavior.  The results will provide  insights into
              sorption mechanisms and bases for establishing the best methodologies for a
              more comprehensive study.    The objective is to improve mechanistic
              understanding of NIOC sorption in natural low-carbon geologic samples, thereby
              allowing more accurate assessments of contaminant transport for groundwater
              resource protection and remediation.
