Title       : Support of Student Participation in North American Paleontological Convention
               (NAPC-VI); June, 1996; Washington, D. C
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1995 
File        : a9506773

Award Number: 9506773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellis L. Yochelson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paleontological Society
	      c/o Thomas W. Kammer, P.S. Treas
	      Morgantown, WV  265066300    301/262-1563

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The North American Paleontological Convention is a quadrennial gathering of
              paleontologists from a variety of disciplines.  It is supported by the
              paleontological group headquartered in North America, but is open to all who
              are interested in paleontology.  The meeting planned for June 1996 in
              Washington, DC, will be the sixth NAPC, and the first to be held on the East
              Coast.  Each previous gathering has been judged by those who participated as an
              excellent scientific event.  One aim of NAPC is to allow specialists who would
              not otherwise normally be in contact to meet and exchange ideas.  For example,
              micropaleontologists and vertebrate paleontologists have different professional
              societies which meet at different times, yet some members of these two group
              work on fossils from the same age rock.  Based on past experience, the
              Organizing Committee for NAPC-VI expects that about 500 professionals will
              attend and interact for three days.  It is the view of the Organizing Committee
              that the continued interest of students is critical to the health of the field.
               Not only will students m aintain the study of past life, they are the ones who
              will provide fresh approaches and examine old fossils with new eyes.  NAPC
              provides an outstanding educational opportunity to obtain a concentrated amount
              of paleontological information from talks and poster presentations without the
              other distractions presented at a general geological meeting.  It also allows
              them the ready opportunity to meet with leaders in the field and to discuss
              their research in  progress, both formally and informally, in a venue not
              provided by a national or regional geologic  meeting.  The grant proposal
              consists of two components.  The first would allow for a lower  registration
              fee for all students who plan to attend.  Based on past experience, the
              Organizing  Committee expect that about 100-150 students will attend.  The
              second component of the grant would  consist of a small grant of fixed amount
              to a limited number of students to facilitate their  attendance.  Grantees
              would be selected on the basis of merit, but appropriate attention would be
              paid  to the need to support minority groups and women.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
