Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Oocyte Meiotic Prophase Arrest in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9506220

Award Number: 9506220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim B. Schedl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9506220  Schedl    Arrest of the cell cycle in prophase of meiosis I is a
              conserved  feature of oogenesis in essentially all multicellular animals. 
              Oocytes in organisms from starfish to humans maintain this arrested  state
              until ovulation by a mechanisms that is not well understood.  This proposal
              introduces a genetic strategy for isolating and  characterizing molecular
              regulators of meiotic prophase cell cycle  arrest. Recent genetic screens
              performed in the nematode  Caenorhabditis elegans have identified mutants where
              oocyte arrest  in diakinesis of MI prophase fails to be maintained. In oar-1
              and  oar-2 mutants (oar= oocyte meiotic prophase arrest defective),  oocytes
              leave arrest and endomitotically replicate their DNA.  Strategies have been
              developed to distinguish Oar mutants from  other mutants producing endomitotic
              oocytes. Importantly, a mutant  has been obtained with a phenotype opposite to
              Oar; olk-1 (olk=  oocyte arrest lock) oocytes maintain arrest under conditions
              when  arrest is usually lost. It is likely that the pathway for  maintenance of
              meiotic arrest defined by the oar and olk genes  involves cell cell
              communication from the soma to the oocyte.  Analysis of oar-1 is consistent
              with the conclusion that a cell  cell signal is needed to maintain meiotic
              arrest; cloning reveals  that oal-1 encodes a Sec61p gamma protein known in
              other systems to  facilitate protein translocation into the ER, and mosaic
              analysis  shows oar-1 activity is needed specifically in the germline to 
              prevent loss of oocyte arrest. Oar-1 may therefore act to  translocate a
              transmembrane receptor to the oocyte surface for  reception of the arrest
              signal. This proposal will initiate a more  extensive genetic and molecular
              investigation of the pathway  maintaining oocyte meiotic prophase arrest in C.
              elegans. Dr.  Schedl will:1) Identify genes necessary for oocyte meiotic
              prophase  arrest using a genetic screen, 2) Genetically and phenotypically 
              characterize mutants in the oar collection, and 3) Genet ically  characterize
              the arrest "loc-1" mutant, olk-1.  ***
