Title       : Cloning and Characterization of Biomineralization Matrix Phosphoprotein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9506111

Award Number: 9506111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne George   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                 3      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                        3    
                3        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   :   ;   <   =   >   ?   @   A   B   C   D                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                e a structural network
              comprised of collagen fibrils, into which calcium is deposited to form the
              final, hard product.   However, the mechanism by which calcium in trapped and
              deposited in the matrix in an orderly fashion is not understood.  Present
              experiGeorge, Anne MCB-9506111 Biomineralization, the biogenic formation of
              mineral deposits, is one of the most widespread processes in nature.  All
              aspects of this mineral deposition are important, but attention has been
              focused on the processes in eukaryotes, where the mineral deposition at
              extracellular sites is clearly mediated and regulated by proteins and other
              components secreted by cells which are part of the matrix itself.  In
              matrix-mediated mineralization, the cells first form the structural components
              of the ECM (extracellular matrix) and then deliver regulatory macromolecules
              which modify the  properties of the matrix and lead to the location and
              stereospecific nucleation of mineral crystal.  Bone, dentin and cementum are
              the three principal mineralized tissues of vertebrates.  The present research
              program will use dentin formation as a model system.  In this system, the
              odontoblasts synthesize a structural matrix, comprised of collagen fibrils,
              which serves to define the basic architecture of the tissue product.  The cells
              also synthesize and deliver a number of acidic macromolecules into t he
              extracellular compartment.  Molecular biology technology has been applied to
              clone the acidic macromolecules.  The first macromolecule identified was DMP1
              (dentin matrix protein 1).  Specific aims of the research program are directed
              toward an increased understanding of the structure and the function of DMP1 and
              its role in biomineralization. %%% Biomineralization is the process that occurs
              in animals and involves the formation of structures such as bone, claws, and
              dentin in teeth.  All of these structures are examples of  biomaterials.  In
              the present program, studies will be performed to begin to learn how these
              biomaterials are formed using dentin as a model system.  In the formation of
              dentin, cells called  odontoblasts  produce a structural network comprised of
              collagen fibrils, into which calcium is deposited to form the final, hard
              product.   However, the mechanism by which calcium in trapped and deposited in
              the matrix in an orderly fashion is not understood.  Present experimental
              results suggest that a number of proteins, also produced by the odontoblasts
              are involved.  By using molecular biology methods, one of these proteins has
              been isolated.  This acidic protein will be studied to learn how it combines
              with calcium and then operates to deposit it in the correct fashion to form
              dentin. ***                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                  ....()()))()()                             
                                                          ;                                  
                                                Oh     +'  0                                 
                   D       h                                               @       d         
                                                               R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 
                                               &    Metabolic Biochemistry Panel Summary     
                                       Shelley A. Graves                   Shelley A. Gra ves
                        @      < 3                          @     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a
              t i o n                           (                                            
                    9                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                @    + m 3                                   
                                                                            @                
                                        Microsoft Word 6.0                                   
                                3                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  e =       e                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    L                                                                        
                                                3               -   T                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              o              
                                                                                             
                George, Anne MCB-9506111 Biomineralization, the biogenic form
