Title       : Atmospheric Responses to North Pacific Sea Surface Temperture Anomalies During
               Winter and Summer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9506368

Award Number: 9506368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mingfang Ting ting@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1324,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9506368  Ting, Mingfang  University of Illinois  Title:
              Atmospheric Responses to North Pacific Sea Surface  Temperature Anomalies
              During Winter and Summer    This proposal outlines a comprehensive research and
              teaching plan  which will enhance the PI's early development of her academic 
              career at the University of Illinois.    The "career" research involves the
              study of the dynamical effect of  the North Pacific sea surface temperature
              (SST) anomalies on the  extratropical atmosphere during both winter and summer
              seasons.   The atmospheric responses to persistent midlatitude SST anomalies 
              has been controversial in the past.  The difficulties stem partly  from the
              fact that the natural variability of the midlatitude  atmosphere is very large,
              thus there is a small signal to noise  ratio.  This problem is also clouded by
              the fact that general  circulation model (GCM) experiments with fixed
              extratropical SST  anomalies do not always produce a consistent response.  This
               project will concentrate on the North Pacific SST anomalies and  their
              possible impact on the Pacific and North American climate.   One novel aspect
              of the research is that it will make use of a  series of modeling tools,
              including a linear steady state model, a  dry GCM and a full GCM.  The PI will
              also, for the first time, look  int the effect the North Pacific SST anomalies
              for the summer  season.  The results of this research are expected to improve
              the  seasonal forecasting for the Pacific and North American region.  In 
              particular, the results from the summer season will help the long  range
              prediction of the mid-west drought and flood potentials.    The education plan
              consists of innovative undergraduate teaching  and developing a graduate course
              that is currently not available in  the PI's department.  One novel aspect in
              the undergraduate  teaching plan will be to introduce students from various 
              disciplines to the current weather information through the computer  network at
              the University of Illinois and to  help students  interpret the data.  The main
              objective of the new graduate course  is to introduce the graduate students to
              the most up-to date  research topics in an area that is rapidly evolving,
              namely the  coupled ocean-atmosphere processes.  The topics include the coupled
               air-sea interaction in the tropical Pacific, i.e, the El  Nino/Southern
              Oscillation phenomenon, the air-sea coupling in the  midlatitude, and the
              air-sea coupling for the tropical 30-60 day  oscillations.
