Title       : Role of Actin Filaments in Fast Axonal Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9506279

Award Number: 9506279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Langford george.m.langford@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506279  Langford    This project will investigate the specific functions of 
              organelle-associated myosins in nerve cells.  The number of  new myosin motors
              identified by molecular and genetic  techniques has grown explosively in the
              past few years but  the functional roles of these new motors have not been 
              determined. This project tests the hypothesis that  microtubule-dependent
              motors drive movement of organelles  over long distances while actin-dependent
              motors drive  movement to local sites along the axon. The broad objectives  of
              the research project are to determine the actin-dependent  motors involved in
              fast axonal transport, the  interrelationship between the actin-dependent and 
              microtubule-dependent forms of organelle motility and the  mechanism by which
              the motors involved in organelle motility  are regulated. The squid giant axon
              and optic lobes (brain)  will be the primary biological materials used in these
               studies. Squid axoplasm is one of a small number of in vitro  systems where
              myosin-dependent organelle motility can be  studied directly. Therefore, it
              represents a unique system in  which to study (a) organelle associated myosins,
              (b) the  regulation of these motors and (c) the relationship between  membrane
              trafficking on microtubules and actin filaments.  Extruded axoplasm is
              particularly useful for motility studies  but the amount of material is too
              small for biochemical  purification of myosin motors. Squid brain, however, 
              represents an alternate source of material for purification  of myosins,
              therefore, motors identified in axoplasm will be  subsequently isolated from
              squid optic lobes. The primary  goal of the research project is to use an
              identified  organelle, the tubulovesicular organelles (TVOs) in the squid 
              giant axon, to study the properties and regulation of  organelle-associated
              myosins. Purification of TVOs will be  achieved by generating axoplasmic
              ghosts; the highly  extracted remnant of axoplasm. Motility of purified TVOs
              will  be reconstituted on actin f ilaments and the parameters of  movement
              determined by quantitative motion analysis. The  function of these compartments
              as Ca stores will be  determined with Ca-indicator dyes. In addition,
              antibodies to  known smooth ER proteins will be used to establish the  identity
              and purity of the isolated compartments. Another  specific goal is to identify
              factors that influence binding  of motors to the tubulovesicular organelles.
              The location of  the actin-dependent motors on the surfaces of TVOs will be 
              determined using immunofluorescence microscopy. This  technique will make it
              possible to establish whether the  motors are uniformly distributed or
              localized to the  vesicular domains of TVOs. Properties of the motor, such as 
              whether the motor is a peripheral protein and whether soluble  factors are
              involved in its attachment to the membrane will  be determined. Myosins will be
              purified from squid brain by  conventional biochemical methods or from axoplasm
              by  immunoprecipitation. Purified motors will be biochemically  and
              functionally characterized using in vitro motility  assays. An antibody to
              squid brain myosin V has been  generated for use in localization and functional
              studies.  Antibodies to other organelle-associated unconventional  myosins will
              be generated and used to inhibit motility in  extruded axoplasm thereby
              verifying the role of these motors  in the movement of organelles.  %%%  The
              work described in this proposal will provide new  knowledge on molecular motors
              and will aid our understanding  of fast axonal transport as well as our
              understanding of many  other fundamental cellular processes including
              secretion,  cell division, cell motility and the organization and  transport of
              organelles. The new knowledge from these studies  has applications in
              biotechnology and research on molecular  nanostructures.  ***
