Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Electronic Materials,
               Devices and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9506732

Award Number: 9506732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry F. Taylor taylor@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raghvendra K. Pandey  (Principal Investigator former)
              Tsay-Jiu Shieh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9165,9178,9231,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9506732  Pandey    This award provides funding for the establishment of a
              multi-  university Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on 
              Electronic Materials, Devices, and Systems between the Center for  Advanced
              Electron Devices and Systems at the University of Texas  - Arlington and the
              Electronic Devices and Materials Group at  Texas A&M University.      The
              research activities of these two sites are complimentary and  this operation
              will enable the Center to expand its research  activities and enrich their
              industrial membership base.  This  consolidated Center has expertise in bulk
              single and thin film  growth, characterization and process modeling of
              electronic  materials, Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE), and Pulsed Laser 
              Deposition (PLD) for the production of multi-layer and  heterostructure
              devices, rapid thermal processing, fabrication,  and evaluation of devices
              (fiber-optics sensors, integrated  optics, semiconductor lasers, microwave and
              millimeter wave  circuits and devices, superconductor devices, ferroelectric 
              devices, and optical instrumentation), device modeling and  simulation.    The
              University of Texas - Arlington will coordinate the  activities between these
              two research sites during the first two  years of operation.  The continuation
              of this coordination  responsibility will be reviewed and discussed by the
              Industry  Advisory board at the end of the second year.    The Principal
              Investigators have worked collaboratively in  developing this multi-university
              Center.  They have excellent  background and the experiences necessary to carry
              out the  proposed plan.  The universities have also shown strong  commitment in
              supporting this multi-university Center.    This proposal has been coordinated
              with Dr. Marvin White, Program  Director, Division of Electrical and
              Communications Systems.    The Program Director recommends Texas A&M University
              be awarded  $50,000 for the first year of a five-year continuing award.        
                                                                           Page 2    Near the
              end of each 12-month period the Program Director and/or  the Division Director
              of the Engineering Education and Centers  Division will review the progress of
              the Center on a number of  renewal criteria, including the following:  1) the
              extent to  which the industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the 
              extent to which a collaborative, robust research program is  developing; and 3)
              the extent to which the support base is  developing.  If the review is
              satisfactory, the Program Director  will recommend support for the next period
              of this continuing  award.     Jay Lee  Program Director, I/UCRC
