Title       : Ion Channel Regulation in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9506191

Award Number: 9506191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $491000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian I. Schroeder julian@biomail.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506191  Schroeder    Stomatal pores in leaves close to reduce transpirational 
              water loss of plants in response to environmental stress  conditions such as
              drought.  Control of stomatal movements  by guard cells in response to
              environmental stimuli and  stress conditions is a primary factor in determining
              water  use efficiency and productivity of crop plants.  Guard cells  provide an
              ideal system to elucidate early events in higher  plant signal transduction. 
              Several key guard cell ion  channels have been identified which have been
              proposed to  function as important signal transducers and mediators of 
              stomatal closing.  Recent data suggest that both Ca2+-  dependent and
              Ca2+-independent transduction cascades may  control stomatal closing.  However,
              the intracellular  signaling cascades which link signal reception to ion 
              channel modulation during stomatal closing remain largely  unknown. 
              Furthermore, the molecular mechanisms have  remained unknown, by which guard
              cell vacuoles release ions,  which is essential for stomata closing.  The long
              term goal  of this research is to characterize the chain of events of  the
              signaling cascade which integrates physiological  stimuli, such as abscisic
              acid, intracellular coupling  proteins, second messengers, and ion channels to
              produce  stomatal closing.  To elucidate signaling mechanism in guard  cells,
              we propose studies using a combination of cell  biological, patch clamp,
              biochemical and genetic analyses.  Recent research has led to the model that
              slow anion  channels  and outward-recitifying K+ channels in the plasma 
              membrane and newly identified vacuolar K+ (VK) and Ca2+-  activated
              Ca2+-permeable (SV) channels in the tonoplast of  guard cells are central
              transducers and mediators of  stimulus-dependent stomatal closing.  The
              regulation and  roles of the newly identified VK channels and the proposed 
              Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release by SV channels in guard cell  vacuoles will be
              investigated in detail to test the  hypothesis that these vacuolar ion chan
              nels are crucial for  signal transduction and vacuolar ion release during
              stomatal  closure.  Furthermore, studies of these vacuolar ion  channels
              together with analyses of rate-limiting slow anion  channels in guard cell
              plasma membrane will be pursued to  determine intermediate Ca2+-dependent and
              putative Ca2+-  independent signaling steps which produce the integrated 
              response of stomatal closing.  Regulation of guard cell  vacuole channels and
              phosphorylation-dependent plasma  membrane slow anion channels will further be
              studied by  using isoforms of the Ca2+-dependent protein kinase (CDPK).  In
              addition, cell biological characterization of guard cell  signaling mutants in
              Arabidopsis will be pursued to  elucidate the function of genetic loci within
              the cascade of  events which produced stomatal closing.  Stomatal regulation 
              ion abscisic acid-insensitive Arabidopsis mutants (abi1 and  abi2) and effects
              of the purified recombinant ABI1 protein  phsophatase on guard cell ion
              channels will be pursued for  enhanced ABA sensitivity and for phenotypic
              stomatal  responses in existing Arabidopsis mutants to identify and 
              characterize additional genetic loci involved in stomatal  and ABA signaling. 
              The proposed research will contribute  significantly to the understanding of
              the molecular  mechanisms of the signal transduction cascade which produces 
              the integrated response of stomatal closing.  These studies  may further
              provide important information for the design of  strategies for future
              engineering of improved water use  efficiency in crop plants.  %%%  Plants
              "breathe" through tiny openings or "mouths" called  stomata which are often
              found on the underside of leaves.  However, a fine balance must be achieved
              between respiration  and loss of water vapor through the stomata. To achieve
              this  balance, the plant is sensitive to a wide variety of  environmental
              stimuli which induce stomatal closure, such as  elevated carbon dioxide levels,
              darkness and the  phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA).  It is  known that stomatal
               closing is, in part,  brought about by ion efflux through  ion channels in the
              outer cell membrane and the membrane  which surrounds the vacuole, the
              tonoplast of the cells  which comprise the stomate, the guard cells. This
              project is  concerned with the way the environment stimuli bring about  changes
              in the amount and rate of ion transport through  these channels.  The channels
              have been identified.  Potassium is released from the vacuole through the 
              tonoplast, into the cytoplasm where it is released into the  cell wall via an
              outward-rectified potassium channel.  A  rise in intracellular calcium and pH
              stimulates this  release.  The regulation and role of the newly-identified 
              vacuolar potassium transporter is explored, as is the  coordination of these
              channels with others at the plasma  membrane to produce an integrated response
              to intracellular  calcium signals.  The integration of the signaling pathways 
              is also explored using molecular genetics.  Mutants which  have the phenotype
              of an altered guard cell response to the  phytohormone, ABA, are analyzed in
              order to identify more  genes involved in stomatal opening and ABA signaling.
              The  role of one of these signaling genes, one which encodes a  protein
              phosphatase, is being explored by purifying the  protein and determining its
              direct effect on channel  physiology.  This project has biotechnical
              application  through the design of crop plants which have improved water  use
              efficiency.  ***
