Title       : CAA: Transient Nucleation Behavior in Li2O-2SiO2 Glasses: The Effects of Q
               Speciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9506486

Award Number: 9506486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanna Nekvasil Hanna.Nekvasil@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9222,9250,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9506486  Nekvasil       Crystal nucleation in silicate glasses is of great
              importance  in both geological and materials systems. Yet, many important 
              questions still remain regarding the effects of pre-existing  amorphous phase
              structure on the homogeneous nucleation process in  silicate melts and glasses
              and the dynamic processes leading to new  steady-state species distributions. 
              This CAA is requested to  permit the PI to begin a new research direction
              focused on the  structural aspects of time-dependent processes relating to 
              crystallization from molten and glassy silicates.  This direction  strongly
              complements her previous experimental and theoretical work  on equilibrium
              thermodynamics in molten silicates.  This project  would serve as an
              introduction to NMR spectroscopy as well as  nucleation studies and would be
              conducted during her first  sabbatical leave.         The proposed study
              focuses specifically on evaluating the  kinetics of structural readjustments
              and its effect on induction  times.  MAS and static NMR experiments on glassy
              lithium disilicate  will be coupled with nucleation studies with the specific
              goal of  determining the kinetics of "short" range order readjustments after 
              structural perturbation.  The kinetics of Qn species rearrangements  when
              coupled with the effects of structure on induction times will  also indicate
              the kinetics of the readjustment of cluster  distributions (i.e., "medium"
              range order).  In addition to  advancing our understanding of the effect of
              pre-existing structure  on induction times, the data obtained should provide a
              means of  determining whether or not a specific measured Qn species 
              distribution at or below Tg reflects an equilibrium state.  This is  of
              immediate relevance to the interpretation of the numerous  structural data of
              glasses in the literature and should provide a  guide to the preparation of
              glasses for future structural studies.         The award supplement will
              support a particularly talented  female, African-American underg raduate.  She
              will work closely with  the PI and a female chemistry professor on all aspects
              of the  project.
