Title       : MCD and MLD Studies of Cytochrome Oxidase and other Hemoproteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9506817

Award Number: 9506817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506817  Peterson  This research will develop magnetic linear dichroism (MLD) as
              a  valuable tool for the study of cytochrome c oxidase and some other 
              metalloproteins. MLD is not sensitive to heme a or CuA(which give  rise to
              features that dominate the magnetic circular dichroism   MCD  spectra of most
              cytochrome c oxidase derivatives one would  like to study) but is sensitive to
              some states in which the heme  a3-CUB binuclear pair can be prepared.
              Consequently, it is expected  that the site of interest can be observed free of
              spectral  interference from the other chromophores using the MLD  approach.   
              The major limitation associated with magneto-optical measurements  on
              hemoproteins in general has been that the MCD signals derived  from species
              having a low spin ferric (S = 1/2) ground-state are  the most intense and can
              therefore dominate much of the spectrum.  Such hemes tend to be simply electron
              transfer centers and not  directly involved in substrate binding. Since for
              most purposes we  are primarily concerned with the latter, this represents
              something  of a problem. Nearly always, it is possible to prepare one or more 
              interesting derivatives where the electron transfer centers are  low-spin
              ferrous (S = O) and the substrate binding heme has some  paramagnetic
              ground-state (S =2 usually). In these circumstances,  only the active site heme
              has a readily measurable MCD signal.   Unfortunately, there invariably remain a
              number of derivatives  which could usefully be studied by MCD spectroscopy if
              it were not  for small amounts of residual low-spin ferric hemes dominating the
               spectrum. This tends to be the rule rather than the exception and  is
              definitely the most serious source of spectral interference  associated with
              the technique.    MLD spectroscopy represents something of a breakthrough in
              this  regard, since it is not sensitive to either low-sin ferric, or  ferrous,
              systems; but is likely to prove particularly useful for  studying integer spin
              paramagnets.    The MCD instrumentatio n now on-line at The University of
              Alabama  operates between 1.2 and 300 K, O to 7 tesla, over the wavelength 
              range 350 to 3000 nm. No other single instrument has these  capabilities. Also,
              unlike other MCD instruments, it has been  constructed entirely by American
              companies. The planned addition of  the MLD option will represent a further
              unique feature in a single  instrument. This equipment arguably represents
              something of a  national resource.  %%%  This research will develop the
              technique known as magnetic linear  dichroism (MLD) as a tool for the study of
              hemoprotein and other  samples which have proved difficult to investigate by
              established  methods. Presently, there seem to be no useful MLD data reported 
              for any metalloprotein samples.The information obtained will assist  in the
              elucidation of the mechanism by which certain metalloenzymes  function and is,
              therefore, of some fundamental significance to  biochemistry.  The planned
              addition of the MLD option to the magnetic circular  dichroism (MCD)
              instrumentation now on-line at The University of  Alabama will represent a
              further unique feature in a single  instrument and, arguably, represents
              something of a national  resource.  ***
