Title       : Function of the Nuclear Ran/RCCI Regulatory System in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9506985

Award Number: 9506985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilhelm Gruissem   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9506985  Gruissem    Cells regulate their growth by controlling their
              progression  into the cell cycle, but the molecular mechanisms for these 
              controls are not well understood.  It has been shown that  the nuclear Ras-like
              GTP-binding protein Ran and its  nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 form a complex
              that is  critical for a number of nuclear functions, including entry  into and
              progression of DNA replication, and entry into cell  division.  Mutations in
              either Ran or RCC1 have complex  phenotypes in animal and yeast cells and
              affect many  processes, including DNA synthesis and gene expression,  often
              resulting in cell death.  This project is an  investigation of the functions of
              Ran and RCC1 in plant cell  division and sexual reproduction.  The proposed
              studies of  the Ran/RCC1 regulatory complex in a multicellular system  that is
              amenable to in vivo manipulations should reveal  novel and as yet poorly
              understood functions for these  conserved proteins.  Preliminary data indicate
              that plant  Ran is a highly conserved nuclear protein which can suppress  a
              fission yeast cell cycle mutation.  Ran is encoded by a  family of genes in
              tomato whose members are differentially  expressed.  The function of Ran and
              RCC1 in tomato plants  will be investigated using transgenic tomato plants 
              expressing mutant Ran proteins in an inducible fashion.  This is a novel and
              powerful tool to investigate the role of  these proteins in development.  In
              addition, the subcellular  distribution and function of the proteins during
              cell  division and sexual reproduction are not understood.  Plant  cells
              present a useful genetic system for such functional  and localization studies. 
              Together, these experiments  establish an important basis for studies to
              understand the  function of the Ran/RCC1 regulatory complex in a signal 
              transduction network that regulates the integration of cell  growth and cell
              division  %%%  During entry into any phase of  the cell cycle, there are 
              complex and diverse functions which must be coor dinated. The  phase which
              leads to initiation of  mitosis, the M phase of  the cell cyle,  requires, and
              to some degree may be driven  by, multiple activities, some of which involve
              the Ran gene  product and its associated RCC1 gene product. However, the  work
              to date on these genes has been done primarily in yeast  and mammalian systems.
               This work pulls together the  suggestive  previous work done in yeast and
              mammalian cell  tissue culture and provides a means to determine definitive 
              functions of this gene complex through the use of  transgenic technologies in
              tomato and Arabidopsis plants.  Work has already shown that the genes for
              Ran/RCC1 in plants  are very similar to those found in yeast and mammals.  The 
              work also shows that the plant genes can functionally  replace non-functional
              genes in yeast.  Ending these studies  to plants takes advantage of the
              multiple known plant  mutations in meiosis, the "reduction" division which
              gives  rise to sexual gametes.  The commonality between the early  phases of
              mitosis and meiosis would indicate that the  definitive role for these proteins
              might be uncovered by  exploiting advanced knowledge in this area of plant
              biology.  Extending the work to plants also takes advantage of the  "naturally"
              occuring cell cycle arrest points and activity  in a mature, differentiated
              higher plant.  Discovery of the  role of  the Ran/RCC1 regulatory complex in
              the signal  transduction network involved in the normal development of  plants
              should provide a deeper of understanding of how these  very basic, common
              signaling mechanisms are coordinated  during plant, animal and fungal growth. 
              ***
