Title       : RCMS: GUIDED RESEARCH EXPERIENCES for MINORITY SCHOLARS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1995      
File        : a9450347

Award Number: 9450347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon K. Jensen jensenj@marquette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450347  Jensen    Overview    The Marquette University College of Engineering
              proposes to renew its Research Careers for Minority Scholars (RCMS)  program
              titled "Guided Research Experiences for Minority Scholars".  This broad-based
              program proposes to attract talented  undergraduate minority students to
              engineering, retain them in engineering programs through degree completion, and
              to prepare  them for research careers.  The proposed program will rely on the
              College's strong academic program in Biomedical, Civil and  Environmental,
              Electrical and Computer, Industrial, and Mechanical Engineering; its
              state-of-the-art facilities, partnerships with  industry; and its tradition of
              successfully educating minority students.    The renewed program will be
              expanded to include 12 student participants per year (a 20% increase) for four
              years, 18 students  over the course of the project.  The program combines
              academic year course work, research project work, and summer research 
              experiences.  The proposed program provides financial assistance, nurtures
              academic success and personal growth through  mentorship, role modeling, and
              strong advising program.  Each student will gain a personal identification with
              the engineering  profession, and the encouragement, preparation, and assistance
              necessary to enter programs of graduate study.    Project Characteristics   
              The context of the project is a private national urban, Jesuit, Catholic
              education.  The general scope of the proposal is national,  in that project
              will attract underrepresented minority participants from around the nation as
              well as locally.  The state of  Wisconsin is approximately 36% minority and
              southeastern Wisconsin is approximately 27.8% minority, providing a sizable 
              local pool of possible participants.  Funding for this project is requested for
              four years.    Project Description    The goal of the project is to attract
              undergraduate underrepresented minority students to engineering, to retain them
              through the  Baccalaureate degree, and t o encourage and prepare them for
              graduate studies, and, to assist them in seeking successful graduate  school
              placement.  Program components include placement of participants with a
              research mentor and inclusion in active and  meaningful research experiences in
              a supportive environment.  Financial support in the form of lab work stipends,
              partial (need  based) tuition assistance, summer research opportunities, group
              social and professional activities, travel to professional  conferences, and
              career advising.  Students are encouraged to immerse themselves (to the extent
              possible) in the academic life.    Key Players    Key players for this project
              are the National Science Foundation and Marquette University.  The university
              regularly includes  outside organizations as indirect collaborators.  They
              include research and coop work sites such as the Veterans Administration 
              Research Center, Milwaukee Electric Tool, Wisconsin Electric Power Co.,
              Illinois Department of Transportation.    Participants    Individuals will be
              recruited from the local and national pool of minority applicants as identified
              by the Marquette University  Office of Admissions.  These individuals will
              include Blacks, Hispanics, and Native Americans.  All individuals must meet 
              regular entrance requirements for engineering at Marquette University which
              includes criteria for performance in mathematics  and science.  The complete
              group will include 12 individuals:  six freshmen, 2 current sophomores, 2
              current juniors and  2  seniors.  They will have appropriate recommendations
              and will have grade point average of 3.000 on a 4-point scale.    Leverage   
              Marquette University intends to overmatch NSF funds by providing 56.9% of the
              total cost of the project over four years.  These  funds will support personnel
              costs for mentoring and advising, Director, Graduate Director and tuition
              assistance from Marquette  University.  In addition, as costs increase from
              year to year, the NSF share will remain constant.  This results in a reducti on
               of 26.8% in the per student costs over the current project.    Evaluation   
              The program incorporation numerous participant evaluations that are used in
              assessing the effectiveness of the program from  a students perspective. 
              Faculty/mentor evaluations are also requested on a regular basis.  The goal of
              this project is a 100%  graduation rate and a 100% placement rate in graduate
              programs.  The current project rate is approximately 92%.    Dissemination
              Plans    Project results will be disseminated in the form of annual reports,
              newsletters to alumni and other colleges and universities,  opportunities to
              present papers and participate in poster sessions at conferences.
