Title       : RCMS: MINORITY STUDENT RESEARCH EXPERIENCES
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9450415

Award Number: 9450415
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Steen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Adedeji B. Badiru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450415  Steen    The University of Oklahoma (OU) Minority Engineering Program
              (MEP) is excited about the  addition of the National Science Foundation's (NSF)
              Research Career for Minority Scholars  (RCMS) project.  The project will be a
              perfect addition to the OU MEP.  OU MEP and the  university have made a true
              commitment to provide enhanced higher education options for  minority scholars.
               This commitment exceeds one million dollars annually in support of  operating
              expenses, scholarships, and fee waivers to minority students majoring in
              engineering  and has allowed the OU MEP to reach a total enrollment of 484
              students for the Fall 1993  semester.  The minority engineering undergraduate
              enrollment constitutes over 20 percent of the  College of Engineering
              enrollment--a truly phenomenal achievement!  This minority engineering 
              enrollment includes some of the best students in the nation.  For example four
              OU students have  won the National Black Engineer of the Year Award - Student
              Leadership Category in the first  seven years of the award.  The University of
              Oklahoma minority engineering student population  provides the opportunity for
              unparalleled success in meeting the objectives of the RCMS project.    The OU
              MEP RCMS project is designed for excellence.  The centerpiece activity will be
              a  quality research experience under the supervision of faculty mentors.  The
              project objectives will  be accomplished using two tiers of research
              experiences and activities.  Tier I will be a  developmental stage for twenty
              freshmen and sophomores and will focus on academic  achievement, personal
              development and an introduction to the world of research.  Tier II is  designed
              for 20 to 35 advanced students and will focus on a research experience and
              related  activities.  Tier II participants will also prepare technical research
              papers, make oral  presentations at monthly meetings, attend  regional and
              national conferences related to their  research projects, submit their research
              for presentations and public ation, and serve as mentors  to younger students. 
              The RCMS participants will also have enhanced opportunities to experience 
              research outside the university.  The project staff will work with corporations
              and national  laboratories to provide summer internships.    The participants
              for the NSF RCMS project will be selected from the minority engineering 
              student population at the University of Oklahoma. The minority engineering
              enrollment is  composed of approximately four hundred and fifty undergraduates
              with a significant number of  all three underrepresented minority groups: 
              American Indian, Black and Hispanic.  The  minority engineering enrollment is
              also national in scope with students from Alaska,  Washington, Oregon,
              California, Idaho, New Mexico, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas,  Arkansas,
              Missouri, Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Maryland, New York, Tennessee, 
              Louisiana, Mississippi, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Florida. 
              The participants  will be selected based on academic ability, motivation,
              financial needs and careers goals.   Participants will be provided a stipend
              for their participation in the project.    Evaluation of the project will be
              based on required data to NSF and such factors as number of  participants,
              retention rate of participants, number of technical paper submissions and
              quality  of research experiences.
