Title       : Alabama Laser Research Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1994      
File        : a9450570

Award Number: 9450570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Lawson lawson@phy.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Shealy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sergey B. Mirov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Abstract 570  Lawson  Alabama Laser Research Initiative    The Alabama Laser
              Research Initiative proposes to establish a  unique world-class Laser Research
              Facility at the University of  Alabama at Birmingham which will provide
              spectrally tunable laser  pulses for photonics research and development.  The
              facility will  help to develop systemic linkages between the science, 
              engineering, and mathematics infrastructure in Alabama in the  area of lasers
              and photonics.  Specific areas of research to be  pursued in this initiative
              include the development of new active  media for future commercial laser
              systems, research into new  types of nonlinear optical materials for optical
              switching, and  research into new types of optical systems for laser beam
              profile  modification to enhance the efficiency of laser systems.  The new 
              active media research (solid state impurity doped and color  centers) is
              spurred by the need for lasers at new wavelengths,  and will result in the
              development of new   irradiated color  centers and impurity doped crystals. 
              These new active media will  ultimately have applications  as new types of
              products for  commercial laser companies, including spectrally tunable solid 
              state lasers, passive Q-switches, and mode-lockers.  The  nonlinear optical
              materials research is motivated by Department  of Defense (DoD) and commercial
              applications such as sensor  hardening, optical processing or computing, and
              optical  switching, and will involve the development of new highly 
              photorefractive NLO materials.  Color-center laser-based  experiments will be
              used to characterize these materials.   Ultimately, this will lead to improved
              nonlinear optical (NLO)  materials for DoD and commercial applications.  The
              beam profile  modification research is motivated by the need to transform a 
              Gaussian laser beam profiles into a more uniform irradiance  distributions for
              applications such as projection processing of  materials.  The proposed
              research in the area of novel beam  reshaping will lead  to beam reshapers for
              use in producing  massive arrays of micro-optical elements.    This Alabama
              Laser Research Initiative will provide opportunities  to educate undergraduate
              and graduate students (including  participants in the Alabama Alliance for
              Minority Participation  program) in laser  and photonic sciences and
              technologies.  The  emphasis of this educational process will be to develop
              applied  skills that will be directly used (i) in new commercial laser and 
              photonics companies located in Alabama; and (ii) to modernize  current Alabama
              based industries.  In addition to educating  students, the proposed research
              will help to develop new laser  and photonics technologies that can be
              transferred to Alabama  industries to develop new products and to improve
              manufacturing  processes.
