Title       : Competitive Analysis of Online and Distributed Systems (Computer Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9450142

Award Number: 9450142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra Irani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research focuses on algorithms that work limited  information.  Three
              topics are addressed, and each is motivated  by an application in online or
              distributed computation.  These  topics include:  (1) Distributed computation
              where a group of  agents must collectively solve a problem.  Each agent
              receives  part of the input, and a graph is used to represent knowledge  that
              is shared between the agents.  The goal is to determine how  to use shared
              information between the agents as well as to  determine the value of sharing
              information. (2) These issues will  be addressed with respect to problems in
              distributed job  scheduling and network routing.  Metrical Task Systems where
              the  set of tasks (inputs to the system) are restricted.  The  restriction on
              the input is part of the description of the  system.  A unified approach will
              be developed to a variety of  online problems by developing a general, simple
              algorithm which  uses the system specification to approximate the best online 
              algorithm for each particular system.  (3) The use of a  statistical adversary,
              which provides a way of bringing  theoretical results in online algorithms
              closer to practical  concerns by considering only those inputs which exhibit
              typical  statistical features.  It is a middle ground between  probabilistic
              analysis and competitive analysis where the input  is generated by an unlimited
              adversary.  The use of a statistical  adversary for problems in finance and
              computer systems will be  considered.    Interactive activities include:
              teaching a research seminar in  online algorithms; leading weekly meetings with
              computer theory  students to discuss research problems; involvement into the 
              Columbia Chapter of the Society of Women Engineers; & women in  the Computer
              Science Department.
