Title       : Revitalizing Scientific Inquiry In The Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1993  
File        : a9450658

Award Number: 9450658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Craig craig@hws.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Gadek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aline M. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Palocsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Steiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hobart & William Smith Col
	      
	      Geneva, NY  14456    315/781-3000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450658  Craig                                     The structure of the
              undergraduate chemistry curriculum is  determined by the American Chemical
              Society Committee on  Professional Training (CPT).  While the curricular
              standards  established by the CPT have succeeded in defining and regularizing 
              educational standards for the training of professional chemists,  changing
              student populations have created pressures on this  curricular structure.  This
              curriculum planning project is designed  to enhance the educational experience
              of both majors and non-majors  by modeling the educational process more closely
              in parallel to the  way in which scientific discovery occurs.  Curricular
              structures  and support materials will be designed to emphasize problem 
              solving, interdisciplinary applications of chemistry, and increased  ease of
              access to chemical information.  This goal will  be  accomplished through the
              efforts of five curriculum initiatives.   Four-person teams selected from
              primarily undergraduate colleges  will participate in these initiatives.  They
              are Modular Course  Design Initiative; Laboratory Innovation Initiative;
              Intermediate  and Advanced Interdisciplinary Course Initiative; Visualization
              and  Database Access Initiative; and Assessment Tools Initiative.  The 
              Collaborating institutions are Allentown College, Buffalo State  College,
              Finger Lakes Community College, Hobart & William Smith  Colleges, James Madison
              University, Millersville University,  Pennsylvania State University, River
              College, Rochester Institute  of Technology, University of Pittsburgh, York
              College of  Pennsylvania.
