Title       : EP-PPD/Science and Math Education for the Special Education Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9450074

Award Number: 9450074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1223574            (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Kimmel kimmel@admin.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1203,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-94-50074  New Jersey Institute of Technology Howard Kimmel, Principal
              Investigator  "Science and Math Education for the Special Education Population"
                                           ABSTRACT  Students with disabilities are able to
              participate fully and comfortably in science, engineering and math (SEM)
              programs if they are provided with appropriate instruction and access. 
              However, teachers in regular science and math classes are not trained to
              include students with special needs in already overcrowded classrooms.  These
              teachers are not prepared to handle the problems of children with special
              needs.  Teaming of SEM teachers with individuals trained in meeting
              accessibility needs should reduce existing problems leading to full inclusion
              and participation of students with disabilities.  New Jersey Institute of
              Technology (NJIT) proposes a project to meet the goal of strengthening science
              and math literacy and career opportunities of all students, including those
              with disabilities from racial minorities.  NJIT plans to establish a
              comprehensive, long-term, training and assistance program in SEM curricula for
              pre-college teachers and counselors, their students with disabilities, and
              their parents.  The project will demonstrate how science and math curricula can
              be adapted to meet the needs of these students.  The project will work on team
              building and collaborative efforts among 60 counselors, 30 science and math
              teachers at the secondary level and 60 special education teachers at the
              elementary level.  Four hundred and eighty special needs students will receive
              follow- up academic support in the classroom provided by specially trained NJIT
              graduate assistants.  In addition, summ er SEM experiences will be offered to
              36 minority disabled students.  The goals of the program are to develop a
              program model that will:  (a) promote positive and permanent changes in the
              academic climate to ensure full participation and inclusion in SEM subjects of
              elementary children with disabilities; (b) provide disabled elementary students
              access to SEM instructional materials, educational technologies and hands-on
              experiences; (c) encourage children with differing abilities, especially
              minorities, to pursue SEM careers by providing opportunities for interaction
              with practicing disabled SEM professionals; (d) encourage and facilitate smooth
              transition from one educational level to the next for students with
              disabilities; (e) stimulate interest in SEM subjects of fourth through sixth
              grade elementary minority children with differing abilities; and (f) inspire
              parents of minority disabled youngsters so that they may enable their children
              to undertake SEM courses and pursue appropriate careers.  Eight areas of
              activity are planned for the three-year project.  Faculty and students who
              participate in Year 1 will continue to      h)          0*0*0*        
              participate in subsequent years, and in years 2 and 3 additional cohorts of
              faculty and students will begin their participation.  The eight areas of
              project activity are the following:  (1) provide teams of secondary science and
              math teachers and elementary special education teachers three weeks of
              intensive classroom experience; (2) provide counselors in-service training on
              bridging mechanisms that facilitate educational transition in SEM courses,
              parental empowerment, and cooperative hands-on science and math instruction;
              (3) provide elementary minority disabled students with four weeks of intensive
              classroom experience in science, math, computer science and communication
              skills; (4) provide parents/guardians of disabled youngsters and counselors
              with workshops to disseminate information on existing services and programs
              available from federa l, state, local and community agencies, SEM course
              preparation and SEM careers; (5) provide academic classroom support for
              implementation of SEM instruction into special education classrooms; (6)
              provide elementary minority disabled students counseling seminars including
              interaction with practicing disabled SEM professionals; (7) provide faculty and
              graduate assistants with classroom training in cooperative teaching and
              learning methods, classroom climate and sensitivity issues; and (8) provide
              elementary disabled school children with information on existing precollege
              initiatives at NJIT and other colleges and universities. ***                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
