Title       : RCMS: RESEARCH FOR MINORITY SCHOLARS IN THE CENTER FOR MANUFACTURING
               TECHNOLOGIES
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9450254

Award Number: 9450254
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $617064             (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Morgan   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Foster  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450254  Foster    Research Careers for Minority Scholars Program at Prairie
              View A&M University    The College of Engineering and Architecture (CEA) at
              Prairie View A&M University  (PVAMU) proposes a five-year Research Careers for
              Minority Scholars (RCMS) program  which is focused towards increased
              participation of African Americans in manufacturing  related SEM disciplines. 
              This project will be operating in conjunction with a major funded  program at
              PVAMU - the Center for Manufacturing Technologies (CMT).  The RCMS  project
              will select twenty-five African American SEM students annually to work with CMT
               faculty and staff.  The goal of the RCMS program will be to act as a feeder of
              high  quality,  research-experienced African Americans into Ph.D. programs in
              those manufacturing  disciplines defined as critical technologies of the 21st
              century.    The fundamental mission of the CMT-based RCMS program is to ensure
              that African  Americans participate fully in those critical and emerging
              technologies related to the U.S.  manufacturing effort.  The program will have
              direct impact on students in the discipline areas  of engineering computer
              science, chemistry and physics at PVAMU.  RCMS students will be  encouraged
              upon completing their undergraduate degree to take part in the ongoing M.S. to 
              Ph.D program between PVAMU and Texas A&M University.  RCMS students will be 
              involved with the following activities:  i) academic year projects, ii) summer
              research  internships, iii) annual manufacturing conference, iv) M.S. and Ph.D.
              pipeline forum, v)  manufacturing curriculum development, vi) manufacturing
              technology transfer, vii)  manufacturing student outreach, and  viii)
              manufacturing student recruitment.    The Center for Manufacturing Technologieq
              is led by Prairie View A&M University in  partnership with Texas A&M University
              System.  The Center for Manufacturing  Technologies was officially recognized
              as a center for research development, technology  transfer and industrial
              extension by the Texas A &M University System Board of Regents in  May of 1993.
               In July of 1993 the U.S. Army Material Command made a five year, $10.6 
              million commitment to CMT to conduct research on electronics manufacturing and
              dual-use  technologies, provide technology transfer ad industrial extension
              services to the consumer  and defense electronics industry, and to initiate an
              M.S. to Ph.D. Pipeline program for  African Americans in the manufacturing
              disciplines.  The five-year performance goal of the  pipeline program is to
              graduate five African Americans each year with a Ph.D. in one of the 
              CMT-sponsored manufacturing disciplines.  It is expected that 25 African
              Americans will be  in the M.S. to Ph.D. Pipeline at any one time, either at
              PVAMU or TAMU.    Institutional commitment to the CMT RCMS program is a dollar
              for dollar match for all  student scholarships and support costs.  The program
              will be evaluated both internally and  externally.  Internal evaluation will
              take place on a semiannual basis through a CMT  advisory panel.  External
              evaluation will occur on an annual basis through the National  Science
              Foundation.  The methods of evaluation would entail the success record of RCMS 
              students moving into Ph.D. tracks at other institutions.
