Title       : SSC: "Project OCEAN (Opportunties to Challenge the Environment and the Nature of
               Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9450509

Award Number: 9450509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean C. Gilbert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline L. Deamer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Long Beach Unified Sch D
	      701 Locust Avenue
	      Long Beach, CA  908134316    213/436-9931

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450509  Long Beach Unified School Dist.  Long Beach, CA  Gilbert, Dean and
              Jacqueling Deamer    "Project OCEANS (Opportunties To Challenge The Environment
              and The  Nature Of Science"    Project OCEAN will serve 60
              underrepresented-minority (Afro-  American, Hispanic, and Native American)
              middle school students  wach of the three summers of the project term.  Twenty
              students who  have hust completed the sixth, seventh, or eight grade will be 
              selected for each cohort; at least half will be young women.   Participation
              will be open to students from the Long Beach, Los  Angeles (Harbor and South
              Central areas), Lawndale, Compton,  Inglewood, Torrance, and PalosVerdes School
              Districts.  Interest in  science and Mathematics as demonstrated in students'
              application  essays and interviews, GPA, completion of challenging academic 
              programs as compared with others from their respective schools, and 
              satisfactory records of conduct and attendance will be criteria for  selection.
               The summer science camp will structured as an  adaptation of the NTSA
              integrated science model.  Instruction will  be organized thematically, with
              applications of basic scientific  and mathematical concepts drawn from the
              disciplines of marine  biology, oceanography, coastal management, geology, and
              terrestrial  ecology.  The approach will be experiential and cross-curricular. 
                The summer component will be offered in three modules, hosted at  three
              different sites.  During the first two weeks of the six-week  session, students
              will attend a mini-institute in essential science  and mathematics skills, so
              as to foster a common knowledge base  among participants.  Students will them
              spenc two weeks at the  Southern California Marine Institute on Terminal Island
              (Los  Angeles Harbor); there they will begin to discover applications of  basic
              concepts withih a marine-science context through classroom  and laboratory
              experiences and field exercises on one of the five  research vessels at the
              disposal of the Institute.  The final  two  weeks will be residential at the
              Wrigley Marine Science Center on  Catalina Island, a period which will function
              as an extended  practicum, during which students will work on individual and
              small-  group research projects of their choosing.  Ten follow-up sessions 
              will also be scheduled during the subsequent academic year.  Part  of the
              follow-up program will be devoted to students' producing  "mini-documentaries"
              of their research experiences the previous  summer.  Project evaluation will
              examine changes in participants'  knowlege about and attitudes toward
              science/mathematics  engineering; subsequent enrollment in and sucdess with
              challenging  courses in these disciplines; growth in understanding of research 
              methodology; awareness of career opportunities in SEM fields; and  requirements
              for postsecondary training and career options in those  areas.  Data will be
              disaggregated by ethnicity, sex , grade level,  and multiple indicators of
              achievement to premit more penetrating  and useful analysis of outcomes.
