Title       : SSC: St. Croix Eco-Explorers.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9450443

Award Number: 9450443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187884             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Wilhite   (Principal Investigator current)
              Katrina Klaphake  (Principal Investigator former)
              Patricia Forber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Chittenden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Museum of MN
	      120 West Kellogg Boulevard
	      Saint Paul, MN  551021208    651/221-4720

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450443  Science Museum of Minnesota  St. Paul, MN  Klaphake, Katrina,
              Patricia Forber and David Chittenden    "St. Croix Eco-Explorers"    St. Croix
              Eco-Explorers is a multifaceted project of the Science  Museum of Minnesota
              whose ultimate goal is to increase the number  of girls, particularly minority
              girls, being exposed to scientific  fields.  This project will enhance the
              scientific knowledge of  middle school girls by providing them with hands-on,
              highly  motivating science activities in conjunction with appropriate 
              technical education and support networks.  It is specifically  designed to
              encourage girls who already show an aptitude in science  to continue exploring
              science through extracurricular activities  and pre-college science courses. 
              The primary vehicle for this  project will be a four-week day camp.  The
              participants will be  engaged in both course work and field research.  During
              this time  they will also be taking field trips to visit women scientists in 
              both industry and academia. Through this project participants will  strengthen
              their self-awareness and self-esteem as well as their  knowledge of career
              opportunities in the scientific world.  Along  with the four-week camp, there
              will be follow-up activities which  engage the participants in sharing their
              gained knowledge with  family and friends, informal meetings with female career
               scientists, and internships within the Museum.  This project  provides for the
              development of curriculum and implementation of  three successive camps that
              will be subjected to frequent  evaluation by staff scientists and educators at
              the Science Museum  of Minnesota.  Major Scientific Disciplines:  Ecology, 
              Environmental Science.  Program:  Formal and Informal Science  Education. 
              Instructional Grade Levels:  Grades 7 and 8.
