Title       : AMP: THE METROPOLITAN DETROIT ALLIANCE for MINORITY PARTICIPATION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9450371

Award Number: 9450371
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4163748            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanley N. Abramson   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450371  Abramson    The Metropolitan Detroit Alliance for Minority
              Participation has been formed to address the  issue of minority
              underrepresentation in the sciences, mathematics, and engineering (SEM).  The 
              Alliance represents a consortium of six Detroit area universities:  Wayne State
              University (the  lead institution), Lawrence Technological University, Madonna
              University, Oakland University,  University of Detroit Mercy, and University of
              Michigan - Dearborn.  The objective of the  Alliance is to increase the number
              of minority SEM graduates from these institutions from the  current level of
              180 to 720 by 1999.  In addition, the Alliance will aim to place 150 of these 
              graduates in graduate programs.  The consortium has made a substantial
              commitment of  matching funds to assist in bringing these goals to fruition.   
              To create a region-wide environment of moral and financial support for
              attainment of these  objectives, the Alliance will expand to include the area's
              public schools, community colleges,  and business community.  Major foundations
              will be approached to further undergird the  Alliance.    A number of projects
              aimed at facilitating student passage along the critical points in the SEM 
              career pathway have been designed.  Summer institutions and workshops,
              concentrating on  science topics and improving math and study skills, will
              bridge the transition from high school  and community college to the
              university.  A program for parents will stress their critical  supportive role
              in their child's education.    Retention in the university will be enhanced by
              emphasizing cooperative learning approaches to  mathematics and science
              instruction, using upper-level and graduate students, as well as  scientists
              and engineering from industry, as mentors or tutors.  Dedicated counselors,
              scholarship  programs, and electronic bulletin boards will provide additional
              support mechanisms.    The Alliance will sponsor seminar programs, affording
              students the opportunity to present their  research exp eriences and to hear
              guest speakers.  An annual day-long symposium focusing on  career opportunities
              in SEM fields will be held.    Region-wide distribution of promotional
              literature describing project goals will aim at attracting  students to the
              program.  The Alliance will publish a newsletter, disseminating information on 
              activities within the Alliance, as well as AMP program news.    Evaluation for
              the Alliance program will focus on both outcome and process.  Outcome 
              evaluation will document progress toward attainment of objectives.  Process
              evaluation will  document program implementation.    The success of this
              project is heavily dependent on obtaining wide community support for its 
              goals.  As those goals are realized, institutionalization of the most
              successful aspects of the  project is anticipated to occur.  Progress towards
              institutionalization will be followed by the  Alliance's governing board,
              composed of the presidents of the six consortium members.  ***
