Title       : Microfabrication of Advanced Radiation Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1994      
File        : a9450547

Award Number: 9450547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238444             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Pitts   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin M. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 547  Pitts  Microfabrication of Advanced Radiation Detectors    The
              project will develop and produce ionizing radiation detectors  using modern
              microfabrication techniques.  The scientific  motivation of this project is the
              production of silicon  semiconductor detectors and micro-strip gas counters for
              nuclear  physics experiments at the Indiana University Cyclotron Facility 
              (IUCF), "Cooler" light ion storage ring, and the MIT-Bates South  Hall Ring. 
              The microfabrication aspects of this project will  include the application of
              advanced micromachining and  electrostatic bonding techniques to the design of
              radiation  sensors.  These techniques will be developed with the assistance  of
              the Center for Microelectronic Sensors and Microstructures at  the University
              of Cincinnati.  The design and testing of these  detectors will be carried out
              in collaboration with the IUCF Wire  Chamber group.  The educational goal of
              this project is to train  our students in the techniques of these rapidly
              evolving fields.   Support for four students is requested as an integral part
              of  this proposal.  Participation in this project will give our  students a new
              path to industry and graduate school.      The project is driven by the need to
              improve two types of  ionizing radiation detectors, the silicon semiconductor
              detector  and the micro-strip gas counter.  Large area silicon microstrip 
              detectors have excellent position, timing, and energy resolution.   These
              detectors suffer from a sensitivity to radiation damage,  however, and are very
              expensive in customized versions.  Local  fabrication will allow the
              customization of these detectors to a  much wider range of experiments and
              applications, and do so on a  more cost effective basis.  The second type of
              detector to be  developed is the micro-strip gas counter (MSGC).  First
              described  in 1988, the MSGC is a miniaturized multi-wire proportional  chamber
              (MWPC) with the wires of the MWPC replaced by metal  traces on an insulating
              substrate.  Micromachini ng techniques  such as preferential etching of
              crystallographic planes will be  utilized to further develop these detectors
              and electrostatic  bonding techniques will be applied to their mechanical
              packaging.   The latter feature will result in hermetically sealed MWGCs 
              compatible with operation inside the ultra high vacuum chamber of  a storage
              ring.
