Title       : Sweeping Change in Manageable Units: A Modular Approach to Chemistry Curriculum
               Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9450703

Award Number: 9450703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Bradley Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Angelica M. Stacy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Sawrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley L. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Casanova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450703  Moore  Massive reform can start with small steps, particularly when the
               politics of change are so complex.  Change in the chemistry  curriculum must
              meet the needs of science and engineering  departments whose students we serve,
              as well as the needs of the  chemistry major going into industry or graduate
              school, and the  liberal arts conscripts to chemistry courses.  In order to
              make  inroads toward change we must find a path that makes possible a 
              curriculum that can be modified continually, is usable in a variety  of
              institutions, can accommodate the increasingly diverse group of  students we
              need to serve, and encourages participation of faculty  and students alike. 
              The in- and out-of-classroom experience must  incorporate new technologies to
              aid the students in accessing,  organizing, filtering and assimilating
              scientific information.  We  must revise our model of curriculum across the
              rapidly blurring  boundaries of the subdisciplines of chemistry, and the
              disciplines  of all sciences.  We propose to develop self-contained modules, at
              all levels of the  chemistry curriculum, that can be used for 2-4 weeks in a
              lecture  or laboratory course,  The instructional tools developed for the 
              module will include software, videos, interactive CD's and other  resource
              material that can replace or greatly augment traditional  texts and problem to
              interest the students and will be developed in  an interdisciplinary manner. 
              Core concepts from the essential  chemistry "tool kit" will be included in each
              module and an  instructor could select a variety of modules in order to cover
              the  same core concepts.  This is more than a repacking of chemistry, it  is
              the beginning of ongoing systemic change that allows for all  faculty,
              innovative or traditional, to use new approaches and  contexts in their
              classrooms.  A consortium of schools, predominantly from California -- the 
              University of California, the California State University, the two-  year
              Colleges, private institutions -- as well as three   institutions from Atlanta,
              Georgia will serve as the working  partners to establish the design and testing
              of the modules.
