Title       : Multiple Entry Into Undergraduate Chemical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1995   
File        : a9450604

Award Number: 9450604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Whitesell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eamonn F. Healy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy Nabona  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450604  Whitesell                                                              
                      We have devised a sequence of instruction that addresses many of  the
              concerns that have been raised about the quality of  lower-division education
              in chemistry.  At this point, it  represents a working plan that will be
              extensively modified in the  next year as we gather background information and
              advice from  institutions both within and outside the core group of four.  The 
              core of the first two years is a two-semester sequence that covers  the
              essences of organic, bioorganic, and bio-inorganic chemistry.   This core is
              preceded and followed by a group of one-semester  courses that, on the one
              hand, introduce the basic elements of  chemistry and, on the other, deal in
              greater detail with specific  areas that bridge the class divisions.  This new
              program of  instruction will require a body of teaching materials that, at 
              best, must be brought together from many different sources.  Other  essential
              teaching aids must be developed from scratch.  In the  next nine months we
              intend to explore available resources and to  begin the development of these
              new materials.  We are especially  keen on developing integrated packages of
              audio-visual aides to be  used in lectures as well as hands on, interactive
              packages of  audio-visual aides to be used for student self-study.  Further, we
               anticipate that faculty from other departments and colleges within  the
              universities involved (University of Texas at Austin, Trinity  University, St.
              Edwards University, and Austin Community College)  will be able to contribute
              substantially to the development of the  curriculum and also be directly
              involved in instruction.  We will  also interface with institutions outside the
              primary group of four,  seeking their involvement in this planning stage as
              well as  possible participation.
