Title       : MPWG: Science Horizons for Girl Scouts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9450593

Award Number: 9450593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56651              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory F. DeFrancis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joy M. Wallace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sally P. Crateau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Claud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montshire Museum of Sci
	      One Montshire Road
	      Norwich, VT  05055    802/649-2200

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450593  DeFrancis    The Montshire Museum of Science, in collaboration with the
              Swift Water Council of the Girl  Scouts of the U.S.A. and the Women in Science
              Project of Dartmouth College, proposes to  develop and pilot a program to
              encourage young women, grades 7-9, in science and  mathematics.  The program
              will provide participants with experiences to increase their  confidence in
              science and math, to increase their interest in science and math courses (and
              other  educational experiences in these fields), and to spark their
              consideration of careers in science  and math.  Project participants will be
              young women from New Hampshire and Vermont drawn  from the Cadette Program of
              the Swift Water Council of the Girl Scouts.  Approximately 80  scouts will
              participate in the pilot program.  Following its development, Montshire Museum
              and  the collaborating organizations intend to conduct the program on an
              on-going basis, assuring that  the experiences will be available to many
              thousands of young women in the two-state region.     The program will be
              composed of the following elements:  (a) a series of workshops in hands-on 
              science education held at the Montshire Museum of Science involving Girl Scouts
              and led by  Museum staff and Dartmouth "Women in Science" undergraduate
              students; (b) visits by the Girl  Scouts to Dartmouth College science labs
              organized by undergraduate Dartmouth women  conducting research projects in
              these labs; (c) science activities developed by the Girl Scouts,  with help
              from the women Dartmouth students and Montshire Museum staff, and presented in 
              community settings in their home towns; (d)  a culminating event for
              participating Girl Scouts  and their parents to be held at Montshire and at
              Dartmouth College; and (e) a pre-project  workshop to disseminate gender equity
              issues widely to volunteer Girl Scout leaders, teachers  from the participants'
              home schools, and others.  An experienced evaluator of informal science 
              programs will be integral to the project, providing sum mative data to assess
              the project's impact.   Information about it will be widely disseminated to
              encourage use of the project as a model for  application elsewhere.  ***
