Title       : SSC: "Summer Science Camp: A University and Industrial Partnership to Enhance
               Minority Science Education and CareerPerspectives"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1994      
File        : a9450367

Award Number: 9450367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299997             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Rohde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Maher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne L. Rohde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jody G. Redepenning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450367  U of Nebraska-Lincoln  Lincoln, NE  Smith, James III, John Rohde,
              Robert Maher, Jody Redepenning and  Suzanne Rohde    "Summer Science Camp:  A
              University and Industrial Partnership to  Enhance Minority Science Education
              and Career Perspectives"    To increase racial minority participation in
              science, engineering,  and mathematics (SEM) careers, the university of
              Nebraska-Lincoln  is seeking funding for a National Science Foundation Summer
              Science   Camp.  This residential Summer Science Camp Project will serve 40 
              middle school youth annually from the Lincoln, Nebraska, Public  School
              District.  The Project will recruit underrepresented  minority students from
              low-income backgrounds whose parents lack a  college degree and involve these
              students in educational activities  following their seventh or eighth grade
              year.  Over the 36-month  period from 1 April 1994 to 31 March 1997, there will
              be 120 total  Project participants.    one of the Project's strengths is that
              it will draw on the  complementary talents of university professors, active 
              professionals in the field, and certified public school teachers  working
              together as an integrated team.  The paid staff will  include a Project
              Coordinator, six Educational Consultants from the  university faculty, three
              certified secondary-education  Instructors, and four live-in Residential
              Advisers responsible for  supervision and peer interaction in the residence
              halls.   Uncompensated volunteers will include a team of mentors drawn from 
              SEM-based industries in the locality.  Leadership will be provided  by a
              Director who has over 20 years' experience in educational  administration and
              whose salary is paid by the University of  Nebraska.    The Summer Science Camp
              will consist of three components.  First,  eligible students will be recruited
              for the Project, selected for  participation, and invited to an orientation
              meeting with their  parents in the spring.  Second, during the six-week summer 
              component, participants, will be offered a  variety of activities  including
              motivational science and math enrichment courses, field  trips, practical
              applications, and actual research experiences at  the University.  These
              activities will enhance students' awareness  of SEM career options, prepare
              them to succeed in the related  preparatory courses, and build a sense of
              community for positive  peer support.  Third, through the academic year
              component, the  Summer Science Camp Project will make available numerous
              resources  to promote the continued academic success of participants.  The 
              faculty involved in this Project will publish its details and  results in
              professional journals.     ***
