Title       : CSAMS, Coordinated Science Assessment Model Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9450208

Award Number: 9450208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49946              (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Miller gemiller@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450208  Miller    High quality assessment and evaluation mechanisms to monitor
              the  outcomes of science education reform at the high school level on a 
              continual basis are needed for both internal and external use.   Teachers,
              school administrators, university and college faculty,  parents and students
              need to accept these assessments as valid  measures of both quality and
              quantity of science learning and  achievement.  Three Golden State Examinations
              in Science (Biology,  Chemistry, and Coordinated Science) have been developed
              and  implemented on a broad scale on California high schools.  This  study aims
              to use these examinations, the students taking them, and  the teachers teaching
              those students as basis to begin to establish  the parameters and methodologies
              that can be most efficiently used  in future large scale efforts to monitor
              secondary school science  reforms.  The study will focus (though not
              exclusively) on the  schools working with the state Scope, and Sequence and
              Coordination  (SS&C) project reforms.    The Golden State Examination
              development and implementation has  been a collaborative effort of school
              science teachers and college  science faculty.  This teamwork has been a
              valuable professional  development opportunity for several hundred science
              teachers,  involved in various facets of the examination, such as development 
              committees, scoring teams, portfolio judges, and as workshop  leaders.  This
              study will add a research component to this  evaluation design and data
              analysis among core groups of these  teachers.  The majority of those involved
              will be from schools  heavily involved in implementing high quality coordinated
              or  integrated science from all students, which is the platform of 
              California's SS&C project.  These teachers will design surveys to  monitor
              attitudes and pathways of learning of students, and  progressive subject matter
              tests, will score essays, performance  tasks, and portfolios, and will analyze
              results to make  recommendations for future assessmen t and evaluation
              implementation  efforts.
