Title       : PPD: A Multisensory Calculus Program for Students with Visual Impairments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9450166

Award Number: 9450166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kress kress@postbox.csi.cuny.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert A. Blank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Gourgey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Staten Island
	      2800 Victory Boulevard
	      Staten Island, NY  10314    718/982-2254

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9178,9253,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450166 Kress  A key barrier to participation in science, engineering, and
              mathematics curricula for blind and  visually impaired students commonly has
              been access to usable instructional materials in higher science and mathematics
              courses.  The Department of Computers Science of The College Staten Island and
              the Computer Center for the Visually Impaired of Barusch College, both within
              the City University of New York (CUNY), propose to provide an environment that
              will offer blind and visually impaired students equal accesses to basic
              education for science, engineering, and mathematics (SEM) by developing and
              testing instructional materials usable by these students.  This project focuses
              on the core mathematics course for SEM,. the calculus.  It will use the most
              effective current audio and tactile technology to provide access to graphical
              information.  The project also will explore other technologies currently in
              development as they mature.  The courseware to be developed will be usable as
              well by students without visual impairments; and although the project will
              develop materials for college education in SEM, the methodology will be equally
              appropriate for primary and secondary grades.  In the proposed three year
              project, the investigators will develop courseware for teaching the calculus to
              first year college students.  For the basic course content, the investigators
              will use a successful self paced mastery course in calculus developed for  SEM
              students under a Carnegie Foundation grant at Carnegie Mellon University.  The
              essential prerequisite materials that would otherwise be inaccessible to blind
              and visually impaired students will be supplemented by specially developed
              auditory and tactile materials.  In most situations, the teaching problems
              associated with visual impairments are solvable with existing technology. 
              Scanners with optical recognition software and Braille printers (or speech
              access systems for those who do not read Braille) can be used to read
              conventional printed or displayed text, and enlarged display screens are
              available for those with lesser degrees of visual impairment.  Graphical
              materials used in science and mathematics, however, require innovations.  The
              investigators propose using audio tactile tablets that can be prepared and
              programmed to present the needed graphics.  The Baruch Computer Center for the
              Visually Impaired is a leading facility for preparation of tactile graphics for
              blind people.  Tactile graphics developed by this facility, combined with new
              technology, the NOMAD audio  tactile tablet, will permit student of the
              calculus to trace the graphics and to hear the essential information for each
              point spoken audibly.  These technologies and materials should provide students
              with visual impairments the ability to read mathematical text and graphics
              directly without having to engage sighted readers.  A multisensory workstations
              has been set up in a College of Staten Island laboratory with a NOMAD audio
              tactile tablet procured with funds from the NSF equipment grant.  The audio
              tactile materials and software development will be tested      h)         
              0*0*0*         with students with visual impairments from CUNY and with blind
              professional volunteers.  The test experience will provide the basis for
              continual revision and further development.  The final evaluation will be
              conducted in cooperation with the Educational Testing Service.  The material
              will be distributed to the New York State Office  of Advocate for the disabled
              for use with organizations offering training and educational benefits to
              individuals with disabilities throughout the United States. ***                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
