Title       : SSC: "Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9450406

Award Number: 9450406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299572             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Robert Houston rhouston@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennie M. Bennett  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450406  U of Houston  Houston, TX  Bennett, Jennie    "Summer Science Camp"
                 The University of Houston Summer Science Camp is an endeavor of the 
              university's Bridge Program designed (1) to address the impending  shortfall of
              technology trained workers in the United States by  encouraging minority
              students in the Houston area to enter careers  in the sciences, engineering,
              and technology and (2) to enhance  these students' proficiency in mathematics
              and the sciences so that  they can successfully complete university and college
              programs in  these disciplines.  The Summer Science Camp Program seeks to 
              provide minority students of intermediate academic ability--  students who,
              without strong encouragement, would otherwise not  enter a university--with the
              tools and the encouragement necessary  for them to pursue such educational
              opportunities.  In the Summer  Science Camp students will be trained in
              research techniques and  study skills, writing skills and, given hands-on
              experiences in  conducting laboratory experiments from several scientific 
              disciplines.  Teachers from area public schools will  collaboratively plan
              chemistry, physics and mathematics classes  with Houston Community
              College-Northeast College instructors and  University of Houston professors. 
              Classroom activity projects and  lessons will be team-taught by chemistry,
              physics and mathematics  university and community college professors. 
              Instructors will  mentor students, working in classrooms and labs, and making
              field  trips to enhance their understanding to reinforce the goals and 
              objectives of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics  Curriculum and
              Evaluation Standards and revised Texas State  Curriculum for Mathematics and
              Science.  TexPrep materials from the  University of Texas-San Antonio will be
              integrated into the summer  camp curriculum.    Students will be exposed to
              scientifically and technologically  based careers through interaction with
              minority scientists and  engineers.  undergraduate students wi ll escort
              students from class  to class.  After the academic activities, students will
              participate  in recreational activities such as swimming, bowling, rap sessions
               (discussing topics relevant to teenagers), and the like, that will  be planned
              and supervised by undergraduate students.  One hour and  a half will devoted to
              study time so students can complete homework  assignments for the next day. 
              Participants will be residentially  housed at the university from Sunday
              evening through Friday  afternoon, spending the weekends at home.  Graduate
              students will  serve as mentors and role models for participants.  In addition
              to  the responsibilities mentioned above, undergraduates who are  majoring in
              scientific and engineering fields at the university of  Houston and who are
              themselves minority students mentors, tutor (if  necessary) and supervise
              recreational activities for Summer Science  Camp Program students.    ***
