Title       : SSC: Summer Science Exploration Camp.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9450281

Award Number: 9450281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvester N. Ekpenuma ekpenuma@claflin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bettye R. Stokes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Philip Charpie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Claflin University
	      College Avenue N E
	      Orangeburg, SC  29115    803/534-2710

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450281  Claflin College  Orangeburg, SC  Ekpenuma, Sylvester, Philip
              Charpie and Bettye Stokes    "Summer Science Exploration Camp"    The Science
              Exploration Camp project planned for Claflin College  will conduct a four-week,
              non-residential math and science course  program to serve fifty minority
              students entering the 7-9 grades  during the three summers of 1994-1996 with
              the first year program  scheduled to rum from July 5-29, 1994.  Peer groups of
              students  will be selected from adjoining school districts of Orangeburg , 
              Calhoun and Bamberg counties in South Carolina which have a high  concentration
              of minority students.  The project will be supervised  by four faculty, four
              undergraduate assistants and a secretary.   The program will comprise of
              interactive, hands-on experiences and  demonstrations in the applications of
              science and technology that  will direct the students to questions such as how
              and why that will  ultimately introduce the learning of basic concepts. 
              Exploration  of the applications in various areas of science and technology
              will  serve as a springboard to instructions in areas such as engineering  and
              physics, basic mathematics (algebra and geometry) and problem  solving skills
              essential foundation for success in the core courses  required for science and
              technology programs; use of computers,  microbiology, chemistry, and improving
              general academic skills such  as note-taking,oral and written communications. 
              The methodology  been tired here is to start from the applications that
              interest the  students and then introduce the concepts later.  To complement
              the  classroom demonstration and instructions, field trips that will  also
              include hand-on activities will be taken to expose the  students to
              professionals in the various fields so that the  students can relate classroom
              study to careers and appreciate that  science is what we do in real life and
              not just what we study only  in the classroom.  Also, the participants will be
              encourage through  career awareness g roup discussions and demonstrations
              involving  minority professionals to pursue studies leading to careers in 
              science and technology.  The academic year follow-up component will  include
              school visitations by program faculty to assist in science  demonstrations and
              a campus weekend demonstrations and  presentations involving the participants
              and their peers.
