Title       : Idaho Native American Outreach Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9450567

Award Number: 9450567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62223              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry R. Armstrong teram@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 567  Armstrong  Idaho Native American Outreach Education    This
              NSF-Idaho EPSCoR Experimental Systemic Improvement (ESI)  initiative targets
              members of one of Idaho's educationally  disadvantaged minorities--the Native
              American (NA).  This is a  twelve-month
              science/mathematics/engineering/technology (SMET)  education partnership
              involving the University of Idaho (UI), the  Nez Perce and Coeur d'Alene
              tribes, the school and community  organizations affiliated with each tribe, the
              American Indian  Science and Engineering Society (AISES), and North Idaho
              College  (NIC).    The project focuses on four basic, systemic changes to the
              manner  in which SMET instruction is presented, supported and accepted in 
              small rural communities.  Under this initiative, scholastically  qualified NA
              high school students, plus high science/mathematics  teachers, a parent of each
              student, and two NA student teachers  will participate in an active hands-on
              summer of environmental  research, education and university experiences at UI. 
              The  environment is a topic of extreme interest to NA tribes in Idaho.   NA
              school and community professionals will assist in selection of  the
              participants and will provide team support and mentoring.   The summer
              experience will have a positive scholastic career  influence on the student,
              provide the teacher with a research  experience and additional classroom
              skills, encourage supportive  parental participation in the student education
              process, and  provide extraordinary pre-service experience for the student 
              teacher.  The summer laboratory and instructional period will be  followed by
              SMET-related educational activities throughout the  next academic year.  The
              post-summer team activities, coordinated  by the UI Project Director and
              supported by the school districts,  AISES and NIC, will include assessments,
              scholastic  guidance/counseling and professional group activities.  Pre-, 
              mid-, and post-summer support and mentoring will be provided to  the
              teacher-student-parent te am by respected members of  established NA community
              and professional groups.
