Title       : EP/PPD: Promoting and Retaining in Math, Engineering and Science (PRIMES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9450020

Award Number: 9450020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1660246            (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald J. Alston   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Leung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark G. Strauss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah C. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1203,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9450020  University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign  Mark G. Strauss, Ph.D.,
              Principal Investigator   "Project PRIMES:  Promoting & Retaining In Math,
              Engineering &  Science"                                 ABSTRACT    This
              Experimental Project is designed to address the  underrepresentation of persons
              with disabilities in science,  engineering and mathematics (SEM) careers and
              those actively  pursuing degrees in these fields.  Project PRIMES has two main 
              goals:  (1) increasing the enrollment and retention of students  with
              disabilities in SEM at the high school and college levels, and  2) increasing
              the understanding of the factors which contribute to  this inequity.    The
              goal of increasing the enrollment and retention of students  with disabilities
              in SEM in high school and college levels are to  be addressed through three
              tasks.    (a) Workshops will be conducted for high school math and science 
              teachers and guidance counselors, high school students with  disabilities and
              their families, and state vocational  rehabilitation counselors.  The workshops
              will discuss methods to  overcome handicapping conditions in an academic
              pursuit of SEM.   Topics covered include:  state and federal regulations
              governing  educational access; funding availability at the local, state and 
              federal levels; availability of technology to increase access to  laboratories
              and computers; availability of referral and human  resources to identify and
              assist in reducing or eliminating  handicapping situations; teaching the
              necessary preparation for  successful transition from high school to college. 
              The high school  students with disabilities participating in these workshops
              will be  targeted for direct recruitment by SEM college departments.   Internet
              and e-mail access will be provided for the high school via  the University of
              Illinois Computer Service in order to facilitate  peer-to-peer support between
              students in different high schools and  mentoring support provided by college
              students with disabilities  w ho are enrolled in SEM.  Mini-grants will be
              awarded to math and  science teachers to provide necessary access technology
              and to  develop either new teaching/laboratory modules or to modify  existing
              ones to increase the integration of students with  disabilities.    (b) The SEM
              department faculty at the University of Illinois will  be provided educational
              workshops on how to teach for students with  disabilities.  Many of the issues
              addressed in the workshops will  be discussed.  Similar mini-grants to college
              professors will be  offered to improve the quality of the educational
              experience for  students with disabilities enrolled in SEM.  One professor in
              each  SEM department will function as a mentor and advocate for the  students
              with disabilities in the department.    (c) A region-wide awareness program is
              planned.  A professionally  developed poster illustrating persons with
              disabilities  successfully engaging in SEM fields at the high school, college
              and  post-graduation levels will be sent to high school math and science 
              departments and guidance counselor offices in Illinois and to  children's and
              science museums in a five state region.    The second goal related to
              increasing understanding of the factors  that contribute to the
              underrepresentation of people with  disabilities in SEM will be addressed by
              collecting and analyzing  data from anonymous pre- and post- surveys completed
              by workshop  participants.  The surveys will ask participants to express their 
              experiences, views and attitudes about people with disabilities in  SEM
              careers.  The most important and impeding issues will be  integrated into
              future workshops and disseminated through national  publications and
              presentations.      The knowledge gained in this project should act as a model
              for  other high schools and colleges to follow to increase the  enrollment and
              retention of students with disabilities in SEM.
