Title       : Knowledge Transfer to Stimulate Exploration for Wyoming Natural Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1994      
File        : a9450557

Award Number: 9450557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce Reiss                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199223             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald C. Surdam   (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry P. Heasler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shelby Gerking  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 557  Surdam  Knowledge Transfer to Stimulate Exploration for Wyoming
              Natural  Gas    The program is designed to be the first stage in a major long- 
              term effort to forge mutually beneficial linkages between the  University of
              Wyoming and Industry, an effort given high priority  by the State of Wyoming. 
              The program is focused on knowledge  transfer in the natural gas industry in
              Wyoming as representing  the best available opportunity to model
              University-Industry  interaction.    Wyoming's immense natural gas resource
              occurs in accumulations  unconventional in form, emplacement, and history. 
              Exploration  techniques designed to locate conventional stratigraphic and 
              structural traps are blind to these unconventional, subtle traps.   Personnel
              at the Institute for Energy Research (IER) are  developing techniques to
              identify, delineate, and predict the  productivity of hydrocarbons in subtle
              traps, and these  techniques have been applied successfully in several
              hydrocarbon-  producing areas, resulting in significant reduced risk and 
              increased profitability for industry.  These areas have extensive  databases to
              work with and company research staff with whom to  interact.  The petroleum
              industry in Wyoming is sparse and  dispersed, and is composed generally of
              small operators without  research staff.  It is vital at this time that the IER
               communicate the knowledge necessary for finding and developing  natural gas
              accumulations in subtle traps in Wyoming basins.   This will require that a
              means of crating linkages and  transferring knowledge be developed that takes
              into account the  particular conditions of exploration and production in
              Wyoming:   the industry is dispersed; and knowledge transfer must be careful 
              and direct, truly understandable and  applicable in the field,  and truly
              interactive so that optimum research benefits are  derived.  An interactive
              program of knowledge transfer is  proposed, in which the IER strategy will be
              demonstrated in  developing the Jonah gas field and a  series of workshops will
              be  implemented through collaboration between the IER, the Wyoming  Geological
              Association, and McMurry Oil Company.  Research at the  IER is ongoing; and the
              accelerated development of Wyoming's  natural gas resource brought about by the
              knowledge transfer made  possible by this initiative will increase the capacity
              of the IER  to guide its research on the basis of feedback from Industry and 
              to compete successfully for  federal R&D funding.  At the same  time, this
              program will be the model for establishing and  nurturing University-Industry
              linkages that will be extended to  other industries in Wyoming as the
              importance of these linkages  is recognized and actively supported.
