Title       : Theoretical Studies of: Close Binary Systems; Binaries in Dense Stellar
               Environments (Astronomy)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9450087

Award Number: 9450087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251211             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosanne Di Stefano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project will continue and expand a vigorous program  of research
              on questions related to binaries in dense stellar  environments and close
              binary systems.  The specific problems  exhibit a range of difficulty.  Some,
              like the influence of the  interstellar medium on the observability of
              supersoft sources, are  ones for which the relevant tools are rather easily
              available and  can be completed relatively quickly.  Others, like work on
              three-  and four- body processes in globular clusters, require a good deal  of
              study and work to lay proper foundations for the research  proposed here.  The
              work on mass stripping during tidal capture and  circularization falls into
              this category.  This is a broad research  program, to be carried out over a two
              year period.  There are  interconnections between many of the questions to be
              explored, and  previous work in all of these areas provides a strong lead-in
              for  several of the problems.    Interactive activities include teaching an
              astronomy course at the  advanced undergraduate level, and a graduate course on
              galactic  dynamics.  Other activities involve:  hosting a regional conference 
              to address local needs regarding encouraging young women in the  sciences (at
              the undergraduate level and above) to enthusiastically  pursue their interest
              in science, and the possibility of networking  and other strategies to enhance
              the effectiveness of existing local  resources; and working with the Center for
              Astrophysics Women's  Program Committee to design and participate in workshops
              for young  women scientists at the Center.
