Title       : SSC: "M3 Summer Camp for Science and Mathematics: Master, Maintain, Matriculate"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9450451

Award Number: 9450451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert S. Hill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine L. Abeita  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Indian Sci&Eng Soc
	      P.O. Box 9828
	      Albuquerque, NM  871199828    505/765-1052

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450451  American Indian Sci & Eng Soc  Boulder, CO  Hill, Norbert Jr. and
              Cathy Abeita    "M3 Summer Camp For Science and Mathematics: Master, Maintain, 
              Matriculate"    The goal of the M3 Summer Science Camp for Science and
              Mathematics  is to build a solid foundation to foster and encourage American 
              Indian students' understanding, development, and use of science and 
              mathematics so that they master and maintain their skills in these  areas.  The
              ultimate desired result is an increase in the number of  American Indian
              students matriculating in college in mathematics,  science, and engineering,
              and persisting in these majors through to  graduation so that they can enter
              careers in these fields.    The M3 Summer Camp and subsequent academic year
              program includes  three interrelated components:  1) St. Norbet College.  The
              summer  program brings together 42 rising American Indian eighth grade 
              students from tribes in three geographic regions of the country--  Great Lakes,
              Southwest, and Southeast.  Fourteen students will come  from each region, in
              teams of two or three from schools/school  districts in their respective
              regions.  The students will work  together for fifteen days at St. Norbert
              College in DePere,  Wisconsin.  2)Regional Summer Follow-up.  Following the
              fifteen-day  experience, students will participate in a five-day summer program
               held concurrently in each of the three regions.  This  component  links the
              students, their respective schools, designated mentors,  and industry/corporate
              sites and is designed to significantly  impact the interest and skill level of
              the participating students  in the fields of mathematics and the sciences.  The
              five-day  program sites are:  Great Lakes: St. Norbert College, DePere 
              Wisconsin, Southwest:  Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque,  New Mexico,
              and Southeast:  Pembroke State University, Pembroke  North Carolina.  3)
              Academic Year Follow-up.  The third component  is AISES' implementation of
              academic year follow-up to help ensure  that  the participants' interest and
              skill level is maintained and  strengthened.  The follow-up will be conducted
              through network  linkages between the student participants, their respective
              mentors  and schools, the regional sites, and AISES.      The M3 project will
              operate for three consecutive years.  ***
