Title       : Integration of Molecular Modelling into the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9450995

Award Number: 9450995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Devino   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy Samet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450995  Devino                                                    This project
              will integrate molecular modelling into the chemistry  curriculum at Dickinson
              College. A primary goal of our revised  curriculum is to blur the boundaries
              found in traditional chemistry  programs. The distinction between lecture and
              lab is blurred in the  one-semester, discovery-based introductory course. The
              intermediate  and upper level courses break down the traditional divisions
              within  the field of chemistry, reflecting the fact that real-world  problems
              in chemistry are best solved using an interdisciplinary  approach. This concept
              is further emphasized in the Integrated Lab  sequence for junior and senior
              chemistry majors, which includes  independent laboratory projects from
              overlapping areas of  chemistry. A second goal is to teach students to
              visualize  molecules, understand their physical properties and predict their 
              chemical reactivity. These tasks are central to all disciplines of  chemistry,
              and will be incorporated into each student's independent  research project. The
              primary goals will be accomplished through  purchase of: (1) student computers
              on which to run molecular  modelling software; (2) an instructor workstation
              for high-end  computational chemistry as well as demonstration purposes; and
              (3)  a file server plus additional accessories to network all of the 
              computers. State-of-the-art molecular modelling software and  hardware
              requested here, only recently accessible to the  undergraduate market, are the
              tools we propose to use as the  unifying theme in the curriculum. The
              incorporation of  sophisticated computer technology into our curriculum will
              help  prepare students for postgraduate education or employment  opportunities
              in chemistry.
