Title       : A Study of the Effect of Temperature on the Interfacial Properties of Liquid
               Crystal Films in the Presende of Competing Interactions (Materials Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9450118

Award Number: 9450118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luz J. Martinez-Miranda   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1762,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The molecular arrangement in a liquid crystal (LC) film differs in  the bulk
              compared to surfaces and interfaces.  An LC film deposited  onto a grooved
              substrate experiences a competition between the  aligning forces at the LC-air
              interface, which force the molecules  to align normal to the surface, and
              aligning forces at the LC-  substrate interface, which forces the molecules to
              align parallel  to the plane of the substrate.  In previous studies on smectic
              A  liquid crystal films, a critical thickness was measured beyond  which the
              long-range aligning forces from the groove interface  dominate over the
              short-range aligning forces imposed by the air-LC  interface.  There is a range
              in thicknesses, which spans  approximately 10um, where the competition between
              short-range and  long-range aligning forces is most pronounced. The aligning
              forces  are responsible for many pretransitional phenomena as well as  surface
              memory effects inside the films.  In this project, the  unstable region just
              above the critical thickness in smA droplets  will be studied as a function of
              temperature to ascertain the  interplay between short and long range aligning
              forces.  Attention  will be paid to the region immediately above the LC-solid
              substrate  interface.    Interactive activities consist of the following:  (1)
              teaching a  graduate course in liquid crystal physical properties, taught as 
              part of the Chemical Physics Interdisciplinary program at Kent  State
              University; and (2) organizing outreach activities for high  school students
              and first and second year college students.  This  second activity will include
              visits to area schools as well as the  development of demonstration kits.  A
              major goal is to convey the  interdisciplinary nature of liquid crystal
              research and of science  in general.
