Title       : Attachment Processes in Early Social and Emotional Development (Social
               Psychology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1994    
File        : a9450129

Award Number: 9450129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth K. DeMulder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Attachment theory proposes that the child's early attachment  relationships are
              fundamental influences on social and emotional  development.  The continuing
              challenge of this relatively young  research area is to elaborate and refine
              the concept of attachment  by developing measures and research designs that
              allow for greater  accuracy and specificity.  This research will contribute to
              this  effort by assessing individual differences in attachment security  beyond
              the infancy period in the home environment, and by examining  links between
              security and theoretically relevant child behaviors  and perceptions.   
              Patterns of attachment with mother will be investigated in relation  to
              internal representations of the mother-child attachment  relationship, of the
              self, and of peers, both in the home and in  the daycare/preschool.  The study
              will employ a short-term  longitudinal design, with data collected on 80
              children over two  years.  This project will dovetail with a larger
              longitudinal study  concerned with socialization of emotion and social
              competence with  peers.  The meshing of these two studies will provide a
              powerful  empirical data set with which to examine multiple interactive 
              factors in early social and emotional development.    Interactive activities
              include:  (1) teaching a graduate level  developmental psychopathology course
              not currently available at  George Mason; (2) organizing a series of seminars,
              presented by  women faculty in the science and engineering departments and
              guests  speakers, on the topic of "Becoming a Scientist; and (3)  coordinating
              a "Women in Science" research festival with poster  presentations by women
              graduate students, faculty members and  researchers from the National Institute
              of Health.  Other  activities include team-teaching developmental psychology
              seminar,  mentoring undergraduate students who are preparing senior theses, 
              and training and supervising graduate students in research  methodology.
