Title       : SSC: "MESA/Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9450438

Award Number: 9450438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227973             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Harold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Sacramento Fdn
	      6000 J Street
	      Sacramento, CA  95819    916/278-7381

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450438  Cal State U Sacramento  Sacramento, CA  Harold, James   
              "MESA/Summer Science Camp"    The California State University-Sacramento MESA
              program proposes to  conduct a 6-week commuter Summer Science Camp enrichment
              program  (MESA/Summer Science Camp) for sixty students each year in the 
              summers of 1994-96.  In addition to enrollment in core academic  enrichment
              courses (math, science, and language arts), the students  will become familiar
              with laboratory facilities, learn research  methodology, participate in
              laboratory projects, and interact with  computer hardware on a variety of
              software such as CADCAM, Word  Perfect, and the NASA Supercomputing Network
              located at the  Lawrence Livermore Laboratory.  Abstract reasoning and problen-
               solving skills will be emphasized.  The students will also have a  wide
              variety of real work exposure through job showing, site  visits, and industry
              sponsorship of meaninful hands-on research  projects.  During the school year
              there will be a number of follow-  up activities, such as Saturday Science
              Academy and Mathematics/  Science Fairs, to ensure that the Summer Science Camp
              participants  continue to develop an interest in mathematics and science
              thereby  making progress toward a scientific major option.    In addition to
              the academic core/research methodology phase of the  project, the 6-week 1994
              summer session will provide the  participants with training in scientific
              inquiry methods, PSAT test  preparation, introduction to scientific careers,
              and  leadership/public speaking training.  Participating students will  be
              selected from feeder junior high/middle schools in the nine  school districts
              comprising the Capitol Center MESA network.   Qualified/qualifiable students
              will be selected by the MESA Summer  Science Camp staff and MESA school-site
              advisors.  The pool of  applicants will be enrolled in courses leading to
              college  preparatory mathematics and science courses and/or have potential  as
              shown by science/math teachers recommendations; hav e an interest  in exploring
              science careers; and are eager to participate in  exciting hands-on science,
              math, and research projects.  The sixty  students will be grouped into two
              sections by grade level to  facilitate instruction and use of small group
              instruction made  possible by coordination with a MESA Math/Science Teacher
              Institute  with the same calendar dates as the MESA/Summer Science Camp.    In
              addition to the NSF funding, extensive resources have been  committed by
              industry, school districts, and the Capitol Center  MESA university sponsors,
              the University of California, Davis,  College of Engineering and the
              CSU-Sacramento School of Engineering  & Computer Science.  The small
              core-groups of student participants  will be made possible by the use of the
              teacher participants in a  Dwight D. Eisenhower Mathematics and Science Teacher
              Training  Grant.
