Title       : SSC: "Summer Science Camp "Camp Triple E" Extend, Explore, Excel"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9450464

Award Number: 9450464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lloyd I. Richardson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Melva L. Ware  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry F. Werner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Haynie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450464  U of Missouri  St. Louis, MO  Richardson, Lloyd, Edward Haynie,
              Melva Ware and Terry Werner    "Summer Science Camp "Camp Triple E" Extend,
              Explore, Excel"    The camp will operate for four weeks each summer during a
              three  year period, as a non-residential day camp program.  Enrollment  each
              summer will be 50 students.  The curriculum is inquiry-based.   Students
              entering 7th, 8th and 9th grades will conduct one major  group study and
              additional defined investigations at the St. Louis  Zoo, Science Center and
              Botanical Garden.  Campers and their  parents will interact with practicing SEM
              professionals in career  exploration activities.  The rational for this
              curriculum approach  is that all students should have the opportunity to be
              motivated by  the scientific discovery process.  Research (developing science 
              projects--doing science) can tap into natural curiosity.  This  "doing" allows
              students to learn processes (how to investigate)  that are fundamental to
              developing personal connection/commitment.   Personal commitment is key to
              understanding content.  (see  "Curriculum Models Coming Into Focus", 2061
              Today, American  Association for the Advancement of Science, Fall, 1991.)   
              Camp Triple E will be based at Crossroads School which is located  1/4 mile
              from Forest Park ( a multi-acre park which houses the St.  Louis Zoo, Art and
              History Museums, the Science Center and numerous  recreational facilities for
              biking, hiking, skating, ball playing,  etc.)  The Crossroads School was
              selected because no St. Louis  Public School buildings are air conditioned and
              none is equipped  with adequate lab facilities.  None of the cooperating 
              colleges/institutions has adequate space/facilities for a program  of the scope
              and duration of the summer camp.  A description of the  Crossroads school
              facilities is attached.      Project Goal:  The summer science camp is an
              essential activity is  the St. Louis region for increasing access to
              mathematics-based  careers for African, Hispanic and Native  American students.
               The  under-represented population in science in St. Louis is  predominantly
              African-American.  Camp Triple E will serve a  critical function in the
              continuum of mathematics and science  mastery/enrichment activities designed as
              the Comprehensive  Regional Center for Minorities (CRCM) "pipeline" supporting 
              students' movement from middle-school to undergraduate school as  SEM majors.  
                  ***
