Title       : RCMS: SENIOR UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH EXPERIENCE (SURE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9450482

Award Number: 9450482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daopu T. Numbere numbere@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colin O. Benjamin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Willie Iyoho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harvest L. Collier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Riordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9450482  Numbere    This proposal seeks to establish a Senior Undergraduate
              Research  Experience Program (SURE) at the University of Missouri-Rolla  (UMR).
               Junior and senior minority students majoring in engineering  and science will
              participate in a comprehensive and structured  program of quality research,
              mentoring and advising designed to  expose and interest them in research
              careers in engineering and  applied sciences.  This 4-year project will handle
              10 students  annually.  During the first 24 months, 10 UMR students will 
              participate annually.  The second 24 months will involve UMR  students as well
              as minority students from traditionally Black  universities in the Midwest and
              South that do not have graduate  programs or research activities of the caliber
              offered at UMR.    The program goal is to increase the number of students from 
              underrepresented minority groups pursuing research careers in  engineering and
              science.  Our strategy is to maximize students'  development of skills ranging
              from theoretical analysis to  practical hands-on laboratory experience.  Each
              month during the  spring semester of their junior year, SURE students will tour
              major  research facilities on campus and attend presentations made by  research
              faculty.  After that, the bulk of their activities will  involve doing research
              in collaboration with a faculty mentor and  graduate students, preparing a
              research paper, mentoring by a  researcher, discussing career plans with
              mentor, receiving  goal-setting training, and becoming familiar with careers in
               research.  SURE participants will receive feedback on their  performance
              monthly from their mentor.  Research assistantships  will be given.  Students
              will be expected to fulfill all agreed-  upon laboratory responsibilities, to
              submit a weekly electronic  mail journal, to prepare and present results of
              their project, and  to contribute to the evaluation of the program.  To enhance
              to the  impact of SURE, students will visit high schools from which UMR 
              attracts m inority engineering students and present their research  to a
              sophomore science class.    The university has pledged to support the SURE
              program by  cost-sharing in the amount of $127,768 over the 4 year period.  
              Other forms of support include providing needed laboratory  supplies, planning
              the continuance of the SURE activities following  NSF support, pursuing private
              funding sources, and coordinating the  activities.    A separate team of
              evaluators including a psychologist and engineer  will conduct the evaluation. 
              It will include weekly feedback from  participants in the form of journals,
              monthly reports from  mentors, and follow-up of all participants three months
              following  their participation.  Students' academic performance during and 
              their participation and their plans following graduation will  be interviewed
              on an annual basis.  Recommendations for improving  will be made and
              implemented on an ongoing basis.
