Title       : SSC: "Summer Science in Birmingham"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9450395

Award Number: 9450395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Froning   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marian Higginbotham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alabama School of Fine Art
	      1800 Eighth Avenue North
	      Birmingham, AL  35203    205/328-3143

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450395  Alabama School of Fine Arts  Birmingham, AL  Froning, Michael and
              Marian Higginbotham    "Summer Science In Birmingham"    The seeds of
              Participation in mathematics and science are sown at  an early age for all
              students.  These seeds whither for many young  people regardless of background.
               Minority students in urban  settings often face special difficulties which
              make success in math  and science problematic.  There is a crisis in the level
              of  participation in science-related careers by non-Asian minorities in  the
              United States.  Pressures on students to stay away from  difficult coursework
              in junior high school are too strong to  ignore.  The mission of the Alabama
              School of Fine Arts Mathematics  and Science Program includes spreading the
              word that success in  mathematics and science is a possibility and necessity
              for all  students.  Under a U.S. Department of Education grant the school  has
              expanded its outreach efforts for adults in the form of teacher  training and
              support programs.  This program provides equivalent  efforts for students.     
              Summer Science in Birmingham is a four-week Summer "camp" for fifty  minority
              students entering the eighth grade in the Birmingham City  Public Schools. 
              There will be twenty daily sessions, each from  8:30 am until 1:30 pm, lunch
              included.  During these sessions  students will be exposed to exciting
              scientific and mathematical  activities whose focus will be on motivation
              students to continue  their study of math and science all the way through high
              school.   At the same time as students are being motivated to study they will 
              assisted with skills and strategies to improve their performance in  their
              regular school programs and to make their study more  efficient.  There is no
              cost to the students for the program.    Goals of the program include the
              following: 1) to provide a four-  week Summer Science Camp for 50 minority
              students who are finishing  the seventh grade from the Birmingham City Schools;
              2) to provide  a curriculum that  will emphasize investigative activities in
              math  and science and provide support for basic skill weaknesses  discovered
              during the Camp; 3) to increase the participant  students' enthusiasm for
              mathematics and science; 4) to increase  participant students' awareness and
              knowledge of both the  historical and current roles of minority scientists and 
              mathematicians; 5) to provide an eight-session (once per month on  Saturday
              mornings) follow-up workshop series for the participants;  6) to offer the
              participants' teachers special programs and in-  school services during the
              following school year through the  already established ASFA Outreach program;
              and 7) to provide  knowledge of, and access to, programs for older students in
              science  and mathematics including possible admission to the ASFA  Mathematics
              and Science Program.  Participants in this Summer  Science camp will see
              science in action.  They will see people like  themselves being scientists and
              mathematicians.  They will become  "doers" of science and mathematics and
              active participants in their  own learning.  Teachers in the program will be
              mentors, not  lecturers.  Students will be learners, not listerners.  Success
              in  mathematics and science will be the focus of everyone in the  program.
