Title       : Hornomal Modification of Communication in Cultured Animal Cells (Biology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9450133

Award Number: 9450133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lee S. Ledbetter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Mary Lee Ledbetter's previous work has used simple assays to  measure the
              ability of cultured fibroblastic or epithelial cells to  share small
              cytoplasmic molecules through gap junctions.  This  cooperation can be
              inhibited by treatment of the cells with the  sodium-pump inhibitor ouabain. 
              When kidney-derived epithelial  cells are treated with the steroid hormone
              aldosterone, their  ouabain inhibition is reduced.  Recent work has suggested
              that  calcium changes mediate the effects of ouabain and that  aldosterone's
              action may involve an unusual mechanism independent  of the cytoplasmic
              mineralocorticoid receptor.    Tests will be carried out to determine whether
              ouabain and  aldosterone also modify the expression an/or distribution of 
              connexins, the gap junction protein, in cooperating cells.   Experimental
              approaches include:  connexin protein localization by  immunofluorescent
              staining in intact cells; expression of connexin  - specific RNA and protein
              and protein electrophoretic mobility in  cell extracts; and rapid changes in
              functional communication,  measured by dye injection.  These studies will not
              only provide a  more complete basis for understanding the interaction between 
              ouabain, aldosterone and cell communication, they will also provide  improved
              tools to study structure-function relationships in gap  junction communication
              for future work.    Interactive activities include participation in the core
              course for  first-year graduate students at The Scripps Research Institute.  
              This involves leading discussion sections, designing and  implementing
              laboratory experiences, and offering occasional  lectures in the course.
