Title       : Searching for Exciting States: Curricular Reform in Chemistry at MSU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1993   
File        : a9450690

Award Number: 9450690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stanley Pine                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley R. Crouch crouch@cem.msu.edu                      Ext. 229  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon L. Galloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450690  Crouch     Curricular changes are proposed that will introduce chemical
               principles in the context of relevant issues (the environment,  health care,
              utilization of energy, etc.).  Instead of teaching  chemical concepts in the
              conventional fashion (of  microscopic-to-  macroscopic), our approach will
              begin by  identifying the concepts associated with some chemical system; 
              thereafter, the system will be studied from the top down,  presenting and
              explaining chemical details on a "need-to-know"  basis.  These approaches will
              require using techniques that  significantly enhance the amount of active
              learning that will  take place in classrooms and laboratories, with a
              concomitant  emphasis on learning by doing rather than by listening.  There 
              will be extensive computer utilization for allowing interactive  independent
              study and self-testing, and for nomenclature,  chemical bonding, etc. 
              Appropriate uses of information  technologies will reduce dramatically the
              amount of time needed  for conventional classroom lecturing, and provide,
              instead,  time for identifying and understanding the unity, coherence,  and
              relevance of various chemical concepts.  Laboratory  settings will stress
              group-learning and team-oriented  experiments so that students may cooperate in
              solving  laboratory problems without merely following a cookbook, and in  some
              cases, without the costs of providing each student with a  full set of
              laboratory tools.  To plan a broad revision of the  curriculum, two types of
              workshops will be held.  Faculty from  small colleges, where innovative
              educational modes have already  been introduced, will be invited to the first
              workshop to  present ideas and discuss ways to implement such changes in the 
              environment of a large university.  A second  workshop will  invite
              participants form various Michigan State University  departments that require
              chemistry courses as part of their  curriculum.  This workshop will focus on
              planning actual course  outlines to better serve the needs of the  clients,
              while  maintaining the elements of the proposed curricular revisions.  ***y
