Title       : Active Learning Using Closed Labs: An Alternative Paradigm for Computer Science
               Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1994       
File        : a9450895

Award Number: 9450895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51889              (Estimated)
Investigator: Merry McDonald merry@mail.nwmissouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Null  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. Heeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Detmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwest Missouri State U
	      800 University Drive
	      Maryville, MO  644686001    660/562-1440

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450895  McDonald                                                  Using closed
              laboratory sessions as the vehicle for implementation,  this project develops
              an active learning environment for computer  science instruction in the first
              two courses in the major. Other  institutions will be able to replicate this
              environment. The  project demonstrates that closed laboratories can be used 
              effectively as the primary means of instruction in the first two  courses in
              the major and  provides an alternative teaching paradigm  that is more
              student-centered than the traditional lecture/listen  method. This paradigm
              focusses on the student as performer, rather  than the professor as performer.
              The professors role is  facilitator, guide, and manager. There is much current
              interest in  incorporating closed laboratories into the computer science 
              curriculum, but the investigators know of no other institution that  is
              committed to replacing most lecture/listen sessions with a  totally redesigned
              active learning environment based on the use of  closed laboratories.  Formal
              studies have shown that students learn  best in small groups. The closed
              laboratory materials and the  physical arrangement of the equipment is designed
              to promote  teamwork, and a major goal of the project is to help students learn
               to work effectively in teams. Lifelong learning skills will be  developed as
              the focus of activity centers on the student and  encourages her/him to share
              responsibility for the learning  process. The project can have a positive
              effect on attracting and  retaining women and minorities because of the
              emphasis on human  interaction and the de-emphasis on rote learning and
              memorization.
