Title       : PPD: Enhancement of Mathematics and Science for Fourth and Fifth Grade Native
               American Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1997  
File        : a9450071

Award Number: 9450071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1336552            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue A. Schmitt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary M. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey R. Knull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leigh D. Jeanotte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Fivizzani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1203,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450071    SCHMITT  The University of North Dakota proposes to implement a
              three-year  experimental program designed to increase science and math  studies
              for Native American students with disabilities who are in  the fourth and fifth
              grades.  The program will have participation  of staff from the College for
              Human Resources Development, the  Center for Teaching and Learning, the School
              of Engineering and  Mines, the College of Arts and Sciences, the Graduate
              School, and  Native American Programs.  The project is designed to increase 
              the awareness of parents, school personnel, college faculty, and  students of
              the educational and career options in math and  science open to Native American
              students with disabilities.   Efforts will be made to enhance the curriculum,
              teaching  strategies, hands-on and culturally-appropriate experiences, and 
              counseling options for these students.  Computers, the necessary  adaptive
              equipment, and training in their use will be made  available to the students. 
              The project will increase the team  building and liaisons among school
              personnel, college faculty,  parents, and professionals in math, science and
              engineering.   This interaction should result in permanent changes to the 
              infrastructure of the school system and the curriculum and  opportunities open
              to the students.  The project will involve a  summer institute for school
              personnel, parents, faculty, and  mentor/role models and two institutes
              involving these persons and  30 fourth and fifth grade disabled Native American
              students from  schools on or near reservations.  A hands-on, culturally 
              appropriate project will be designed and implemented in each  participating
              school.***
