Title       : AMP: AMP FOR THE GREATER PHILADELPHIA REGION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9450505

Award Number: 9450505
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4721957            (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. England  (Principal Investigator former)
              Antonio M. Goncalves  (Principal Investigator former)
              Corrinne Caldwell   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450505  England    The Alliance for Minority Participation (AMP) for the
              Greater Philadelphia Region is a five-year collaborative effort  of the
              Philadelphia Consortium/Partnership which is dedicated to doubling the number
              of underrepresented minority  students (African American, Hispanic, and Native
              American) receiving baccalaureate degrees in science,  engineering, and
              mathematics (SEM) and entering into graduate degree programs in SEM
              disciplines.    The Consortium consists of sixteen colleges/universities,
              metropolitan school districts, corporate partners, SEM  professional
              organizations, community groups, and educational support organizations
              established through the  implementation of the current Comprehensive Regional
              Center for Minorities (CRCM) funded by the National  Science Foundation. 
              Temple University will serve as fiscal agent for the Consortium.    The AMP
              will not only focus its efforts on retention in SEM at the undergraduate
              levels, but it will also place a  strong emphasis on the recruitment of
              students through early intervention mechanisms tied to pre-college initiatives 
              in the region.  Retention efforts will focus on improving the quality of the
              learning environment and the academic  performance of minority students using
              community-building principles which will emphasize collaborative learning 
              approaches, including group study and support, and positive and sustained
              interaction with faculty.    Eight institutions will lead the Consortium
              efforts:  Drexel University, University of Pennsylvania, Temple  University,
              University of Delaware, Cheyney University, Lincoln University, Community
              College of Philadelphia,  and PATHS/PRISM.  These institutions will strengthen
              and expand their own minority recruitment and retention  efforts, and use the
              knowledge gained from their experiences to expand effective practices to other
              Consortium  institutions and beyond.  This will be accomplished through the
              integration of three areas of concentration:    1)   Academic Enrichment which
              i ncludes pre-freshman bridge and minority undergraduate support programs,     
               curriculum review and development, and undergraduate research activities.   
              2)   Outreach/Transition Activities which includes an early identification
              mechanism, articulation programs and       graduate programs to promote the
              development of minority faculty, and scholarships.    3)   Industry Involvement
              which includes:  pre-professional employment programs, and career awareness    
                activities.    Lead institutions will participate in all project areas,
              exchange ideas and information, set specific group and  institutional
              objectives, and assist each other with program planning and delivery.    In
              addition to the assessment of all programmatic activities through the use of a
              database monitoring system all  institutions will be evaluated on their
              recruitment effectiveness and retention of minority students in SEM.  At 
              present, the SEM retention rates at consortium institutions range from 50% to
              80%.  Regularly scheduled regional  meetings, research conferences,
              newsletters, and electronic media and a resource center will be used to
              facilitate  networking and dissemination of information.    Through
              institutional cost sharing (one-to-one match), dedicated staff and SEM faculty
              support, and in-kind  contributions by Consortium institutions, the proposed
              activities will lead to improvements in the quality of the  learning
              environment for minority SEM students at Consortium institutions, and the
              development and implementation  of effective SEM recruitment and retention
              models.  The project will impact approximately 3,500 minority students  per
              year.
