Title       : Investigation of Vapor Phase Organic Coatings for High Reliability
               Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0099765

Award Number: 0099765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roya Maboudian maboudia@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,1468,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project will explore the anti-stiction effectiveness of a number
              of organic coatings deposited from vapor phase.  Vapor-phase processes would be
              environmentally friendlier and more economical than standard liquid-phase
              processes.  Furthermore, dry processes may well result easier to scale-up from
              research stage to production, due to the potential for easier control and
              better uniformity.  Because silicon has excellent mechanical properties, there
              is a growing interest in developing technologies that use silicon as a
              mechanical material.  One such technology, called surface micromachining,
              consists of deposition and selective etching of multiple layers of structural
              and sacrificial thin films, and is a core technological processes underlying
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).  Despite significant advances in surface
              micromachining, stiction remains a key problem, severely limiting the
              realization and reliability of many MEMS devices. 

The project will provide
              core training for a graduate student. The student will benefit from
              interdisciplinary training at the crossroads of surface science, electrical and
              mechanical engineering and materials science.  An additional pay-off is the
              achievement of higher reliability MEMS.  The PI will continue her ongoing
              commitment to education, including outreach activities to underrepresented
              groups, undergraduate research participation in the work to be performed,
              public presentations on the topics of microsystems technology and surface
              engineering, and active involvement in curriculum development on these
              topics.

