Title       : Sums of Banach-valued Random Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a0099414

Award Number: 0099414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Montgomery-Smith stephen@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research contains two projects. First, the principal investigator plans to
              investigate tail distributions of sums of Banach-valued independent random
              variables.  The principal investigator, with Pawel Hitczenko, already has many
              results concerning the case of real-valued random variables.  But now the
              principal investigator feels that there are also fundamental questions
              concerning the Banach-valued case, for which up until now there are only
              partial, albeit deep, results.  The second part of this proposal is to find new
              martingale inequalities.  This work, joint with his Ph.D. student Jerry Shen,
              will extend the celebrated inequalities of Burkholder, and also similar
              inequalities involving so called tangent sequences.

A single random event in
              and of itself is hard to predict.  But far more is known when the effect of
              many random events are averaged together.  This study of the sum of many
              different random variables goes back to the foundations of probability theory,
              including such celebrated results as the laws of large numbers and the central
              limit theorem, both foundational in the study of statistics, finding
              applications to any field, for example, medicine, in which single events are
              hard to predict.  Despite the long history of this study, there remain many
              questions still unanswered.  This work will be pure research, focusing on the
              fundamental aspects of this averaging behavior.

