Title       : Luminescent Polyelectrolytes for use in Biosensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0099843

Award Number: 0099843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Heeger ajh@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Luminescent polyelectrolytes exhibit enhanced fluorescence quenching
              ("superquenching") with very large Stern-Volmer quenching constants.  The
              superquenching arises from a combination of two effects.  First, it has been
              demonstrated that a single acceptor (functioning as an acceptor for
              photoinduced electron transfer) can quench the fluorescence emission from an
              entire macromolecule in aqueous solution.  Second, in aqueous solution, such
              luminescent polyelectrolytes are charged.  As a result, the positively charged
              acceptor and the anionic polymer form a weakly bound complex thereby enabling
              static superquenching.  The superquenching of the photoluminescence (PL) can be
              used for sensing biomolecules with specificity and with high sensitivity. 
              Thus, determining and controlling the magnitude of the Coulomb binding energy
              of the polymer/quencher complex is of particular importance to the use of
              luminescent polyelectrolytes in biosensor applications.  If the binding between
              the ligand tethered to the quencher and the analyte is smaller than that
              between the quencher and the polymer, the quencher/ligand cannot be effectively
              pulled away from the luminescent polymer.  In addition, the photoluminescence
              (PL) quantum efficiency is sensitive to the conformation of the polymer in
              solution.  It is known that polyelectrolytes can form stable complexes with
              oppositely charged amphiphilc molecules (surfactants).  Experiments have shown
              that addition of sufactant to solutions containing luminescent polyelectrolytes
              significantly increases the PL efficiency.  Thus, studies of the chain
              conformation of luminescent polyelectrolytes  is of clear scientific relevance
              and importance.
%%% 
This project is directed toward determining the chain
              conformation of luminescent polyelectrolytes and the magnitude of the Coulomb
              binding energy of the polymer: quencher complexes.  The luminescent
              polyelectrolytes to be studied include water soluble PPV derivatives and novel
              poly-lysine polymers (polypeptide chains with cyanine dyes in J-aggregate
              configuration attached as side-chains).  A series of quenchers with different
              charges have been developed and are available for these studies.  Quenching of
              PL will be studied by changing the ion concentration in buffered aqueous
              solutions, by changing the concentration of acceptors, and by varying the
              temperature.  The chain conformation of the luminescent polyelectrolytes will
              be determined (with and without quencher, surfactant etc), as a function of the
              Debye screening length (ion concentration) and as a function of molecular
              weight using light scattering and neutron scattering.

