Title       : Cooperative Research: Coastal Effects of Tsunamis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0099333

Award Number: 0099333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas E. Synolakis costas@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action provides support fora group research project focusing on specific
              aspects of tsunami coastal hazards mitigation.  To mitigate tsunami coastal
              hazards, the first priority is to improve the identification of the
              tsunami-inundation zone.  Recently, NOAA (National Oceanographic and
              Atmospheric Administration) has launched a comprehensive program to estimate
              potential inundation zones along the coastal areas of the Pacific States
              (California, Oregon, Washington, Alaska and Hawaii;
              http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/tsunami/time/).  The next level of mitigation strategy
              is to reduce loss of life and property damage within the tsunami inundation
              zones by considering the runup process in detail: flow patterns, induced
              forces, the impact of debris and floating objects, and their implication for
              improved design of waterfront structures and decisions concerning land
              use.

The five primary objectives are to:
Understand the fundamental
              turbulence phenomena associated with tsunami runup and its effects on tsunami
              forces on structures and scouring;
Improve the prediction capability of
              tsunami runup models, by more accurately including the effects of dispersion
              and wave breaking;
Achieve a practical means of describing the complex runup
              flows within the context of their interactions with structures, trees and other
              typical complex coastal features (e.g. dunes, earthen dikes and river
              intlets);
Develop benchmark problems and their solutions for validating
              numerical models and for determining the adequacy of different approximations
              for different applications in tsunami hazard reduction;
Develop scenarios
              focusing on four interrelated issues: single and multiple structures
              (rectangular and cylindrical forms), porous media, missiles/debris impacts, and
              scouring.

The project involves researchers from Cornell University, Southern
              Methodist University, the University of Southern California, the University of
              Washington, GeoEngineers, Inc., Seattle, and a Professor Emeritus from Harvard
              University.  In addition, it includes collaboration on scouring during tsunami
              runup with researchers at Japan's Public Works Research Institute (PWRI), using
              PWRI's large and unique experimental facility.

