Title       : Collaborative Research: Combining rRNA Probes and Cell Cycle Analyses to
               Investigate In Situ Growth Rates of Eukaryotic Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0099078

Award Number: 0099078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312662             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Virginia Armbrust armbrust@ocean.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the project is to assess both species diversity and the distribution
              of growth rates among eukaryotic phytoplankton populations under natural
              conditions. Relatively little is known about phytoplankton species composition
              in any particular sample of seawater, let alone the growth rates of those
              species. The wide range of growth rates and responses to environmental
              conditions observed for phytoplankton has obvious implications for species
              succession and the efficiency of the biological puinp. The investigators will
              focus on eukaryotic phytoplankton because these cells are responsible for the
              bulk of production in many regions, including most marine phytoplankton blooms.
              They will employ a three-tiered approach that combines: 1) high-throughput DNA
              sequencing and fragment analyses to allow us to determine species diversity and
              to design species-specific rRNA-targeted probes for ecologically relevant
              organisms; 2) a newly emerging class of molecular phylogenetic probes known as
              peptide nucleic acids (PNAs), which are highly sensitive and relatively easy to
              design and use; and 3) flow cytometric cell cycle analyses of PNA-labeled cells
              to determine intrinsic growth rates of targeted species.

Since the division
              cycles of most phytoplankton are phased to the daily light:dark cycle, the
              intrinsic growth rate of a population can be determined by monitoring DNA cell
              cycle distributions over a diel period. If the flow cytometric signature
              (pigment fluorescence/light scatter characteristics) of the organism in
              question is sufficiently distinctive (as with the prokaryotic picoplankter
              Prochlorococcus), DNA distributions (measured with a fluorescent stain) in
              natural samples can provide growth rates at the species level. Direct flow
              cytometric analyses of eukaryotic phytoplankton cell cycling are not practical
              because multiple species in a given sample typically have similar morphology
              and flow cytometric signatures, but different amounts of DNA or cell division
              timing. Therefore, the investigators will selectively analyze cells of
              particular species by using fluorescentlylabelled PNA rRNA probes. Target
              species will be chosen from among the phytoplankton present at diel sampling
              sites in coastal and open ocean waters. They will extract DNA from
              phytoplankton purified either by flow cytometric cell sorting or size
              fractionation and amplify eukaryotic rDNA using PCR. A combination of terminal
              restriction fraction length polymorphism (T-RFLP) analysis and the sequencing
              of 18S clone libraries generated from selected sites will be used to select
              species of interest for further study. Specific rRNA probes to selected species
              will then be designed. The invetigators will use fluorescently-labeled PNA
              probes, in conjunction with DNA staining and dual-beam flow cytometry, to
              obtain cell cycle (and thus growth rate information for target species). In
              addition to speciesTm growth rates, these analyses will provide new
              perspectives on the distribution and diversity of eukaryotic phytoplankton in
              the sea and will improve our capabilities to address a variety of oceanographic
              questions on ecologically relevant scales.

