Title       : Lattice and Continuum Studies of Fluids and Fluid Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0099541

Award Number: 0099541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. G. Lipson jane.lipson@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0099541
Lipson
This grant, jointly funded by the Materials Theory Program in
              DMR and the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in CHE, is targeted
              at understanding the correlation between microscopic structure and macroscopic
              behavior for fluids and their mixtures.   The research tools are theoretical,
              but a major thrust of the research is to make connections and comparisons with
              experimental data both for small-molecule and polymeric fluids.  In addition, a
              real opportunity afforded by this work is the ability to compare the results
              for the lattice and continuum models using the same theoretical
              approach.

The behavior of complex fluids has been of high interest in recent
              years, stimulated by the increasingly sophisticated kinds of measurements
              accessible to researchers.  In addition, the ability to simulate mixtures of
              dense fluids has expanded dramatically within the last decade.  Thus, more data
              capable of testing statistical mechanical theories are appearing, particularly
              for complex liquid mixtures.  The research here involves the Born-Green-Yvon
              (BGY) integral equation technique.  Using the BGY formalism, descriptions of
              lattice and continuum systems have been derived, and comparisons between the
              results using the two have been initiated.  The lattice theory yields
              closed-form expressions for thermodynamic quantities of interest.  The
              advantages of lattice theory include its accessibility to non-theorists, and
              the ability to test it using lattice simulation results on relatively complex
              fluids and mixtures, which are more plentiful than continuum simulation data. 
              The continuum theory is capable of tackling more subtle issues involving the
              interplay between local structure and bulk properties.  However, continuum
              solutions involve numerical methods, and simulation data on mixtures are not
              yet plentiful.  As indicated above, the development of analogous lattice and
              continuum theories yields the possibility of determining what kinds of
              equilibrium properties are expected to be sensitive to the imposition of a
              lattice constraint.  

In the current grant, the lattice studies will focus
              on developing an understanding of polymer solutions and blends, building on the
              demonstrated ability of the lattice BGY theory to describe simple alkane fluids
              and mixtures and hydrocarbon polymer solutions and blends.  This work will
              involve analysis of data, including (new to this effort) small angle neutron
              scattering results, in order to obtain the characteristic microscopic
              parameters.  Having determined what minimum data set is required to
              characterize a system, the goal is to predict less accessible properties, such
              as the pressure dependence of the coexistence curve.  Such information is
              important, for example in deciding on processing conditions.  The BGY theory is
              also capable of probing the effects of structural and energetic differences on
              miscibility in an effort to understand at a more sophisticated level the
              balance between the two.

On the continuum side, recent research by this
              group has shown that the BGY theory is effective in describing such phenomena
              as chain collapse and the contraction of a hard-sphere chain in a hard-sphere
              solvent.  The research will focus on dense fluids and mixtures which interact
              via a square-well potential.  This potential is of interest because it is
              simple, yet capable of capturing the essential physics of real fluids.  This
              potential has been used in making the first lattice-continuum comparisons,
              finding (among other things) that the scaling relationship between chain
              dimensions and chain length exhibits universal behavior.  Future work will test
              the ability of a square-well fluid to serve as a model for alkanes, allowing a
              comparison with BGY lattice studies on n-alkanes. 

This connection between
              lattice and continuum will enable a 'meta' study on n-alkanes, involving both
              theories as well as simulation and experimental data.  A major question is
              whether analogous results may be obtained using lattice and continuum BGY
              theories and, if so, what level of sophistication is required.  Another issue
              is whether it is desirable to leave the theoretical development at different
              stages in the lattice and continuum, sacrificing subtlety for ease of use on
              the lattice, and accessibility for the ability to describe more complex systems
              in the continuum.
%%%
This grant, jointly funded by the Materials Theory
              Program in DMR and the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in CHE,
              is targeted at understanding the correlation between microscopic structure and
              macroscopic behavior for fluids and their mixtures.   The research tools are
              theoretical, but a major thrust of the research is to make connections and
              comparisons with experimental data both for small-molecule and polymeric
              fluids.  In addition, a real opportunity afforded by this work is the ability
              to compare the results for the lattice and continuum models using the same
              theoretical approach.
***



