Title       : Integration of Adaptive Technology and Clinical Assessment into Mathematics at
               MU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0099216

Award Number: 0099216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Holliday hollidayg@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darren L. Gabbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stamatis Dostoglou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0099216  
Institution: University of Missouri at
              Columbia
Principal Investigator: Gregory Holliday
Title: "INTEGRATION OF
              ADAPTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND CLINICAL
ASSESSMENT INTO
              MATHEMATICS"

ABSTRACT

The Department of Mathematics of the University of
              Missouri - Columbia (MU) in a unique collaboration with the university's
              Adaptive Computing Technology (ACT) Center and the Assessment and Consultation
              Clinic (ACC), proposes to create a highly supportive mathematics learning
              environment for students with learning disabilities (LD).  

The project will
              ensure retention and success in mathematics for students with LD by:  
1. 
              enabling students with LD to amplify and successfully apply intact cognitive
              processes by using adaptive computing technology (ACT);  
2.  increasing
              institutional capacity of the MU Department of Mathematics to effectively
              identify and instruct students with LD; and by  
3.  developing field
              placement opportunities to support successful school-to-work transitions. 
              

Success in mathematics depends on perceiving, processing, retaining,
              retrieving, and applying complex information.  A deficiency in any of these
              capacities places students with LD at high risk for failure.  Often, students
              have more than sufficient cognitive capacity to comprehend mathematical
              concepts and master essential skills if they have appropriate classroom and
              testing accommodations.  While technologies exist to compensate for weak
              processing capacities in students with LD, such technologies are of little
              benefit if they are not appropriately customized to the student or effectively
              utilized in the classroom.  In addition, the link between specific learning
              disabilities and appropriate compensatory technology, especially as applied to
              postsecondary students enrolled in mathematics coursework, has been largely
              conjectural.  Instructors and students have therefore underused this strategy. 
              Postsecondary success of students with disabilities has remained
              unsatisfactory.  The proposed model for mathematics instruction of
              postsecondary students with LD will consist of:

1. Enhancement of
              mathematics instructors' awareness of LD and how to effectively teach       
              students with LD through collaborative trainings offered by the ACT Center and
              the ACC;
 
2. Collaboration between the ACC and ACT Center to link specific
              LDs to appropriate technology; 

3. Integration of the technology
              accommodations of the ACT Center into mathematics curriculum and
              instruction;

4. Collaboration among all three units (ACT Center, ACC, and
              Department of Mathematics) to identify placement opportunities and maximize
              student learning opportunities in the workplace. 

