Title       : Social Trust and Confidence: A Dual Mode Model of Cooperation in Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0099278

Award Number: 0099278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Earle timearle@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We trust others to gain the benefits of cooperation.  In the business
world,
              trust supports interfirm alliances, acceptance of organizational
change, the
              transfer of knowledge, and more.  In public life, trust
underlies voting for
              candidates and support for government initiatives. 
In private life, trust
              guides relations among patients, physicians, and
medical organizations.  
              Given this clear, pervasive importance of trust
to our lives, it is not
              surprising that it has become the focus of a
growing body of research
              activity.  The goal of our project is to test a
new model of social trust
              within the applied context of environmental
risk management.  Our model
              differs from others by clearly
distinguishing social trust from confidence as
              separate, but
interacting, paths to cooperation.  Social trust is based on
              judgments
of values or intentions; confidence is based on judgments of
              past
performance.  Social trust is associated with uncertainty and risk;
              it
is required when confidence fails.  Confidence is the normal state
              of
affairs, sometimes lost when performance is judged to be bad,
              but
restorable through the establishment of social trust.  Social trust is
              a
bridge between steady states; it has primacy and control over
confidence. 
              Our model has clear, practical implications for the
practice of risk
              management: attempts to communicate about performance
(i.e., the management of
              risk) should be preceded by the establishment
of social trust relations.  The
              state of trust relations conditions the
interpretation of performance
              information.  In a state of distrust,
presumably good performance information
              is discounted and does not lead
to confidence.  Similarly, in a state of
              trust, presumably bad
performance information does not lead to the loss of
              confidence.  Social
trust, according to our model, is resilient, and helps us
              to remain
confident in the lives we lead; it can be progressive or
              conservative. 
Our research project will provide a test of this model of
              social trust
and confidence in risk management, improving our understanding,
              moving
us closer to the goal of using social trust to improve our lives.

