Title       : NSF-EC Activity: Integration of New Hybrid Materials Containing Biomolecules for
               the Fabrication of Optical Sensor Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0099862

Award Number: 0099862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1260000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nasser Peyghambarian nnp@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce S. Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey I. Zink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ghassan e. Jabbour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Descour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1734,5914,5980,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is an interdisciplinary, collaborative, and international program
              between the University of Arizona Optical Sciences Center (OSC), the Department
              of Materials Science and Engineering at UCLA, and European-Union researchers.
              The program is directed at creating and developing the materials, the
              fabrication processes, and the components needed to demonstrate an integrated,
              optoelectronic system-on-a-chip capable of multifunctional sensing of chemical
              and biological agents. The UCLA research involves the development of sol-gel
              glasses doped with biomolecules that can be used as opto-chemical transducers
              that exploit the sensitivity and selectivity of antibodies and enzymes. The
              chemical and biochemical changes of the encapsulated biomolecules can be
              monitored by optical methods. The research will encompass the development of
              light sources, photodetectors, and micro-optical systems based on hybrid
              
organic/inorganic materials. The students will receive more than simply
              "exposure" because they will gain hands-on experience in areas of materials
              synthesis, processing, spectroscopy, device fabrication and 
operation, as
              well as system integration. The interdisciplinary nature of  this collaboration
              will also provide the students with a fundamental understanding of
              synthesis-property relationships for hybrid optical materials and their
              applications in chemical and biological sensing.

This proposal is an
              interdisciplinary, collaborative and international program directed at creating
              and developing the materials, the fabrication processes, and the components
              needed to demonstrate an integrated, optoelectronic system-on-a-chip capable of
              sensing chemical and biological agents. The program consists of two components:
              (1) research and development of chemical and biomedical sensing materials based
              on the sol-gel encapsulation of biomolecules and (2) research and development
              of optical sensing techniques that capitalize on the optical properties of the
              sensing materials. The program will provide strong educational benefits to
              participating undergraduate and graduate student researchers and make them
              competitive in the world economy. The breadth of the research and our proposed
              international training program will ensure that the students will not only
              become experts in their own field of specialization, but that they also will
              achieve a detailed understanding of the entire sensor system. The 
students'
              knowledge will encompass the fundamental chemical and physical science and
              engineering of the transducer and optical system, and the realities of device
              fabrication. This project is being co-funded by the Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences Directorate (Office of Multidisciplinary Affairs, Division of
              Materials Research, Chemistry Division) and the Engineering Directorate
              (Chemical and Transport Systems Division).

