Title       : U.S.-Hungary Materials Research: Effects of Polymer Architecture on the
               Aggregation Behavior of Amphiphilic Block Copolymers in Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0099682

Award Number: 0099682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37327              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf Faust Rudolf_Faust@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5916,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              INT 0099682
Faust, Rudolf

This U.S.-Hungarian research project between
              Rudolf Faust at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, and his partner Miklos
              Zsuga of Lajos Kossuth University, Debrecen, features synthesis of novel
              amphiphilic block copolymers with non-linear architectures by living cationic
              polymerization and the study of architectural effects on their aggregation
              behavior.  Building upon their previously developed methodologies that employ
              static light and dynamic light scattering, the researchers intend to
              investigate the architectural effects on structural parameters such as
              aggregation number, overall size, core, and shell dimensions of block copolymer
              micelles in water at different temperatures. Their results may yield some
              relatively inexpensive amphiphiles and non-ionic surfactants with many
              potential applications, but for which structure must be better understood to
              optimize performance.

Above the critical micelle concentration in dilute
              aqueous solutions, amphiphilic block copolymers self-assemble into micelles
              with a hydrophobic insoluble core and a hydrophilic shell.  The U.S.-Hungarian
              team maintains that block copolymer architecture (star-shaped, H-shaped, graft
              etc.) is an important parameter in micelle formation.  With this in mind, they
              intend to synthesize non-linear block architectures consisting of hydrophobic
              polyisobutylene (PIB) and hydrophilic poly(methyl vinyl ether) (PMeVE)
              segments. They expect resulting amphiphilic star-block copolymers to serve as
              model polymers for characterizing architecture/property relationships of
              macromolecular amphiphiles and non-ionic surfactants. 

This polymer research
              project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
              enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
              complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
              interest and competence.
