Title       : Capacity Expansion under Forecast Uncertainty: Stochastic Integer Programming
               Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a0099726

Award Number: 0099726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shabbir Ahmed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The project is aimed at the development of optimization techniques for planning
              capacity expansions when forecasted planning data are unreliable.  Stochastic
              programming has emerged as an important tool for solving planning problems with
              data uncertainties.  In capacity expansion problems, however, the integral
              nature of strategic decisions prevents the use of standard decomposition
              approaches that have been successful for stochastic linear programs.  This
              project will develop efficient solution strategies for stochastic integer
              programs arising in capacity expansion applications.  A key component of the
              project will be to identify special problem structures that can be exploited
              within solution strategies.  The structural results will be used to design,
              analyze, and implement approximate and exact solution algorithms. The viability
              of the developed methodology will be demonstrated in important economic sectors
              such, as semiconductor wafer fabrication facilities and web hosting
              enterprises.

Capacity expansion to meet anticipated demand growth is a key
              strategic concern in all industrial sectors. In high growth-high volatility
              industries, such as the IT sector, uncertainties in forecasts for costs,
              demands, and technology evolution, and the economies-of-scale in expansion
              costs make capacity expansion decisions very complex.  Using stochastic integer
              programming concepts, this research project will develop an optimization based
              paradigm for aiding capacity expansion that explicitly address forecast
              uncertainty.  If successful, the project will provide robust computational
              techniques to aid strategic capacity planning in a wide variety of industries.
              It is also anticipated that insights gained from this research will
              significantly advance the current state-of-the-art in solving multi-stage
              stochastic integer programs.

