Title       : Interfacial Investigations and Process Innovations in the Near Net-Shape
               Manufacturing of Aluminum/Ceramic Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0099771

Award Number: 0099771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian S. Mitchell brian@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to produce a novel class of aluminum matrix
              nanocomposites with superior structural and corrosion-resistance properties
              that can be manufactured rapidly and uniformly. The nanocomposites are formed
              by first producing aluminum and mullite nanoparticles using high-energy ball
              milling (mechanical attrition).  The nanocrystalline powders are then processed
              to near net-shape composites using Hot Isostatic Pressing (HIP). Further, the
              incorporation of design innovations to improve the speed and uniformity with
              which these nanocomposites are formed are being investigated.  Specific tasks
              include the development and evaluation of a fluidized bed process for the
              continuous milling of nanocrystalline materials.  Oxidative milling will be
              incorporated in the fluidized bed process in order to form intimate mixtures of
              nanocrystalline aluminum and ceramic, that can then be further processed via
              HIP.
 
Characterization of the interfacial, mechanical, and corrosion
              properties of nanocrystalline mullite-reinforced nanocrystalline aluminum
              matrix composites will be conducted. Mechanical properties are to be
              characterized using nanoindentation and traditional tensile testing.  Corrosion
              studies will be carried out to determine the effects of nanocrystallinity on
              chemical resistance. The project will provide research experiences for
              undergraduates involved in the Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation
              (LAMP). It is expected that LAMP students from Dillard, Southern and Xavier
              will participate and be encouraged to pursue advanced degrees. 
