Title       : Collaborative Research: Robust Strategies for Cross-Training Call Center Agents
               - Taxonomy, Models, and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0099803

Award Number: 0099803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seyed M. R. Iravani iravani@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research on strategies for cross-training and call/agent assignment is a
              ripe research topic that promises not only scientific innovation, but also a
              significant step forward in call center managerial practice and performance. 
              This research has the potential to impact call center agents through increased
              career development and quality of life and help organizations with call centers
              through improved practices that lead to improved profitability.  Moreover, it
              will increase the quality of service experienced by the users of call centers,
              which includes nearly the entire population. Within the last decade, call
              centers have become a large service industry employing roughly 3-4 million
              Americans, growing at about 10% annually, according to Data Monitor.  The
              operational management of call centers, which is a notoriously difficult task,
              has developed to the point where the technology is already available to
              dynamically route incoming calls to the most suitable customer service
              representative (CSR), or agent, based upon their skills and training. Much more
              than convenience and profit are at stake. Critical emergency services such as
              911, police, ambulance, and fire dispatching depend upon call centers and have
              experimented with cross-training call center agents to handle multiple call
              types.  In response to these pressing needs, this project develops innovative
              approaches to setting effective strategies for determining which agents to
              cross-train for more than one task as well as how to best assign calls to them.
               The principal investigators have interacted with industrial call center
              managers and software solution providers to maximize the impact of this
              work

This research will construct a detailed, conceptual classification
              scheme for call center environments that identifies key characteristics germane
              to the selection of a cross training strategy.  It will create and analyze a
              series of mathematical models that predict the performance of various
              cross-training patterns utilizing skills-based call routing and provide insight
              into the factors that determine their efficacy from a cost/benefit perspective
              as well as the system's response performance. The analysis will use tools that
              include queuing theory, Markov decision processes, discrete event systems
              theory, and simulation.  The anticipated results of this research are:  (1)
              managerial insights that greatly deepen the understanding of which systems will
              benefit from cross-training and a suitable strategy for implementation;  (2)
              CSR (Customer Service Representative) cross-training strategies that are
              robustly effective across a wide range of call centers;  (3) useful analytical
              models for the analysis and design of agile work systems; and (4) extensions of
              the queuing technology base to include broad classes of systems where servers
              operate in new and complex ways based on their skill sets.   Upon
              implementation, the results will impact users of call centers with increased
              quality of service, agents through increased career development and quality of
              life, and firms (small, medium, and large call centers) through improved
              management practices.

