Title       : Toward a Realistic Estimate of Sea-Level Rise and Global Water Balance Due to
               Glacier Wastage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a0099236

Award Number: 0099236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Dyurgerov dyurg@tintin.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Bahr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark F. Meier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The potential environmental, social, and economic impacts of rising sea levels
              are serious.  A major potential source of water to the world's oceans that
              would result in sea-level rise is from melting of the world's glaciers.  This
              research project will examine the contributions of meltwater from all of the
              world's glaciers except the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets in the recent
              past and potential contributions in the future.  The investigators will model
              results from mass-balance time series for different glaciers to the middle of
              the 20th century using observational data, repeated geodetic and mapping
              surveys, and aerial photographs.  Statistical analyses will help determine
              teleconnections in glacier volume change between glaciated regions and relate
              these to teleconnections in climate.  Static sensitivities of glacier mass
              balances to air temperature and precipitation change will be calculated using
              long-term records and glaciological data averaged by mountain ranges. 
              Stochastic scaling and percolation theory will be used to estimate the number
              and size of glaciers and relationships among glacier area, volume, and response
              times.  Expected outcomes of the project include greatly improved information
              and understanding of changes in glacier volume, which affect sea level and the
              global water balance, improved information on large-scale patterns of climate,
              and evidence of climate change as revealed by glaciers.  Project results will
              be used by several world meteorological programs, including the Global Climate
              Observation System (GCOS), and also the United Nations Environmental Program
              (UNEP), Global Environmental Monitoring System (GEMS), World Glacier Monitoring
              Service (WGMS), and the National Snow and Ice Data Center in Boulder.

There
              are significant social and economic reasons for improving capabilities to
              project future sea-level rise.  A major fraction of the world's population and
              the world's most valuable real estate are at elevations within a few meters of
              sea level.  Local effects like reductions in the sediment discharge of large
              rivers and subsidence caused by pumping water or oil out of the ground are
              exacerbated by sea-level rise.  Improved estimates of sea-level rise based on
              better understandings of the contributions of melting glaciers to global ocean
              volume therefore will be important for land-use planning, coastal-zone
              management, and other social, political, and economic processes that are at
              risk.  This study will produce a greatly improved estimate of changes in
              glacier ice volume which affects sea level and the water balance between land
              and ocean; significant new information on regional and temporal patterns of
              glacier-climate interactions, and algorithms for extending these results in
              studies of climate and glaciers in the past; regional information on changes in
              runoff to be expected as a result of global warming in those areas where the
              runoff is largely derived from glacier wastage, such as closed drainage basins
              in South America and Central Asia; improved information on large-scale patterns
              of climate and climate change as revealed by glaciers, and new scientific
              advances on the mathematical treatment of incomplete data sets.

