Title       : Synthesis and Evaluation of Perylenebisimide-Derived Donor-Sigma-Acceptor
               Molecules as Electrical Rectifiers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0099674

Award Number: 0099674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniell L. Mattern mattern@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Metzger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Aviram-Ratner model of orbital energy levels predicts that monolayer arrays
              of Donor Sigma-Acceptor (D-?-A) molecules will pass electrons in only one
              direction, that is, D-?-A molecules should be able to rectify electricity. In
              this project a new class of materilas incorporating  perylenebis(dicarboximide)
              as a new D-?-A acceptor, and/or a related tetralkylperylene as a new D-?-A
              donor, will be prepared and evaluated as potential rectifiers of electrical
              current. The molecular orbital levels of these groups are well situated for the
              D-?-A task. The perylene-based donors and acceptors have two synthetic handles,
              allowing the convenient attachment of the -?- bridge between them, as well as
              "tails" to the other ends. These tails are required both to improve solubility
              and to permit the formation of the monolayers required to evaluate
              rectification. Monolayer films will be controlled to form in either the D-?-A
              or A-?-D orientation by the appropriate selection of tails. The relatively
              polar polyethyleneglycol (PEG) tails proposed for some targets should improve
              current flow compared to nonpolar alkyl tails. Whereas rectification has been
              reported recently from D-?-A multilayers as well as from D-?-A monolayers, the
              Aviram-Ratner model properly applies to D-?-A monolayers. The proposed research
              will test these systems. . The D-?-A targets will be synthesized at the
              University of Mississippi, and will be evaluated for film-formation and
              electrical properties at the University of Alabama.
%%%
The investigation of
              molecular-scale rectification is of far-reaching practical interest  because it
              could lead to greatly miniaturized electronic devices. This is an important
              goal  in the world of nanoelectronics. This project provides a significant
              opportunity for substantial advancements in the training of young minority
              scientists from Mississippi and Alabama. 

