Title       : Colorings and List Colorings: Contrasts and Similarities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0099608

Award Number: 0099608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandr V. Kostochka kostochk@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A(n ordinary) proper coloring of a (hyper)graph is an assignment of colors to
              the vertices of this hypergraph in such a way that no edge becomes
              monochromatic.  The chromatic number of a hypergraph is the minimum number of
              colors used in a proper coloring.  Finding proper colorings using only few
              colors can be useful in many applications.  The assignment of colors can model
              resource allocation; the edges represent conflicts in usage of resources. 
              Areas of application include scheduling, database access, assignment of
              computer registers, data clustering, computer aided design of printed circuits,
              positional games, DNA sequencing, etc.  The more general model of list coloring
              allows to restrict the colors available for each vertex.  Each vertex is
              assigned a list of available colors.  The color for each vertex must be chosen
              from its list, but the constraints imposed by edges must still be satisfied by
              the chosen coloring.  List coloring can be used to model problems such as
              extension of colorings of subgraphs.  The list chromatic number of the
              hypergraph is the minimum k such that whenever all lists have size at least k,
              it is possible to choose a proper coloring from the assigned lists. A proper
              coloring with k colors can be considered as a list coloring with all the lists
              of vertices being the same (of size k).  Thus, the list chromatic number of a
              hypergraph always is at least the chromatic number.  Although one might think
              that the most difficult case of list coloring is when all the lists are the
              same (giving more conflicts for colors), this is not always the case.  Vizing
              and Erdos, Rubin, and Taylor gave examples of 2 colorable graphs with
              arbitrarily large list chromatic number.  On the other hand, in some classes of
              (hyper)graphs the list chromatic number behaves similarly to the (ordinary)
              chromatic number.

The main thrust of this project is to explore the analogs
              for list coloring of many results about ordinary coloring.  The issue is under
              what conditions there are similar bounds for related list coloring and coloring
              problems.  Upper bounds on coloring parameters can lead to efficient
              algorithms; lower bounds impose limits on what can be accomplished.  One
              question is when the list chromatic number actually equals the chromatic
              number.  Another is how many edges are needed to form a (hyper)graph with a
              given chromatic number, subject to various additional conditions; here a list
              coloring analogue will also be explored.  For classes of graphs obtained using
              intersections of geometric objects of special types, bounds on (list) chromatic
              number in terms of the maximum number of pairwise adjacent vertices are sought.
               Many coloring problems have analogs using lists, and this project will begin
              the exploration of many of these list coloring problems.  For example, many
              generalized coloring parameters have bounded values on important classes of
              graphs such as the  planar graphs (those that embed in the plane without edge
              crossings).  Do such colorings still exist when the vertices are assigned color
              lists of bounded size?  Most of the work is planned to be done jointly with
              Douglas B. West (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)

