Title       : Spatial and Temporal Analyses Applied to Understanding Racial Socioeconomic
               Disparities in the Location of Environmental Hazards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0099123

Award Number: 0099123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Mohai pmohai@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Studies demonstrate that pollution, locally unwanted land uses, and other
              environmental hazards disproportionately burden low-income and minority
              communities.  However, most studies provide "snap-shot" information about the
              current distribution of environmental hazards by socioeconomic status and race.
               They do not explain the processes by which disproportionate environmental
              burdens occur.  Building on a pilot study of commercial hazardous waste
              facilities in Michigan and the Great Lakes region, this project examines past
              socioeconomic and racial disparities and changes over time for the full nation.
               In so doing, it overcomes several difficult methodological problems concerning
              measurement of geographic location and identification of bi-directional causal
              influences.

Specifically, the project uses longitudinal data aided by
              Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology to examine demographic and
              housing variables at or near the time of siting for commercial hazardous waste
              facilities and transporters for the years from 1970 to 2000.  It pays careful
              attention to identifying accurate locations of the facilities that can be
              mapped and analyzed using GIS software, and measuring demographic and housing
              changes that occur before and after the sitings.  The results evaluate
              competing arguments that present-day disparities reflect pre-siting demographic
              and racial characteristics of communities, or post-siting demographic changes
              in areas with hazardous facilities and transporters.  The results also identify
              differences in the processes across regions of the nation.  These improvements
              in data and methodology shed light on the processes that produce environmental
              inequality, and contribute to policies to ameliorate such inequality.

