Title       : Gravitational Physics from the Cosmic Microwave Background
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0099493

Award Number: 0099493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1785000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyman A. Page page@pupgg.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne T. Staggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Wilkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1243      GRAVITATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professors Lyman Page, Suzanne Staggs, and David Wilkinson will measure
minute
              variations in the temperature and polarization of the cosmic
microwave
              background radiation (CMB). The CMB is now widely accepted as
the remnant
              radiation from the fiery big bang. It is the oldest light
in the universe and
              may be thought of as a fossil of the cosmic
conditions that gave rise to such
              objects as galaxies. The CMB has
cooled with the expansion of the universe so
              that it now emits
predominantly in the microwave region of the spectrum. The
              research
focuses on two open questions:  to what degree is the CMB polarized
              and
how does the intensity of the radiation vary from position to position
on
              the sky on angular scales of order a tenth the size of the moon.
Both
              questions are pursued through the development of new
instrumentation coupled
              with new observational and data analysis
techniques.

Cosmology is in the
              midst of a revolution. Through new technologies and
techniques, coupled with
              theoretical advances, the physics of the
universe is being comprehended in
              ways only dreamt of a decade ago.
The CMB, already having played a central
              role in the current
understanding, is the premiere tool for making the next
              advances.
Measurements of the polarization and fine scale angular distribution
              of
the CMB directly address the following questions: what were the sources
of
              dynamism in the universe just 300,000 years after the big bang?
what are the
              properties of the new form energy, the recently discovered
"cosmological
              constant"? how exactly did the first cosmic structures
form? and how much of
              the universe is made of the material of
which we are made?
