Title       : Financial Crises: New Data, New Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0099031

Award Number: 0099031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Bordo bordo@fas-econ.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry J. Eichengreen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Financial crises are one of the dominant features of the 1990s. The fact that so
              many episodes of financial turbulence and distress have been packed into fewer
              than ten years points to what is new and troubling about our current economic
              and financial environment.  Or does it? The premise implicit in recent analyses
              - that the crisis problem is growing more severe - is just that: implicit.
              Virtually the entire recent literature on financial crises uses the same crisis
              dates for the same sample of developing countries for the same 25 years. We
              lack systematic, rigorous, quantitative comparisons of the last quarter century
              with earlier times and places. The goal of this project is therefore to
              construct a new database encompassing not just the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s but
              more than a century of historical experience. These historical data, for a
              substantial number of developed and emerging markets, allow this project to
              formulate more precise answers to the question of whether crises are growing
              more frequent and severe, and to construct more powerful tests of their
              determinants. It sheds new light on the causes and consequences of financial
              crises. It provides a unique resource for future investigators.

This project
              asks and answers questions like the following: Have there been changes in the
              frequency of currency and banking crises? How do they compare in terms of
              severity? What is the role of macroeconomic, financial and political variables
              in their incidence? How long has output taken to recover? What was the impact
              on the current account, money supply and interest rates?  The project addresses
              these questions with a combination of statistical and historical techniques.
              The statistical analysis uses a newly generated set of crisis dates, together
              with macroeconomic variables and econometric techniques designed to disentangle
              the two-way causation between recessions and crises. The historical analysis
              looks deeply at particular episodes where there are parallels with
              today.

This research has immediate policy implications. If crises are indeed
              becoming more frequent and/or severe, then there exist important weaknesses in
              our current financial environment requiring urgent reform. If history shows
              that crises are especially pervasive and/or devastating in countries with
              particular exchange rate systems, monetary regimes, regulatory arrangements,
              and capital account regimes, then the results will have obvious implications
              for the choice of exchange rate regime, the desirability of capital-account
              liberalization, and the emphasis that should be placed on financial
              deregulation. The data developed for this project and the institutional
              variation provided by history should enable us to uncover these patterns. Even
              if not everyone agrees with our conclusions, our database will provide a new
              resource with which others can also pursue such questions.

