Title       : Modeling Refugee and Internally Displaced Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0099313

Award Number: 0099313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Will H. Moore whmoore@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              What events might transpire that would lead someone to consider abandoning
              her/his home and possessions, and take flight to seek refuge elsewhere, either
              within or outside of her/his country? People who, owing to a reasonable fear of
              persecution, take such action and seek refuge abroad are recognized under
              international law as refugees. Those who seek refuge in mountains, forests, or
              with relatives within their own borders are recognized as internally displaced
              persons. The project explores the etiology of flows of refugees and internally
              displaced persons.

The project addresses four questions:

I) What
              characteristics make a country likely to produce refugees and internally
              displaced persons? 2) How can we distinguish countries that produce greater
              numbers of internally displaced persons from those that produce greater numbers
              of refugees? 3) What can explain greater flows of refugees to one bordering
              country rather than another? 4) Are the factors and processes that produce
              `voluntary migrant' flows distinguishable from those that produce `forced
              migration' flows? That is, do economic factors influence refugee and internally
              displaced person (R-IDP) flows?

The literature on this topic is
              interdisciplinary, and thus suffers from limited communication across
              disciplinary boundaries. As such, no comprehensive study exists that seeks to
              explore the usefulness of the many hypotheses scattered throughout the
              literature. In addition, the work on this topic is largely idiographic and
              descriptive: there are few comparative case studies, a relatively limited
              number of theoretically driven studies, and very few large-n, statistical
              analyses. This investigation makes a significant contribution by creating a
              comprehensive, theoretically driven set of hypotheses, and examining them using
              a global data set.

Like many scholars who work on migration, the
              investigator employs a simple cost-benefit framework for studying these flows.
              The major argument with respect to the first question is that countries where
              people feel that their lives are threatened by violence have a greater
              likelihood of producing refugees than countries where this is not the case.
              This is not a novel argument, nor is it particularly surprising. Yet, what is
              surprising is that few analyses of the etiology of refugee and internally
              displaced person flows do not move on to ask the additional questions listed
              above, and none of them have sought to test hypothetical answers. With respect
              to the second question, the investigator argues that policies toward both
              emigration and immigration, the level of violence in surrounding countries, and
              the border terrain will separate those countries that produce a high level of
              internally displaced relative to refugees from those that produce a high level
              of refugees relative to internally displaced. These same variables, save
              emigration policy, should help determine which country refugees seek asylum in.
              Finally, by including measures of relative wages in the regressions that
              address questions two and three, the investigator will be able to address
              question four.

The investigator assembles a dataset for a global sample
              covering the period 1965-1998. Attention is given to both validity and
              reliability issues. Finally, the hypotheses are examined using relevant
              statistical techniques.

This project enhances our understanding of the topic
              and produces a dataset that will be of use to numerous scholars interested in
              the topic.



