Title       : Analyzing the Dynamics of International Mediation Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0099086

Award Number: 0099086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah J. Gerner d-gerner@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Schrodt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project examines the dynamics of third-party international mediation using
              statistical time-series analyses of political event data.  Third-party
              mediation is one of the most common international responses to political
              conflict.  Studies show that the use of mediation has increased following the
              end of the Cold War.  Surprisingly, there are few systematic studies of
              mediation.  Those that do exist focus generally on relatively static contextual
              factors, such as the attributes of the conflict and the prior relationship
              between the mediator and protagonists, rather than on dynamic factors - both
              contextual and process - that may contribute to the success or failure of
              mediation activities.  In contrast, the extensive qualitative literature
              provides numerous hypotheses about dynamic aspects of mediation.  These
              studies, however, are primarily case studies, often are undertaken by mediation
              practitioners, exhibit little cumulation and, when taken as a whole, are rife
              with contradictory assertions.
	This research formally tests a number of the
              hypotheses embedded in the theoretical and qualitative literatures on
              mediation, suing automated coding of event data from news-wire sources and
              employing time-series and event-history methods available in standard
              statistical packages.  Event data provide a rich set of indicators about the
              results of mediation, the political circumstances of the mediation (for
              example, prior military success or failure by the protagonists), and the
              various strategies employed by the mediating parties).  The research looks at
              the factors that influence (1) whether mediation is accepted by the parties in
              a conflict, (2) whether formal agreements are reached, and (3) whether the
              agreements actually reduce the level of conflict.
	The project focuses
              initially on conflicts in the Middle East, a region where the principal
              investigators have substantial field experience.  The TABARI machine-coding
              system - an open-source successor to the NSF-supported KEDS coding program - is
              adapted to code events according to the new IDEA coding framework developed by
              Taylor, Jenkins and Bond.  The broader research community has access to the
              revised coding program, coding dictionaries, and datasets via a web site. 
              After refining the statistical tests on the Middle East case, the analysis is
              extended to event data on conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and West Africa. 
              Finally, a subset of tests is applied to the historical crises in Leng's
              Behavioral Correlates of War dataset and to the contemporary crises being
              documented in Alker's Conflict Early Warning System project.
	The research
              uses three types of statistical models.  The first set of models employs
              interval-level methods on scaled and aggregated event data, using methods
              similar to those found in econometric analysis.  The sensitivity of the event
              scaling system also is examined.  Second, mediation is explored using the "time
              series cross-sectional logit" technique that is used widely in the "democratic
              peace" research and other war-initiation literature.  This work takes into
              consideration modifications suggested by Beck, Katz, King and others to improve
              the effectiveness of this methodology.  Finally, event-history and other
              duration models are estimated; this approach should be particularly useful
              given the large random element in the timing of many conflicts.
	This study
              contributes in both the academic and practical arenas.  It provides an
              extensive empirical analysis of hypotheses about the dynamics of the mediation
              process.  Those empirical generationalizations can inform the efforts of
              individuals engaged in actual international mediation.  The project also
              continues the development of research tools and datasets that can be used in a
              variety of statistical studies of international behavior.

