Title       : Request for a Travel Grant for the XXVII International Ethological Conference,
               held in Tubingen Germany, August 22-29, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0099267

Award Number: 0099267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19044              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry F. Downhower   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The biennial meeting of the International Ethological Congress is open to all
              who are interested in ethology, animal behavior and related disciplines. The
              IEC is the only international gathering for those studying all aspects of
              animal behavior. The coverage of the field at IEC conferences is always broad,
              with papers ranging from neurobiology and neurochemistry to applied animal
              ethology and behavioral evolution. The IEC emphasizes integration of the field
              of animal behavior across all animal groups and all levels of analysis rather
              than promoting one particular point of view or methodology. It seeks to
              integrate pure and applied ethology, field and laboratory orientations,
              theoretical and empirical approaches and to bring together those working in
              other subdisciplines, such as ornithology, herpetology, mammalogy, entomology,
              primatology, physical anthropology. The conference also makes an effort to
              bring in ideas from related fields that can broaden and strengthen the study of
              behavior.  
	It is particularly important that young scientists be exposed to
              this perspective and to the intellectual stimulation that this conference
              provides. They need to establish professional contacts with leaders in their
              field from around the world. As interactions in many fields increase, this
              opportunity for international dialogue between young scientists of different
              countries should also not be overlooked. Because these young scientists are
              often financially limited, NSF support that would partially defray the costs of
              this conference will greatly enhance their participation in the conference and
              allow them to reap the professional and intellectual rewards of that
              experience.

