Title       : Open Door, Capacity Building at Yavapai College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0099125

Award Number: 0099125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421574             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Abbott sm_ken@yavapai.cc.az.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melissa Quinley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yavapai College
	      1100 East Sheldon
	      Prescott, AZ  863013220    /   -

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0099125
Institution: Yavapai College
Principal Investigator:
              Kenneth Abbott
Title: "The Open Door Project"

ABSTRACT

Yavapai College
              serves the needs of rural and isolated small urban populations in Yavapai
              County, Arizona.  The college is well underway toward completing its ADA
              self-evaluation goals for physical barrier removal. A corresponding effort,
              however, has not taken place to address access to instructional materials in
              appropriate forms, educational technology, alternative delivery methodologies
              and access to laboratory and field experiences.
 
The goal of this project is
              to increase the number of rural disabled students successfully pursuing SMET
              careers.  An advisory committee will provide oversight and project direction to
              actualize the following objective: To develop a model program that creates an
              inviting rural community college environment responsive to the needs of
              students with disabilities.  The Open Door Project will: 1.  Assign a SMET
              disabilities curriculum coordinator to research, gather, and maintain a
              specific set of alternative curricular materials and strategies for all gateway
              math and science courses that use current best practices of adaptation,
              accommodation, and assistive technology.  2.  Train disabilities Master
              Teachers in all SMET curricular areas who will conduct disabilities awareness
              and alternative strategies training at the SMET department level.  The problem
              of adjunct faculty inclusion will be addressed by specific training at
              orientation, access to intranet resources, and assignment of a disabilities
              mentor from the full-time SMET faculty.  3.  Develop ways for students to have
              a SMET "hands-on" experience by creating innovative ways to assimilate students
              with disabilities into ongoing research, field and laboratory activities and to
              facilitate student interface with working SMET professionals in local and
              regional high tech businesses.  This activity will include development of a
              SMET Summer Camp for students with disabilities.

The Open Door Project will
              also work to increase the number of disabled high school students, veterans,
              women re-entering the workforce and Native Americans with SMET career
              expectations.  This will be accomplished by using the countywide outreach
              activity of existing TRIO and Transition programs to encourage interest in SMET
              careers among disabled students.  In addition, these outreach groups, staff
              development activities, and stipends for participation in summer programs, will
              be used to raise the awareness of high school and college career counselors and
              faculty.  This will increase their competency to address the needs of students
              with disabilities and promote existing Yavapai College Foundation scholarships
              for disabled and SMET students as well as SMET summer camps.

The Open Door
              Capacity Building Project will raise the visibility and attractiveness of SMET
              careers for disabled students by creating a program specifically designed to
              capture their imaginations and provide a responsive community college
              experience that articulates into a SMET career or advanced degree.  The
              long-range post-project goal is to use Yavapai College's unique field sites and
              on-campus dorm capacity to create a regional SMET magnet school for students
              with disabilities.

