Title       : Quantum Dynamics with Trajectories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0099845

Award Number: 0099845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Wyatt cman041@aurora.hpc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robert Wyatt of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop analytical and
              computational methods and algorithms for generating quantum trajectories that
              can be used for solving multidimensional problems in quantum dynamics.  An ab
              initio approach will be taken to develop all that is needed "on the fly" as
              trajectory ensembles evolve.  The focus will be on performing numerically
              accurate integration of the time-dependent Schrodinger equation using
              trajectories as the underlying computational tool.  The techniques that will be
              explored are the quantum trajectory method (QTM) and a second trajectory method
              based on an implementation of stochastic mechanics.  For the QTM, the following
              methods will be developed and incorporated into a new code for multidimensional
              problems: (1) both direct product and non-direct product (spherical symmetry)
              distributed approximating functionals (DAFs), (2) a new variational moving
              least squares method to evaluate derivatives that appear in the equations of
              motion, (3) a new local gauge transformation method to filter input functions
              before derivative evaluation is initiated, and (4) several types of grid
              adaptation intended to bypass problems associated with regions near nodes in
              the wavefunction.  In stochastic mechanics, the following topics will be
              investigated: (1) "on the fly" integration of the
              convection-advection-diffusion (CAD) equations in the Lagrangian picture, and
              (2) the possible use of complex-valued trajectories to avoid the node problem. 
              Applications will be made to electronic nonadiabatic transitions in collisions
              with and without curve crossing, and intramolecular rearrangements such as the
              vinylidene isomerization reaction. 

The solution of the time-dependent
              Schrodinger equation sought in this research is a very general problem which
              has important ramifications in chemistry, physics, and biology.  This research
              could ultimately lead to the development of computer codes that will permit new
              understanding of important properties of complex molecular systems.
