Title       : Zeta Functions for Self-Dual Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0099761

Award Number: 0099761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Iwan M. Duursma duursma@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues study connections between self-dual linear
              codes and algebraic curves over a finite field.  The main goal is to improve
              existing bounds for the asymptotic relative minimum distance of self-dual codes
              by showing that the zeros of the zeta function of a self-dual code satisfy a
              Riemann hypothesis analogue.  The zeta function of an algebraic curve, that
              contains information about the number of rational points, can be defined for an
              arbitrary self-dual code.  The zeta function of a self-dual code contains
              information about the minimum distance of the code, which has an expression in
              terms of the trace of the zeros of the zeta function.  A Riemann hypothesis
              analogue would give an upper bound for the minimum distance similar to the
              Hasse-Weil bound for the number of rational points on an algebraic curve over a
              finite field.

The problem under investigation comes from the theory of
              error-correcting codes. Error-correcting codes are used to ensure reliable
              communication over noisy communication channels.  One of the central problems
              asks how good codes can be, in other words how many errors can be corrected if
              we choose an optimal code. Even if we restrict ourselves to the important and
              much smaller class of self-dual codes, no precise answer to this fundamental
              question is known, although some estimates are available. Improved estimates
              will follow by establishing analogues for self-dual codes to known results on
              zeta functions in Number Theory and Algebraic Geometry.

