Title       : Cryptography: The Mathematics of Secret Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0099220

Award Number: 0099220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark Saul                               
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet S. Beissinger beissing@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vera Pless  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project develops an 8-week middle-school mathematics module that introduces
              cryptography, the science of sending secret messages, while teaching and
              reinforcing the learning of related mathematical concepts.  The topics range
              from the classical encryption systems and the historic context in which they
              were used through powerful modern encryption systems that provide secrecy in
              electronic messages today.  The module also covers passwords and codes that
              correct errors in the transmission of information.  Public awareness of the
              importance of cryptography is growing, as is the need to understand the issues
              involved.  The study of cryptography provides an interesting context for
              students to apply traditional mathematical skills and concepts.  Mathematical
              topics covered include percents, probability, functions, prime numbers,
              decimals, inverses and modular arithmetic. 

The main product is a
              middle-school student book, with accompanying teacher materials.  A web site is
              being developed that supports the activities in this book.  Abbreviated modules
              for Grades 3, 4  and 5 are also being developed, as well as an instructor's
              guide for adapting the materials for use in informal educational settings such
              as museums and after-school programs.  The development of the module involves
              piloting and field-testing by experienced classroom teachers from diverse
              school communities and instructors of informal educational programs. 
              Evaluation includes review by mathematicians and educators, as well as an
              investigation into the level of students' understanding of the topics
              studied.

