Title       : Improved Liquefaction Hazard Mapping Procedures for Urban Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0099739

Award Number: 0099739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54727              (Estimated)
Investigator: T.Leslie Youd tyoud@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Liquefaction has generated widespread damage and disruption to urban areas
              during many large US and Japanese earthquakes.  This destruction has created
              public demand for state and local governments, public utilities, and other
              responsible agencies and corporations to mitigate liquefaction hazard in their
              respective jurisdictions.  An initial step in hazard mitigation is definition
              of vulnerable areas and potential deleterious effects through liquefaction
              hazard maps.  Most US liquefaction hazard maps are based on geologic units with
              generalized criteria leading to qualitative hazard ratings of high, moderate,
              low, etc.  Users, including city planners, building officials, engineers,
              utility companies, and loss estimators, need maps with more detail and accuracy
              than those based on generalized geologic criteria.  The purpose of this study
              is to develop improved mapping techniques for delineation of liquefaction
              hazard to meet this need.  The compilation of such maps will require
              evaluations based on detailed subsurface stratigraphy and soil properties.  To
              develop and test improved techniques, a test area is needed where an extensive
              array of borehole or CPT logs and accompanying soil property data has been
              compiled and where liquefaction and consequent deleterious effects from a past
              earthquake have been documented.  A unique opportunity to develop and test
              mapping techniques has occurred with the compilation of a large set of
              geotechnical data for the Kobe, Japan metropolitan area by Prof. Yasuo Tanaka
              and his colleagues at Kobe, Japan, University.  This data set consists of over
              5,000 borehole logs scattered over Kobe and two adjacent communities, with
              concentrations of logs in areas heavily damaged by the 1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu
              (Kobe) earthquake.  Similarly, an extensive compilation of observed
              liquefaction effects, including lateral spread displacements, has been
              assembled by Japanese investigators, including Prof. Masanori Hamada and his
              colleagues at Waseda University, Tokyo.  The objective of this project is to
              work jointly with Prof. Tanaka and his colleagues to develop improved
              susceptibility and ground failure hazard mapping procedures.  These techniques
              will be developed by analyzing subsurface sediment stratigraphy, soil
              properties, local topography, and past liquefaction effects in the Kobe area. 
              From these analyses, several possible procedures will be developed and
              evaluated for mapping liquefiable layers and consequent hazards.   The most
              viable technique or techniques will then be used to prepare demonstration
              liquefaction hazard maps for selected parts of the Kobe metropolitan area and
              an urban area in the US.  A likely urban area for the US demonstration map is
              Oakland, California, urban area where Dr. Thomas L. Holzer, USGS, is in the
              process of installing and collecting data from a large array of CPT soundings
              and SPT boreholes.  The work of Dr. Holzer specifically directed toward
              evaluation of liquefaction hazard.  
