Title       : Hydrodynamic Regulation of Reproduction in Fucoid Algae: A Regional Model and
               Consequences for Population Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  2002  
File        : a0099043

Award Number: 0099043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan H. Brawley brawley@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Fucoid algae dominate most rocky shores across the north Atlantic and contribute
              substantially to structuring of the coastal ecosystem. Reproduction in fucoid
              algae is sensitive to hydrodynamic conditions, resulting in high fertilization
              success because gamete release occurs only under calm conditions. These
              findings have important implications for asynchrony in gamete release between
              populations and the scale of population isolation. This study will 1) test a
              nascent model describing when successful fucoid reproduction can occur, 2)
              determine whether hybridization between Fucus vesiculosus and other fucoid
              algae occurs when gamete release is delayed by turbulent conditions, and 3)
              analyze whether genetic differentiation in F. vesiculosus is correlated with
              variable hydrologic conditions due to coastal topography. Quantitative data on
              gamete release at multiple sites on opposite sides of coastal points (and
              smaller features) will be collected. This will determine whether gamete release
              in fucoids occurs at different times over small spatial scales due to variable
              wave and wind exposures across opposite sides of the undulating coastline.
              Species-specific monoclonal antibodies to recognize fucoid sperm are available;
              they and the required pump/concentration apparatus have been tested
              successfully at Pemaquid Point. Local environmental data (e.g., wind speed,
              light levels, water motion) will be collected and compared with data from
              monitoring systems such as NOAA's National Data Buoy Center stations. Maine
              shores have been stable for thousands of years; if the coastal F. vesiculosus
              is reproductively isolated in topographic fragments, population genetic
              structure may be affected. This will be tested with AFLP analysis of randomly
              collected adults. Storms delay gamete release from fucoid algae, and laboratory
              studies predict that natural hybridization will increase sharply if over-mature
              eggs participate in fertilizations. This will be tested in field studies of
              hybridization potential, achieved hybridization, and identification of hybrid
              position in the intertidal zone in F. spiralis versus F. vesiculosus (Maine)
              and F. serratus (an exotic) versus F. vesiculosus (Nova Scotia). The
              hypothesized environmental interaction with development as a regulator of
              hybridization and genetic structure in F. vesiculosus (and other fucoids) could
              have strong local and biogeographic effects on intertidal communities across
              the north Atlantic. Among the products of this research will be a robust
              regional model for fucoid reproduction as a function of relevant physical
              factors (i.e., wind speed and direction, wave height, light levels). 
