Title       : GOALI: High resolution diffractive x-ray optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0099893

Award Number: 0099893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris J. Jacobsen jacobsen@xray1.physics.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. Tennant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0099893
Jacobsen

What is the ultimate focus of electromagnetic radiation?
              The far-field focus of a lens can be characterized by its Rayleigh resolution
              of 0.61 times the wavelength divided by half of the lens' opening angle, or
              numerical aperture.  To achieve a finer focus than that obtained from a visible
              light laser and a high numerical aperture microscope objective (such as in a
              confocal microscope), one must significantly decrease the wavelength while
              still maintaining appreciable numerical aperture. This can be accomplished by
              using x rays for their short wavelength, and diffractive optics for maintaining
              a reasonably high numerical aperture.  Fresnel x-ray zone plates have been
              fabricated as diffractive focusing optics that produce the finest far-field
              focus of electromagnetic radiation at any wavelength - about 35 nm Rayleigh
              resolution at 2-5 nm wavelength. These zone
plates have been fabricated in an
              academic-industrial collaboration between a group at the Department of Physics
              and Astronomy at SUNY Stony Brook that carries out research in x-ray microscopy
              using the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) at nearby Brookhaven
              National Laboratory, and the state-of-the-art electron beam lithography group
              of Don Tennant at Lucent Technologies Bell Laboratories. Zone plates produced
              by this collaboration are employed as the focusing optics in three x-ray
              microscope systems at the NSLS, and these microscopes are used by the Stony
              Brook group and by a number of U.S. and European groups for research in
              biology, polymer science, geoscience, colloid chemistry, environmental science,
              and other fields using x-ray microscopy.  Given that x-ray microfocusing is
              growing in importance at U.S. synchrotron radiation facilities including those
              at Brookhaven, Argonne, Berkeley, Stanford, Cornell, University of Wisconsin,
              and Louisiana State University, and that each of these facilities represents an
              investment of $20-500 million, it seems crucial to further develop the
              processes needed for fabrication of the highest possible resolution zone plates
              within an academic setting in the U.S.  Indeed, a large number of potential
              applications of x-ray microscopes (both in the 0.2-1 keV energy range, and the
              1-10 keV energy range) would become possible if the spatial resolution of zone
              plates were to be increased significantly beyond what is now attainable. The
              PIs research program includes the following:

o  They propose to supply zone
              plates to one of the world's leading groups in ultrafast x-ray pulse
              generation:  the lab of Margaret Murnane and Henry Kapetyn at the University of
              Colorado/JILA. This should enable the first exploration of nonlinear optics at
              x-ray wavelengths in a setting other than that of a thermonuclear weapon.

o 
              They propose to develop zone plates that should, for the first time, make
              sub-100 nm resolution imaging routinely available for 1-10 keV x-ray
              microscopes. Microscopes in this energy range are ideal for trace element
              mapping in biology and environmental science, and for inspection of defects in
              buried interconnects in integrated circuits.

o  They propose to carry out
              experimental tests aimed at future development of Bragg zone plates, where high
              aspect ratio zones must be angled to be on the Bragg condition to achieve high
              focusing efficiency and very high numerical aperture.

o  They propose to
              work with one of the leading groups in nanoimprint lithography (University of
              Texas at Austin) to combine our capabilities in fine linewidth zone plate
              fabrication with their technology for high throughput lithographic fabrication.
              The ultimate goal is to make a limited number of high resolution "master" zone
              plates, and use the UTA nanoimprint method to fabricate "disposable" high
              resolution zone plates. This could be a key technology for a high-risk,
              high-payoff scientific project: the use of x-ray free electron lasers to obtain
              atomic resolution maps of the structure of membrane proteins.

