Title       : Isolating and Characterizing the Fat-Regulating Hormone Leptin in the Fence
               Lizard
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a0099303

Award Number: 0099303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Niewiarowski phn@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Londraville  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Fat stores are an important source of energy for reproduction, maintenance, and
              growth in vertebrates.  Recently, a protein hormone (leptin) that is central to
              regulation of lipid stores was discovered in mammals. Leptin also affects
              metabolic rate, age-at-maturity, and appetite (perhaps through regulation of
              lipid stores).  Although leptin's biology has been vigorously studied in
              mammalian systems (>3000 publications since 1994), its study in ectotherms is
              limited to a handful of papers.  This research team initiated studies of leptin
              function in Sceloporus undulatus, the eastern fence lizard, and have
              demonstrated that injection of murine leptin in fence lizards induces the same
              short-term effects seen when leptin is injected into mammals.  If long-term
              effects of leptin injection in fence lizards are consistent with mammalian
              studies, then leptin could be used to manipulate age-at-maturity, yielding a
              powerful new approach to test the fitness consequences of variation in this
              central life history trait. To reach that goal, leptin will be isolated and
              characterized from fence lizards. Initial results indicate that fence lizards
              express a protein of appropriate size that is recognized by an antibody against
              murine leptin.  Taking advantage of this assay, the investigators will use
              three approaches to cloning and characterizing leptin from fence lizards. 
              First, a cDNA expression library will be prepared from S. undulatus.  This
              library will be screened with the mouse leptin antibody, to identify putative
              lizard leptin clones.  Identity of clones will be verified via DNA sequencing
              and BLAST comparisons with GenBank sequences.  Second, two-dimensional
              immunoblots of brain tissue will be screened with the mouse leptin antibody. 
              Putative leptin spots will be partially sequenced by Edman degradation, and
              this primary sequence information will be used to make degenerate primers to
              use in amplifying lizard leptin by PCR.  Lastly, the mouse leptin antibody will
              be immobilized to a chromatography matrix, and reacted with lizard brain
              tissue.  Captured antigens will then be eluted and characterized by partial
              Edman degradation.  These approaches will run concurrently, thus maximizing the
              chance of success.  Although this research is focused on characterizing leptin
              in lizards in order to study life history variation, the isolation and
              characterization of leptin from fence lizards will significantly improve
              understanding of structure/function relationships in homologous leptins. The
              success of this project will yield the only leptin sequence from an ectotherm.
              By comparative sequence analysis with mammalian leptins, regions of functional
              importance will likely be revealed, which may be useful information for
              researchers seeking to use leptin as a natural chemical to ameliorate human
              obesity.
