Title       : Microscale Processing of Multi-functional Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0099805

Award Number: 0099805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83883              (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Boyd jboyd@aero.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitris C. Lagoudas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1669,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this preliminary research project, large arrays of Micro Electromechanical
              Systems (MEMS) with programmable electrodes and electromagnets will be used to
              achieve microscale positioning of particles, whiskers, and chopped fibers in
              polymer matrix multi-functional materials. The  research will enhance the
              understanding of the electro-magneto-mechanical interactions of particles in
              thin layers of liquid polymer undergoing solidification and curing.  The
              preliminary research task is to establish whether particles at this scale can
              be patterned by rearrangement in response to electric and magnetic fields. 
              Currently there is no way to affordably position particles and whiskers in
              microscale patterns in composite materials. The research is thus a critical
              enabling technology that will provide an affordable method to pattern two or
              more types of particles into unit cells.  Such patterning will reduce the
              concentration of stress, electric field, and magnetic field, thereby leading to
              materials with improved threshold properties such as mechanical strength,
              electric breakdown field, and magnetic saturation field.  These three threshold
              properties will be tested in patterned microstructures, and the results will be
              compared with random particle arrangements. 

If the feasibility of this
              method is established, it is expected that this novel process would then
              provide an affordable way to make massive arrays of electrodes and
              electromagnets with features as small as one micrometer at low unit cost based
              upon photolithography methods.  The MEMS arrays are designed to be reusable, as
              they are not part of the finished product.

