Title       : Molecular Electronics: 2000, Kailua-Kona, Hawaii; December 10-15, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0099745

Award Number: 0099745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Ratner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A conference on Molecular Electronics will be held at Kailua-Kona, Hawaii,
              December 10-15, 2000. The conference will address theoretical and experimental
              aspects of molecular electronics with emphasis on molecular phenomena and
              material science considerations. Molecular Electronics is an emerging field
              developing as the microelectronics field looks beyond silicon to evaluate new
              possibilities for future technology, and as atomic level resolution probes have
              become available for accessing and manipulating individual molecules and
              molecular assemblies. New techniques will be discussed for molecular synthesis,
              as well as new techniques for attaching molecules to specific
              surfaces/interfaces, and evaluating molecular transport properties. The
              conference will also concentrate on possible techniques for creating molecular
              circuits and methods needed to be able to interact with and to exploit the
              properties of single molecules.
The program is organized around 20 invited
              speakers, and both contributed papers and posters are scheduled. The overall
              size of the meeting is expected to include 60-80 participants. Special efforts
              have been made to recruit a diverse group of participants, including foreign
              and American scientists, younger and older researchers, and industrial,
              national laboratory and academic researchers. Objectives are to stimulate
              communications among the chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science
              communities working in this and related fields, and to formulate and delineate
              critical research necessary to move molecular electronics concepts forward.
              
The conference is well organized by an international committee. A list of
              invited speakers and conference organizers who are leaders in the field is
              provided. The conference is expected to provide an effective forum for
              discussion of critical scientific issues and directions in Molecular
              Electronics. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future
              directions, it is expected that new ties and collaborations will be established
              between university, industry, and other research institution
              researchers.
%%%
 An evaluation of the progress and status of Molecular
              Electronics and related chemistry and materials issues, especially critical
              materials and device related research areas, and the relationship of molecular
              and materials issues to device fabrication along with current assessments of
              the most important developments in this field will be of great value to the
              understanding and development of new capabilities in computing, data
              processing, and communications. 	 
***
 


