Title       : Machining of Elastomers and Elastomer-Steel Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0099829

Award Number: 0099829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239965             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Strenkowski jsstren@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Shih  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to develop new methods for machining elastomers and
              elastomer-steel composites.  Several machining methods will be investigated
              including high speed milling using ultra-sharp cutters, machining of elastomers
              with induction heated tools, and machining of cryogenically-cooled elastomers. 
              An understanding of the tool-workpiece interaction will be developed using
              finite element techniques that address the large strain and highly deforming
              elasto-viscoplastic response of elastomers.  The models will be used to
              determine tool forces, workpiece temperatures and deformation, and surface
              roughness of a machined elastomer as a function of operating conditions and
              tool geometry.  Appropriate material property data will be developed in close
              collaboration with several industrial partners to characterize the elastomer
              response at the elevated temperatures and high strain-rates anticipated in
              machining.  Tools and operating conditions that result in smooth surface
              finishes and damage-free parts will be identified, and cutting tests will be
              performed to verify the models based upon tool forces and surface
              finish.

This research will lead to new understanding of the fundamental
              mechanisms of chip formation during machining of elastomers at both elevated
              temperatures and cryogenic conditions.  This understanding is critical for
              identifying tools and operating conditions to improve the machinability of a
              wide range of elastomeric products such as shock isolators, sound and vibration
              absorbers, seals, tires, electrical and thermal insulators, footwear, tubing,
              and other applications requiring a highly flexible or stretchable material.  As
              compared with traditional expensive and time-consuming molding processes, the
              machining methods investigated in this research promise a practical alternative
              for rapid production of precision elastomeric parts for a multitude of custom
              applications at significantly lower cost.  This research also offers the
              potential for the development of new manufacturing processes for cost-effective
              and environmentally conscious tire recycling.

