Title       : Polarized Electron Scattering from Nucleons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0099557

Award Number: 0099557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $975000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Finn finn@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allison Lung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Todd D. Averett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith A. Griffioen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research grant supports a program of electromagnetic and weak
current
              experiments to probe the flavor content and spin structure of protons and
              neutrons
(nucleons). At present, these properties of the nucleon cannot
              be
precisely predicted using quantum chromodynamics, the accepted
fundamental
              theory of the strong interaction, and so experiment must
lead the way.  A
              series of parity-violating electron scattering experiments at the
Thomas
              Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) will
enable us to
              determine the strange quark "sea" contribution to the
nucleon ground state.
              These experiments include a measurement in Hall
A of the parity-violating
              asymmetry in scattering from the proton at
low momentum transfer, and
              measurements of the asymmetry in scattering
from 4He and 208Pb. The G0
              parity-violation experiment in Hall C is
moving from the design and
              construction stage to the commissioning and
data-taking stage. This experiment
              will definitively map out the
strange quark vector form factors for the
              nucleon as a function of
momentum transfer.  A measurement of the asymmetry
              for the N to
Delta(1232) transition will be made simultaneously, and
              planned
measurements on deuterium will probe the axial form factor.  A new
              initiative is under development to use a modified version of the G0
              spectrometer to perform a parity-violation electron scattering experiment at
              very low momentum transfer, in order to make a sensitive
search for physics
              beyond the standard model. A series of polarized
electron scattering
              experiments at Jefferson Lab are dedicated to
elucidating the spin structure
              of the nucleon using polarized 3He
targets.  This program is well underway,
              three experiments using these
targets will take place in the next year at
              Jefferson Lab, and a 3He
target cell lab at William and Mary supports this
              program.



