Title       : Policy Expectations and Institutional Arrangements in the American States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0099320

Award Number: 0099320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138424             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean P. Lacy dlacy+@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Existing studies of voter behavior are based on the premise that if a voter is
              issue-oriented. she should vote for the candidate whose personal position or
              campaign platform is closest to her own preferences. In a democratic system in
              which a lone elected official makes all policies. such a view of issue voting
              may make sense. But in a democratic system with multiple policymakers - such as
              an executive and a legislature and a separation of powers, it makes little
              sense for voters to imagine that a candidate will accomplish everything she 
              says she will once in office.

If voters are issue-oriented, as Downs (1957)
              argued. their goal should be to elect officials who will likely produce public
              policies that the voter prefers. The foundations of issue-voting are the
              expectations voters hold about the policies the government will adopt given the
              election of each of the candidates. In presidential and gubernatorial
              elections, these policy expectations associated with each candidate may differ
              from the candidate's personal position due to the institutional power of the
              executive relative to the legislature and to divided government. Furthermore,
              the extent to which voters use policy expectations or candidate position when
              deciding which candidate to support may also be influenced by the prospects of
              divided government and the voters perception of the power of the executive
              branch. In many  cases the candidate whose personal position is closest to the
              voter's own will not be the candidate who would produce policies closest to the
              voter's preferences.

The PI's conduct a telephone survey of 1000 registered
              voters in each of two states (New- Jersey- and Virginia) that, will have
              gubernatorial elections in 2001. The survey. which will take place the two
              weeks preceding the election. will present respondents with a series of
              questions asking them to place on an issue scale their own position. the
              positions of the gubernatorial candidates. the position of the state
              legislature. and the position of the state government under each gubernatorial
              candidate. Respondents will also be asked which party they believe will have a
              majority in the state legislature, how powerful they believe the governor is
              compared to the legislature, and for which candidate they intend to vote in
              their state's gubernatorial election.

The survey will also collect data on
              respondents' party identification, socioeconomic characteristics, level of
              political information, attention to politics, and other relevant, data. The
              PI's will then measure the impact of policy expectations versus candidate
              positions on voters' choice of candidates. Across both states, they expect to
              find that once voters' policy- expectations are taken into account, voters are
              more issue-oriented than researchers have previously found. Also, candidate
              positions will play little role in the vote decisions made by voters unless the
              executive is likely to have tremendous control over policymaking or is unlikely
              to have any control. In the latter case, voters will cast an expressive vote
              for the candidate whose personal position they most prefer knowing full well
              that the candidate will have little influence over policy.

Results from this
              project will contribute to research on voting behavior and state government.
              For the literature ore voting behavior. The PI's will provide the first true
              test of issue voting based on the theory that voter's preferences are defined
              over expected policy- outcomes rather than the positions of the candidates.
              With this research; the investigators' hope to provide empirical evidence
              relevant to controversies concerning both divided government and directional
              voting models. For studies of state government, the PI's will provide a new
              source of data on the relative influence of the executive branch of government
              across two different states. These data can also be combined with previous work
              by the PI's on Ohio and Texas state government. Data from the survey will be
              made available to other researchers and to the general public. The research
              promises to enhace substantially our understanding of the topic.


