Title       : Collaborative Research: An Efficient BEM Formulation for Thermal-Mechanical
               Problems in Tribology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0099854

Award Number: 0099854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Q. Wang qwang@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0099854
Wang
and 
0099646
Green
Frictional heating often causes failure of
              many tribological elements. Investigating the combined thermal and mechanical
              effects holds the key to understanding heat-induced failure and the overall
              performance of machine parts and their tribological surfaces. However, for
              conformal contacts, such as in bearings and seals, analyses become very
              difficult because they typically involve macro-scale structural analyses of the
              element parts, and micro-scale contact/lubrication calculations at the
              sliding/rolling interfaces. 

The common practice today is to use commercial
              finite element packages to solve such problems. The boundary element method
              (BEM) is expected to provide a far more efficient solution, because by nature
              all that is important, from a tribological point of view, occurs at the
              boundaries of the interacting surfaces. Therefore, the BEM formulation is
              expected to reduce the simulation effort and computation time by orders of
              magnitude (because only the boundaries need to be meshed and solved for).
              Therefore, the solutions for the problem of the three-way coupling of
              lubrication, elasticity, and thermal effects can be achieved much faster to be
              effective in design and analysis. Because meshing is necessary on the
              boundaries only, also computer storage is reduced significantly. It is,
              therefore, that the boundary element method (BEM) is the most reasonable and
              efficient means to use for thermal-mechanical problems in tribology.

The
              proposed collaborative research aims at developing the formulation of a general
              boundary element method (BEM) for thermomechanical problems of tribological
              elements having any general geometry subject to thermal-elastic boundary
              conditions.  Other computational techniques, such as the FFT and the
              macro-micro approach would make the BEM formulation a complete and the most
              efficient numerical method for thermomechanical problems of complex
              tribological elements. The modeling of the combined thermal and mechanical
              phenomena in tribology will provide the needed link between performance
              analyses and failure simulation. This work is the first attempt to solve the
              thermomechanical contact problem of finite structures with the boundary element
              method. It is expected to become an important and the most computationally
              effective tool for contact analysis problems where the half-space Green's
              function/integral or the FEM approaches become either inaccurate or
              computationally impractical.  

This work will be performed in conjunction
              with the ongoing research at the existing Center for Surface Engineering and
              Tribology (CSET) at Georgia Tech and Northwestern University, which is
              co-funded by NSF and participating industries. The proposed research will link
              the contact simulation ability of Professor Wang's group at NU, and build upon
              Professor Green's work at GT on the analysis of triboelements, failure
              simulation, and prevention. The fusion of expertise by Green and Wang will
              construct an entirely new, efficient, and accurate analytical tool for
              analyzing thermomechanical failure of practical triboelements. The new approach
              will greatly enhance the CSET research, benefit its membership as well as other
              US industries in their efforts to improve designs and introduce new products.
              


