Title       : Research on Bounded Rationality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0099025

Award Number: 0099025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410476             (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Laibson dlaibson@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xavier Gabaix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research develops intelligent algorithms that mimic the cognitive processes
              of  human decision-makers.  Such algorithms allocate cognitive resources like
              other scarce resources. Attention is only allocated to tasks in which it will
              do the most good.  The algorithms settle for approximate solutions and
              "educated guesses" when solving highly complex problems. The research develops
              models that predict the form of such educated guesses, providing an
              implementable model of artificial intelligence. To succeed such models must
              find a sensible middle ground between the extreme rationality of omniscience
              and the extreme myopia of mechanistic strategies.  An intelligent machine that
              tried to think of everything (omniscience) would run out of time when making a
              decision.  By contrast, a machine that acted myopically would quickly blunder
              into obvious mistakes that humans would never make.  Finding a middle ground
              between the extremes of omniscience and myopia will require answers to numerous
              questions about cognition. What information do people use?  How is that
              information manipulated? How do individuals decide when to stop working on a
              complex problem and act on their best guess?

The "directed cognition model"
              that addresses these questions is expressed as a three-step algorithm. First,
              the algorithm evaluates the expected benefit of various cognitive operations.
              The expected benefit is related to the predicted likelihood that a cognitive
              operation will reveal useful information about an upcoming decision. Second,
              the algorithm executes the cognitive operation with the greatest expected
              benefit. Third, the algorithm repeatedly cycles through these first two steps,
              stopping when the cognitive costs of analysis outweigh the expected
              benefits.
	
The directed cognition model realizes three goals. First, the
              model is psychologically plausible, predicting numerous observed psychological
              phenomena (e.g., salience, myopia, and anchoring) and matching the cognitive
              strategies that experimental subjects claim to use. Second the model generates
              precise quantitative predictions that can be empirically tested. Initial
              experimental data overwhelmingly rejects the perfectly rational model in favor
              of the directed cognition model. Third, because the model is general it can be
              applied to a wide class of problems.
	
By extending the directed cognition
              model and integrating it with other models of cost-effective cognition, the
              research develops a general bounded rationality approach to optimization,
              including boundedly rational dynamic programming. At the core of this approach
              is a theory of endogenous approximation.
	
Current applications include
              contract theory and consumption. Contract theory applications explain both the
              presence and form of contract incompleteness, including boilerplate contracts.
              Boundedly rational consumption models explain why households adjust too slowly
              to changes in their economic environment and why households simultaneously
              exhibit excessive sensitivity to salient variables like current income.

The
              directed cognition model makes sharp predictions about how much time
              experimental subjects will choose to spend on each problem in a multi-part
              quiz. The model also predicts how the quality of respondents' answers will vary
              when the amount of time allowed for a given problem is fixed by the
              experimenter and varied across subjects. If the directed cognition model
              continues to be empirically validated, it will represent one of the first
              economic models that can formally predict the difficulty of a decision problem
              --- i.e., the model predicts the quantitative relationship between time spent
              analyzing a problem and optimality/accuracy of the resulting decision.
              Ultimately, a relatively general model of artificially intelligent
              decision-making may be developed, which can be applied and tested in a wide
              range of choice problems.

 
