Title       : Decision Theories in Recuperative Health Decisions: The Role of Intrinsic
               Self-Reference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0099172

Award Number: 0099172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Parthasarathy Krishnamurthy partha@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Medical patients often face treatment options that involve an element of
              uncertainty or risk.  When processing information, patients in need of
              recuperative treatment are likely to be in a heightened emotional, cognitive,
              motivational, and attentional state.  Our central proposition is that these
              features of recuperative treatment decisions are likely to influence
              psychological mechanisms that are known to affect how people process risk
              information.  In this research we examine how patients process risk information
              and test the extent to which current knowledge about risk processing extends to
              the context of recuperative treatment decisions.  Preliminary findings indicate
              that current knowledge in the decision science literature only partially
              translates to contexts such as these,  where the decision maker is likely to
              process information in an intrinsically self-referential manner.  

Our focus
              is on four distinct but related topics. The first is how patients respond to
              logically equivalent risk information presented in semantically different
              frames. The second explores how patients choose between treatment options that
              vary in the risk associated with therapeutic benefits versus side effects.  The
              third is how patients make decisions to choose versus reject treatment options
              that vary on the extremity of the advantages and disadvantages they offer.  The
              fourth topic examines how patients determine their individual risk of further
              complications of their health condition. Results from the proposed research
              will enhance our understanding of how people process risk information in
              extremely self-referent decision contexts.  The results should also be useful
              to medical practitioners in communicating risk information to their patients.

