Title       : Collaborative Research: GOALI: Integrated and Computerized Setup Planning and
               Fixture Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0099804

Award Number: 0099804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yiming Rong rong@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Yen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1463,1504,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              
The objective of this project is to research and develop an integrated
              framework for automatic generation of setup plans and fixture designs, applied
              to a wide range of components (prismatic, rotational, as well as irregular)
              that require machining in lathes, 3-axis machines, and 5-axis machining centers
              using modular, standard, or dedicated fixtures.  Setup planning and fixture
              design are two closely related tasks.  While setup planning is constrained by
              fixtures to be applied, it also provides guidelines for fixture design.  The
              cyclic interaction creates the 'chicken or egg' dilemma, which is the main
              research barrier.  This problem will be solved as follows.  First, a graph
              representation is developed to capture the feature/tolerance relationship of a
              product model.  Through the recognition of design datum frames, the graph is
              transformed to a datum-machining surface relationship graph (DMG).  With
              considerations of production scheme (integrated, distributed, or combined
              operations), fixturing constraints, machine tool capability, and tolerance
              decomposition, DMG will be converted into a setup graph.  Tolerance stack-up
              analysis and setup plan verification is then followed to provide information
              for fixture design.  

If successful, this research will yield both basic and
              applied advances.  As basic research, it will provide a generalized methodology
              to unify current research results in setup planning and fixture design to
              achieve smooth integration of computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided
              manufacturing (CAM).  It will also shed light on mathematics-based tolerance
              analysis.  For practicing engineers, it will allow them to incorporate setup
              generation and fixture design capability into existing CAD/CAM software tools;
              thus, dramatically improve user productivity.  The incorporation of the
              research results into course curriculum will broaden mechanical, industrial,
              and manufacturing engineering students' knowledge spectrum; thus, better
              preparing them for the knowledge intensive and multi-disciplinary working
              environment in the 21st century.
