Title       : Collaborative Research: A Satellite-Based Climatology of Jet Aircraft Contrails
               for the Contemporary Period (1995-2000)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0099011

Award Number: 0099011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75308              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Travis travisd@uww.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Whitewater
	      800 West Main
	      Whitewater, WI  531901705    414/472-1027

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A potential contributor to contemporary and future climate changes from human
              activities is that due to jet aircraft emissions.  Station climate data,
              intensive field experiments, and numerical modeling reveal the impacts of jet
              condensation trail (contrail) cirrus clouds on the surface and atmospheric
              radiation and energy budgets.  Some scientists suggest that in certain regions
              (e.g., central Western Europe) contrails already may be as significant for
              climate as the present anthropogenic CO2 forcing.  However, before attempting
              to evaluate the climatic impacts of contrails, and in order to extrapolate the
              effects of the predicted continued increase in air traffic into the 21st
              century, a comprehensive spatial climatology of contrail occurrences for the
              contemporary period (1995-2000) is required.  Satellite high-resolution imagery
              are a close-to-ideal database for developing a climatology of contrails.  The
              development of a contemporary contrail climatology is the primary research
              objective, and will be achieved using the archived thermal infrared imagery
              from the NOAA polar orbiters, available on-line.  The spatial and temporal
              variations of contrails over the U.S. in the period 1995-2000 will be
              determined for mid-season months using a manual technique.  This climatology
              will comprise normalized maps of contrail occurrences composited by diurnal,
              monthly, and annual time periods; graphed zonal frequencies for different
              periods; and temporal variations plotted by region, facilitated using
              geographic information system (GIS) methodology.  For about 7 contrail
              "outbreak" periods comprising the range of geographical locations, mid-season
              months, and synoptic meteorological conditions, the incidence of contrail
              spreading to form cirrostratus clouds will be tracked using GOES imagery.  For
              these cases also, the satellite contrail information will be allied with
              aircraft-level temperature and wind observations to help disclose the important
              physical processes associated with persisting contrails.

The contemporary
              contrail climatology developed for the U.S. will help provide appropriate
              boundary conditions for assessing the climatic impacts of contrails, for
              modeling the possible role of contrails in future climate, and for ultimately
              guiding policymakers.  More specifically, the analysis will permit
              clarification of the associations between synoptic meteorological conditions
              and contrails, and help provide rules useful for the real-time prediction of
              contrails.  The ultimate products of the research will be statistical models
              that quantify the relationship between the contrail data and other proxy
              measures of jet aircraft activity (e.g., jet fuel usage).  These will permit an
              extrapolation into the first half of the 21st century of the magnitude and
              preferred locations of likely increases in the cirrus clouds that result from
              persisting contrails, and which are important for climate.

