Title       : RUI: Investigating the Effect of Hair Bundle Hydrodynamics in the Inner Ear
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0099753

Award Number: 0099753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63234              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Shatz shatz@kirchoff.ee.suffolk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Suffolk University
	      8 Ashburton Place
	      Boston, MA  021082770    617/573-8630

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shatz
0099753
An important goal of this research is to understand the
              relationship between the morphology of inner ear hair bundle structures and
              their functionality; in particular, how the size and shape affects their
              response to stimuli of different frequencies. Another goal  is to understand
              the role that an overlying membrane has in hair cell sensitivity. Hair bundles
              of hearing organs are usually topped by an overlying membrane called the
              tectorial membrane. Comparing the hydrodynamics of a model which represents an
              overlying membrane to one that does not should elucidate the role of an
              overlying membrane in hair cell sensitivity. The principal investigator
              previously investigated the hydrodynamics of a single hair bundle as a
              two-dimensional flap and as a   three-dimensional hemispheroid. The 3-D
              analysis indicated that the 2-D model does not adequately  represent hair
              bundle dynamics at low frequencies. This new research project is designed to
              extend the hemispheroid model in two directions: to include mid-frequencies,
              and to analyze a model with an overlying membrane in the low and high frequency
              regions.    

Students are to participate in this research in several ways:
              by  comparing the results of different methods of solving for the distribution
              of the fundamental solutions; by animating the motion of the hair bundles and
              surrounding fluid; by studying the singularity method; studying the features of
              neural tuning curves.  The research will enhance the students' understanding in
              the areas of fluid flows, numerical analysis, ear physiology, and computer
              programming. Results from the research are expected to contribute to the
              knowledge base of auditory science and also to numerical modeling of fluids. In
              the field of micro-mechanics the new knowledge may prove useful in developing
              micro-mechanical transducers of sound and motion.


