Title       : Harmonic and Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0099767

Award Number: 0099767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121089             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Nagel nagel@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT (DMS-0099767)

The principal investigator proposes to study the sharp
              regularity
properties of operators associated to domains of finite type in
              dimensions
greater than two, and to apply the results to the study of the
              boundary
behavior of holomorphic functions in these domains. He also proposes
              to
study corresponding properties on certain nilpotent Lie groups.
              The
operators under consideration include the Szego and Bergman projections,
              and
the relative fundamental solutions to the Kohn-Laplacian. In particular,
              the
principal investigator hopes to find an appropriate metric that controls
              the
size of the distribution kernel for the Szego projection on
              diagonalizable
pseudo-convex domains of finite type, and on convex domains. He
              hopes to
study the boundary behavior of holomorphic functions in
              certain
non-diagonalizable domains, and in this context, he proposes to
              study
variants of the Hardy-Littlewood maximal function. Appropriate nilpotent
              Lie
groups can model many of these problems, and the principal
              investigator
proposes to study the corresponding convolution operators on the
              groups. The
distribution kernels of these operators have singularities that
              are more
complicated than the classical Calderon-Zygmund singular integral
              operators,
and the problem thus leads to interesting questions in harmonic
              analysis.

Interesting questions and results in mathematics often arise at
              the
interface of two or more areas of research, since in such situations,
              deep
results in one field can shed light on previously intractable problems
              in
another. The research outlined in this proposal is directed
              towards
questions at the interface of modern harmonic analysis, several
              complex
variables, and linear partial differential equations. For more than
              forty
years these areas have enjoyed a very profitable symbiotic relationship.
              For
example, attempts to solve the Levy problem in complex analysis led to
              the
development of deep results about hypo-elliptic partial
              differential
equations, and these problems, in turn, led to developments in
              harmonic
analysis on nilpotent Lie groups such as the Heisenberg group. Many
              of these
related results dealt with integral operators that are modeled on
              the
classical singular integrals such as the Hilbert transform and the
              Riesz
transforms whose study goes back to the middle of the twentieth century.
              In
recent years, it has become clear that new problems in complex
              analysis
require the understanding of new kinds of operators in which
              the
singularities of the kernel are considerably more complicated than
              the
classical singular integrals. The research described in this proposal
              is
directed toward understanding these more complicated situations. 




