Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Agenda Setting in the
               States: A Comparative Institutional Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0099355

Award Number: 0099355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7620               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Brace pbrace@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	
This Doctoral Dissertation Research  project looks at American state
              government agenda setting comparatively. It considers how political issues get
              on state government agendas, and, in particular, why gubernatorial,
              legislative, and judicial political agendas vary across and within states. More
              specifically, this dissertation examines institutional agenda space allocated
              to redistributive social and economic policies across varying preference
              distributions, institutional rules, design and political context, and political
              resources. Redistributive policies are defined as social and economic policies
              that involve advantaged and disadvantaged groups (i.e., rich versus poor;
              majority versus minority). The goal of this project is to provide an integrated
              model of agenda setting that highlights the primary forces promoting or
              inhibiting redistributive agendas in the states. The research design in this
              study collects and analyzes data from all fifty states, looking at the years
              1994-1996. Ordinary least squares and maximum likelihood estimation will be
              employed to systematically test hypotheses about institutional agenda setting
              and economic and social redistribution in the American states. The data will
              consist of governor state of the state addresses, state legislature bill
              introductions, and state supreme court case dockets. The results from this
              dissertation will provide a comprehensive view of the politics of agenda
              setting practices within and across the states.



