Title       : Simultaneous Vibration Confinement and Disturbance Rejection Through
               Electromechanical Tailoring of Piezoeletric Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0099827

Award Number: 0099827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178265             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kon-Well Wang kwwang@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The overall project goal is to investigate a novel vibration control concept
              --simultaneous disturbance rejection and vibration confinement via
              piezoelectric network tailoring.  The underlying principle for vibration
              confinement, which has attracted significant attention among vibration control
              researchers, is to alter the structural modes in such a manner that the
              corresponding modal components have much smaller amplitude in concerned areas
              than the remaining part of the structure.  As a result, the vibration energy
              will be confined to regions that are less important.  While vibration
              confinement is an attractive idea, some critical problems need to be addressed
              before the concept can be realized.  The proposed new idea can solve these
              problems and greatly advance the state of the art.  The research tasks include
              theory development, system analysis, and experimental investigation.  
The
              significance and impact of the proposed research will be: (a) With
              piezoelectric networks, it is possible to suppress vibration of the entire
              mechanical structure by confining the energy in the electrical circuitry part
              of the system, which cannot be achieved with the current confinement approach.
              (b) With the circuit elements as design variables, one can re-design the
              electrical system to achieve vibration confinement without changing the
              mechanical structure -- adjusting electrical circuits is much easier than
              modifying mechanical components. (c) With the circuit elements as additional
              design variables, the system design space can be significantly increased. This
              could allow the possibility of simultaneous left/right eigenstructure
              assignment. One can thus achieve disturbance rejection (through shaping the
              left eigenvector) together with energy confinement (shaping the right
              eigenvector) and end up with much better vibration control performance than
              that of the current practice. (d) The proposed effort will be the first to
              examine piezoelectric network tailoring for general complex structures with a
              systematic and rigorous approach.  


