Title       : The Bermuda Testbed Mooring (BTM) Project: A Community Resource for Science and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0099245

Award Number: 0099245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2392781            (Estimated)
Investigator: Tommy D. Dickey tommy.dickey@opl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1315,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this project is to continue to provide the
              oceanographic community with a critical resource for scientific and
              technological studies, namely a deep-ocean mooring platform and core
              interdisciplinary measurements. Time-series programs off Bermuda (Bermuda
              Atlantic Time-series Study or BATS) have been effectively used since 1988 to
              make exciting discoveries, to increase our knowledge and understanding of a
              variety of ocean processes, and to develop and test models. Objectives of the
              BTM program include: collection of high temporal resolution, interdisciplinary
              data, which will complement ship-based BATS data (and data collected through
              other specialized programs in the vicinity; facilitate studies and enhance
              understanding of the roles of higher frequency and episodic phenomena (gravity
              waves to mesoscale and beyond) in affecting the variability of upper ocean
              biogeochemistry, ecology, and physics, and 3) provide the BTM's high frequency,
              long-term data sets to investigators who will be developing and testing
              sub-seasonal, seasonal, and longer-term disciplinary and interdisciplinary
              models designed to include high frequency and episodic phenomena. BTM will also
              serve as a model for future autonomous global ocean observatory system
              platforms. Technological objectives include: supplying data which can be used
              for groundtruthing data for passing floats, drifters, gliders, and autonomous
              underwater vehicles (AUVs) as well as satellites to provide a platform for the
              testing and utilization of emerging sensors, instrumentation, and data
              communication technologies, and reduce dependence on ship-based operations (and
              therefore cost) as new sensors, platform technologies, and communication
              systems come on line.  The BTM program is multi-faceted and already serves a
              large number of oceanographers and students ranging from technologists to
              observationalists (in situ and remote sensing) to modelers. The continuation of
              the BTM program will be used to accelerate observational capacity at a time
              when knowledge of the ocean is of growing societal interest and concern.



