Title       : Inverse Problems via Layer Splitting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0099838

Award Number: 0099838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111305             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sylvester sylvest@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop "Layer Stripping", or more properly,
              "Layer Splitting" techniques for inverse scattering problems in one or more
              dimensions. We are working to create stable algorithms by utilizing the
              principle of causality and by characterizing the scattering data, as much as we
              possibly can. Inverse scattering problems are often posed in either the
              "frequency
domain" or in the "time domain". Theoretically, the two are
              equivalent, one set of data being related to the other by the Fourier
              transform. However, features that are easily seen in one domain can appear much
              more complicated in the other. For example, the scattering operator, in the
              frequency domain is easily seen to satisfy certain bounds.  The analogous
              bounds in the time domain appear much more complicated.  Similarly, the timing
              of reflections (i.e. you hear reflections from nearby objects before you hear
              those from objects further away) becomes a property of ideals in spaces of
              analytic functions when translated to the frequency domain.

A main feature
              of our approach is to carefully analyze how to express each such feature in
              both contexts, and use these to help characterize the scattering data and
              enforce stability.
The fundamental task of science is to investigate the
              world. Most often, we accomplish this goal by directing waves (e.g. light,
              X-rays, sound) at an object and  observing the waves after they have interacted
              with that object.  In some cases, the results of such an experiment can be
              readily understood (e.g. a photograph, a single X-ray).  However, as our
              technology becomes more and more complex, the data from an experiment are less
              and less likely to be directly meaningful. More and more, sophisticated
              mathematical and statistical techniques are necessary to translate data into
              something which is meaningful to the human investigator (e.g. a CAT scan, a
              neutron scattering experiment). This is the general role that Inverse Problems
              plays in science today.  It is the mathematical science of interpreting
              experiment. When we solve inverse problems we run physics backwards, deducing
              the cause from the effect. While physical intuition often suggests the best
              imaging experiments, an imaging algorithm is not a model of a natural process.
              In particular, these problems are often ill-posed, and physical principles must
              often be applied in ways that are radically different than how they would
              function in a "forward problem" which directly models nature. Thus they offer a
              unique opportunity for using  mathematical intuition to supplement physical
              intuition. This project seeks to employ physical principles in novel ways to
              develop stable imaging techniques. Here is an example, discovered under
              previous NSF support. We observe reflections of waves from a layered lossless
              medium with unknown wavespeed. If one makes a guess at the wave speed in part
              of the medium and uses that guess to compute the reflection one would have seen
              from the rest of the medium, then either the guess is correct or the computed
              reflections violate the principle of causality by arriving back at the receiver
              too soon. We used this principle to develop a very stable algorithm.

