Title       : Unsaturated Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a0099800

Award Number: 0099800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Houston sandra.houston@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Houston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              It is recognized that our infrastructure to a very large extent is founded on
              unsaturated soils.  In fact, construction in unsaturated soils is typically
              preferred when practical, due to reduced costs and effort.  However, the
              geotechnical research community has not yet solved all of the issues of
              implementation of unsaturated soil theory.  One of the primary difficulties in
              bringing the relatively new fundamental theories of unsaturated soil mechanics
              into engineering design, analysis, and construction is the difficulty, time,
              and cost associated with unsaturated soil characterization.  Two major elements
              are needed to bring unsaturated soil mechanics and fundamental analyses into
              practice: (1) estimates or measurements of soil suction, and (2) moduli or
              coefficients relating soil suction to performance parameters such as soil shear
              strength and compressibility.  In this research, a range in sophistication of
              approach will be employed for unsaturated soil characterization. Hierarchical
              Level 1 will be developed for extremely high-level, large budget projects for
              which significant expenditures are likely. Hierarchical Level 4 will be
              developed for lower budget, routine projects for which very limited testing and
              analysis are common.  This research is an important step in bringing
              unsaturated soil mechanics into present day geotechnical engineering and
              construction practice. The implementation of unsaturated soils theory would
              result in more fundamentally sound analyses and design and would lead to
              substantial savings in construction costs for many applications. 
