Title       : Long-term durability of Carbon CFRP Composites applied to R/C Concrete Bridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0099792

Award Number: 0099792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris P. Pantelides chris@civil.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel O. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence D. Reaveley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The investigation will focus on the monitoring and analysis of the State Street
              Bridge in Salt Lake City, Utah, which has been seismically retrofitted with
              Carbon FRP composites. The severe weather changes, the application of salt in
              the winter, and the freezing and thawing patterns make this a unique study. 
              Test items, plates, and cylinders will be placed at the bridge site and used
              for destructive testing at predetermined intervals.  Further laboratory
              testing, will investigate single and dual variables.  The objectives of this
              research are to: (a) evaluate the long-term reduction in strength and modulus
              of elasticity of the carbon CFRP composite due to changes in temperature,
              alkalinity, chlorides, UV exposure, and freeze/thaw cycles; (b) evaluate the
              durability of the bond between the CFRP composite and concrete using
              mechanical, thermal, and chemical testing; (c) evaluate the long-term effect of
              the CFRP composite retrofit on the strength and structural characteristics of
              the reinforced concrete bridge; (d) develop a "durability reduction factor" to
              be used in the design of a CFRP composite retrofit, based on the information
              gathered from the long-term monitoring of State Street Bridge.  Instead of
              testing only commercial products in the proposed durability study, a matrix of
              carbon fibers and resins will be utilized.  A total of five composite materials
              will be investigated: three commercial composite products, to be supplied from
              three independent manufacturers and two non-commercial products.  


