Title       : Some Analytical Aspects of the Theory of Integrable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0099812

Award Number: 0099812
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander R. Its   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The  research project is focused on the analytical aspects of the theory
              of
integrable systems related to the Riemann-Hilbert  and isomonodromy
              methods.
The problems under consideration include the  asymptotic analysis of
              the
correlation functions  of  exactly solvable quantum field and
              statistical
mechanics models, the investigation of the double scaling limits
              in the 
theory of orthogonal polynomials, the analysis of the integrable
              systems 
describing the distribution functions of random  matrix theory and
              random 
permutations,  and  the global asymptotic analysis  of the solutions
              of 
integrable differential  equations of the  Painleve' and KdV types.
              

The theory of integrable systems is an expanding area  which plays
              an
increasingly important role as one of the principal sources of
              new
analytical and algebraic ideas for many branches of modern mathematics
              and
theoretical physics. Simultaneously, it provides an efficient analytic
              tool
for the study of some of the fundamental  mathematical models arising
              
in  modern nonlinear science and technology.  Specifically,  the research
              
directions indicated above deal with the mathematical models which form 
the
               theoretical basis for the following fields: condensed matter, 
high energy
              and plasma physics, nonlinear hydrodynamics, and  high-bit rate
              
telecommunication systems.  A special attention  in the project is given 
to
               the  analysis of the distributions of random matrix theory which govern 
              
statistical properties of the  large systems which  do not  obey the usual
              laws  
of classical probability. This kind of systems appears in  many
              different areas
of applied  science and technology including  heavy nuclei,
              polymer growth, 
high-dimensional data  analysis, and  certain percolation
              processes.

