Title       : Magnetoelastic Interactions in Giant Magnetostriction Multilayers for Adaptive
               Micro-systems Transducers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0099830

Award Number: 0099830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Wetherhold mecrcw@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harsh D. Chopra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PIs: R. C. Wetherhold and Harsh Deep Chopra, State University of New York at
              Buffalo
Proposal Number:	0099830
Proposal Title:	Magneto-Elastic Interactions
              in Giant Magnetostriction Multilayers
for Adaptive Micro-Systems
              Transducers
Project Abstract:	Research is focused on high strain
              susceptibility and low switching field "giant" magnetostriction of Tb-Fe or
              Sm-Fe films, which are sandwiched between high magnetization soft magnets, such
              as Fe-Co.  Due to inter-layer interactions between stress and magnetization in
              these multilayers, understanding and controlling favorably the magneto-elastic
              coupling is a key objective of these studies.  An overall energy function is
              being developed for the combination of all magnetic, mechanical, and coupling
              energies, in order to understand the magneto-elastic coupling.  Multilayers are
              being sputter deposited as a function of layer thickness and number of
              bilayers, with post-deposition stress annealing to optimize their
              magneto-elastic behavior.  Films are being characterized for their magnetic
              structure and microstructure using analytical electron microscopy, x-ray
              diffraction, and scanning probe microscopy.  Optimized films are being tested
              as adaptive components of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) and Bio-MEMS.
               In addition to the richness of new phenomena that are being observed due to
              magneto-elastic interactions, these studies impact significantly the rapidly
              evolving fields of MEMS and bio-MEMS.  Examples include highly efficient
              micro-switches, laser beam deflectors, fluid jet deflectors, valves, ultrasonic
              motors, micro-grippers and micro-pumps, with high dynamic response. 
              Educational impact includes active training and participation of graduate and
              undergraduate students, as well as high school students from Buffalo area inner
              city high schools.

