Title       : Cacciopoli Sets, Capacities and Quasiconformal Mappings in Carnot-Caratheodory
               Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0099609

Award Number: 0099609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoltan M. Balogh zoltan@math-stat.unibe.ch  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to investigate three fundamental problems arising in
Analysis on
              Carnot-Caratheodory spaces.
The first question is from geometric measure
              theory. It is
related to Cacciopoli sets and their characteristic locus with
              applications 
to minimal surfaces. The second problem is from non-linear
              potential theory and
sub-elliptic PDE related to sharp capacity estimates. The
              third question 
concerns the integrability and Hausdorff dimension distortion
              of quasiconformal mappings in  Carnot-Caratheodory spaces. The  fundamental
              difficulty in this theory lies in the fact that in Carnot-Caratheodory spaces
              we can only work with a restricted number of differential operators
              (corresponding to admissible directions)  while in Euclidean analysis all
              possible directions were allowed. The underlying geometry has a fractal-like
              character illustrating well the complexity and the need of new ideas for
              approaching the above problems.

Due to their construction by mechanical
              linkages, robot motions have to 
satisfy infinitesimal constrains of
              admissible directions. Similar differential
 constrains appear in
              thermodynamics between the characteristic  quantities (temperature, pressure,
              volume, entropy and energy) describing the stage of an ideal gas. The right
              mathematical context for studying these and related phenomena from engineering
              and physics is the setting of Carnot-Caratheodory spaces. The present proposal
              intends to develop the adequate tools of Analysis
for approaching various
              practical questions in this context.



