Title       : Computability Theory and Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0099556

Award Number: 0099556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert I. Soare soare@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              IN this project the investigator will study computability theory and its
              relationship and applications to other areas of mathematics such as
              differential geometry and algebraic structures, as well as internal
              computability properties such as automorphisms of computably enumerable (c.e.)
              sets and the effective content of mathematics.  The space Riem(M) of Riemannian
              metrics (modulo diffeomorphisms) on certain manifolds is of considerable
              interest to a wide variety of mathematicians and physicists.  Topologists have
              proved for certain natural scale invariant functionals related to diameter on
              the space Riem(M), and for certain manifolds M of dimension > 4 that for every
              c.e. set A there is a sequence of points x_n, n in N, the integers, such that
              if n in A then x_n determines a local minimum on Riem(M) whose depth is roughly
              equal to the halting time of the Turing machine computation that n in A.  The
              investigator constructed an infinite sequence of sets A_i, i in N, of c.e. sets
              so that for all n the settling function (for stopping times of the associated
              Turing machine) of A_i dominates that of A_{i+1}, even when the latter is
              composed with an arbitrary computable function.  The two results together give
              a "fractal" like behavior with extremely big basins, and very much smaller
              basins coming off them, and those containing still smaller basins, and so on,
              where the relative size of one set of basins to the next exceeds any computable
              function, what the topologists describe in their paper on fractals as "the
              astonishing richness of the space of Riemannian metrics on a smooth manifold,
              up to reparametrization.''  The investigator's work will also stress
              connections of computability to model theory and algebraic structures. With a
              junior colleague and a graduate student he will classify the degree spectrum of
              models which are prime or saturated but which have no computable isomorphic
              copy.  Finally, he will continue his work on the automorphisms and structure of
              c.e. sets.  He will put together these results to help obtain a classification
              of structure of c.e. sets and effective content of certain parts of
              mathematics. 
