Title       : Design and Control of Next Generation Networks:A Measurement-Analytic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0099137

Award Number: 0099137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $783104             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ness B. Shroff shroff@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin K. Chong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravi R. Mazumdar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine P. Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Next generation high-speed networks are expected to support exciting new
              applications involv-
ing multi-media traffic, such as video-conferencing,
              tele-medicine, video-on-demand, and web
TV, in addition to countless other
              yet-to-be-conceived network applications. The viability and
the continuing
              success of these networks will depend crucially upon their ability to offer
              high
performance with regard to latency, delay variation, and bandwidths they
              can provide to these
myriad of applications. Customers will demand
              high-quality multimedia services, and not be
satisfied with the kind of
              high-latency, variable delay that is characteristic of the current Inter-
net.
              The various performance requirements from the users and the sheer size of these
              networks
make it imperative that we properly understand at a fundamental level
              how to design, engi-
neer, and control these networks, and develop appropriate
              methodologies. It is also essential
that these tools be evaluated in terms of
              complexity and accuracy using experimentation (i.e.,
testbed) and
              simulation.
      To address the challenges described above, we propose to
              develop an innovative approach
that harnesses the power of combined
              measurement and analysis to create design and control
tools for next
              generation networks. We plan to elaborate on the approach in the context
              of:
performance evaluation (i.e., QoS estimation), and QoS-sensitivity
              estimation.
     These issues form the foundation required to solve key
              network design and control problems.
Building upon our approach|combining
              analysis with measurements|we will then focus on
on a variety of problems that
              have to be addressed in order for networks to support QoS:
  admission
              control,                                                                       
                                                                                          
              congestion control,
  QoS-based routing, and
  network design and
              dimensioning.
Our proposed solutions to the above problems will be supported
              and refined by extensive
empirical studies on our experimental platform. This
              platform is capable of supporting a
variety of network technologies and
              traffic characteristics.
     Our research team has been at the forefront of
              the development of important results in traffic
analysis, network design, and
              control, and is committed to creating the necessary synergy for
addressing the
              key problems outlined above. Our team already has a significantly
              productive
track record in previous collaborative efforts.
      We are
              planning to address a set of problems that are critically important for
              deploying
next generation networks with the capability of offering high
              bandwidth and stringent QoS to
users. Creating a future broadband network that
              is exible, efficient, robust, and controllable
is essential to the viability
              of our economy and to the different communities within it. Hence, if
our
              research is successful, it will have a significant impact on the delivery of
              services necessary
to meet the diverse needs of education, business, and
              entertainment.
