Title       : Design, Modeling and Implementation of Polarization Switching Digital to Analog
               Converter (PDAC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0099669

Award Number: 0099669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180002             (Estimated)
Investigator: T S. Kalkur kalkur@eas.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	Ferroelectric thin films are becoming extremely important in the
              implementation of non-volatile memories with nearly unlimited endurance and
              fast read and write times compared to conventional floating gate non-volatile
              memory technology. These thin films have been successfully integrated onto
              conventional complementary metal oxide semiconductor technology (CMOS). We are
              proposing a novel application for ferroelectric thin films in the area data
              conversion. 
In digital to analog converters, scaling network plays an
              extremely important role in the overall performance. The scaling network is
              usually voltage based using resistor networks or charge based using capacitor
              networks or a combination of both. This proposal investigates the design,
              modeling and implementation of polarization based scaling network. The proposed
              digital to analog converter should have less area, reduced power dissipation,
              reduced substrate noise and higher speed.
The project involves developing a
              suitable SPICE circuit model for the ferroelectric capacitor switching as well
              as process and material characteristics condition to obtain a given resolution.
              The model to be developed will also incorporate temperature and voltage
              dependence characteristic of circuit elements. Capacitor test patterns will be
              fabricated with Strontium Bismuth Tantalate (SBT) ferroelectric thin films. The
              SPICE model parameters will be extracted from ferroelectric capacitor
              characterization. The analog switches, voltage references and comparators will
              be attached to the CMOS chip by flip chip technology. The module will be tested
              to verify the performance of PDAC.   



