Title       : Patrimony, Property, and Development Territories in Northern Côte d'Ivoire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0099252

Award Number: 0099252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Bassett bassett@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,9186,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the effects of a new land law requiring the
              registration and titling of rural land on the productive activities and
              livelihoods of women, pastoralists, and poor households in northern Ivory
              Coast. A major debate exists in the African rural development literature on
              whether indigenous land rights systems should be built upon or supplanted by
              land titling to promote natural resource conservation and economic growth.  The
              question is what will be the implications of the Ivory Coast land law on the
              fundamental issues of resource allocation and use.  The research seeks to
              document shifts in resource access and use in the context of the new land law
              at the local and regional scales.  The main hypothesis states that the new land
              law is creating from scratch new political-administrative entities, rules, and
              regulations within rural communities which will interact with and augment, not
              replace, existing institutions and practices of land allocation.  These
              institutional innovations linked to new governance structures at the local,
              regional and national scales present new opportunities for individuals and
              groups to gain (and lose) access to and control over productive resources.  The
              general question is how will resource access and use patterns change as a
              result of these interactions as different actors interpret and modify these new
              rules and regulations?  Do the strategies of different actors to claim land
              rights under these changing conditions result in greater investments in
              agricultural and pastoral production and natural resource conservation?  A
              hybrid research strategy and comparative case study will generate both
              qualitative and quantitative information.  The principal methods include survey
              research techniques (farming systems studies); interviews with members of land
              registration and land management committees (land registration studies),
              vegetation transects, key informant interviews, and aerial photo and satellite
              image interpretation (environmental change study). 

This project will
              contribute to land tenure policy debates at a time when many African
              governments are engaged in land tenure reforms.  This study's focus on the
              actions taken by women, pastoralists, and the poor to maintain or improve their
              access to resources will illuminate the creative ways in which vulnerable
              subgroups actively seek to improve their status and livelihoods.  Finally, this
              project will provide original and high quality data on the relationship between
              land registration and environmental change by examining the effects of the new
              land law and land user stakes on land cover and land use changes.


