Title       : The Cost of Environmental Policy in a General Equilibrium Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0099118

Award Number: 0099118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53680              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Pizer pizer@rff.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Resources For Future Inc
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The costs of environmental policy are frequently thought of as the direct costs
              to firms and individuals associated with compliance. Yet, modeling efforts over
              the past ten years have consistently demonstrated that interactions with
              existing tax distortions can increase (and under less common circumstances
              decrease) the cost to society by a factor of several times. This is in complete
              agreement with early work by Harberger who emphasized that taxation in one
              market can lead to large welfare effects in other related markets. At the same
              time, however, classic theoretical work on public good provision by Diamond and
              Mirrlees suggests only a modest divergence between direct and social costs.
              This disagreement can be traced to opposing assumptions about the nature of the
              tax system: optimal versus fixed taxes. Despite considerable work on the topic
              of regulation in the presence of existing taxes, there has been little attempt
              in the environment literature or the public finance literature to reconcile
              these results in a unified model. This is particularly important for
              environmental policy since the relative cost of different policy options (e.g.,
              tradable permits versus command-and-control) depends on these effects.

This
              project develops a general equilibrium framework that can be used to examine
              the social cost of different environmental policies under alternate assumptions
              about government fiscal behavior. The analytic framework is based on classic
              public finance models suitably modified to consider these differences.
              Expressions are derived for the marginal social costs associated with the
              various combinations of environmental policy and fiscal behavior, linking this
              exercise with previous work and providing much needed intuition about distinct
              outcomes.  The practical goal is to provide guidance to analysts and
              policymakers, who wish to evaluate environmental policy with specific, or at
              least transparent, assumptions about fiscal policy. The scholarly goal is to
              unify work on both public good provision and environmental regulation under
              alternative fiscal assumptions.

Cost-benefit analysis is one of the foremost
              tools of environmental policy analysis. Even when benefits are difficult to
              quantify, cost studies often provide the impetus for or against proposed
              regulation. Since considerable theoretical and empirical work has demonstrated
              the potential for social costs to diverge significantly from private costs, a
              thorough and yet practical understanding of the determinants of that divergence
              is important. It is important for accurate cost analysis and it is important
              for good policy decisions.
By clarifying the connection between government
              fiscal policy and social costs of environmental policy, the proposed research
              can enlighten the discussion of costs and benefits and improve the quality of
              cost analyses.

