Title       : Home Binds: Naturalization Among Somalian Refugees in Minneapolis and St. Paul
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0099145

Award Number: 0099145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth H. Boyle boyle@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Arthur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines how gender affects the naturalization process among
              Somalian refugees in Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota. The project develops
              two sets of propositions that hinge on whether men or women become naturalized
              at proportionately higher rates. On the one hand, if the idea of citizenship is
              historically male, American citizenship may increase Somalian men's status
              within the household and men may provide the family liaison to the "public"
              sphere. Consistent with these ideas is the further consideration that
              bureaucratic and discriminatory barriers to citizenship may disproportionately
              affect Somalian women. On the other hand, Somalian women may seek American
              citizenship at higher rates than men because they have greater exposure to
              Western ideals through their interaction with welfare and educational
              institutions, and they have more to gain from the rights rhetoric that
              accompanies the notion of citizenship. In addition to exploring the effect of
              gender, the project will consider the effect of education and family structure
              on men and women's naturalization choices.  To explore these questions,
              interviews will be conducted with a total of 140 Somalian refugees in the Twin
              Cities. In these interviews, the project will assess the local, national, and
              international forces that encourage certain individuals to seek citizenship
              while explicitly or implicitly discouraging others.  This is a significant
              undertaking as the project will facilitate the incorporation of men and women
              refugees into their new environment in the United States by identifying formal
              and informal barriers that inhibit their efforts to participate in the
              community.  This project will also have broader implications for understanding
              "world polity" as American citizenship can privilege individuals as ambassadors
              of "global" principles-human rights, environmental protection, democratic
              process-to their native countries.
