Title       : Benthic Primary Production on the South Atlantic Bight Continental Shelf --
               Areal Efficiency of Light Utilization and Biogeochemical Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0099167

Award Number: 0099167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349873             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Nelson nelson@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research program focuses on the contribution of benthic microalgae to the
              total primary
productivity of a major continental shelf system, the South
              Atlantic Bight (SAB) off the southeastern United States. The work will focus on
              the proposition that biogeochemical cycling is intensified in the lower portion
              of the euphotic zone when the euphotic zone extends to the sand sediments of
              the shelf.  In particular, it is hypothesized that the areal efficiency of
              light utilization for photosynthesis is enhanced as a result of the optical
              environment in the sands, high benthic microalgal biomass, and the internal
              cycling of nutrients within the surface layer of the permeable sands. Further,
              it is hypothesized that areal benthic primary production on the shelf may be
              estimated on a regional scale as a function of irradiance levels at the shelf
              sea floor. The study builds upon the results and experience obtained in a prior
              study that suggested that most of the sea floor of the broad SAB shelf is often
              within the euphotic zone. And, although the light intensity reaching the shelf
              sea floor averaged only some 4-7% of surface incident irradiance, microalgae
              could contribute about 40% of the total primary production (water column plus
              benthic) over the mid-shelf region of the SAB. 

To address the hypotheses
              stated above, the study will: 1) determine benthic primary production
over the
              annual cycle in relation to regional environmental and bio-optical variability;
              2) evaluate the areal efficiency of utilization for photosynthesis on the
              shelf, emphasizing on the sediment portion of the euphotic zone; 3) investigate
              key aspects of the physiological ecology of benthic diatoms, particularly those
              that could contribute to the maintenance of high benthic microalgal biomass
              (and high areal photosynthetic potential) in the shelf sediments. In the study,
              several approaches will be employed to obtain a robust estimate of benthic
              primary production as a function of incident irradiance. The biogeochemical and
              oceanographic scope of the proposed study will be expanded through association
              with other regional field programs currently in process. 

