Title       : Infrastructure for Context-Aware Wireless Network Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0099184

Award Number: 0099184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1186383            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henning Schulzrinne hgs@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter K. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Feiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Information systems are now mobile, wearable, multimodal, real-time,
              scalable from workstations to
desktops to notebooks to palmtops to cellular,
              collaborative and ubiquitous. Network access is becoming
increasingly
              important as a part of the computing infrastructure. Unfortunately, for the
              near term, un-limited bandwidth, anytime access to a network is not feasible,
              particularly in large urban environments
where interference, occlusion and
              collision are ongoing problems. To alleviate this, we are developing a
set of
              context-aware Autonomous Information Retrieval (AIR) pods. These are small,
              hardened low-cost
computers that require only electric power. AIR pods have
              sufficient local storage to hold relatively static
information and are
              equipped with two wireless interfaces: one short-range, unlicensed high-speed
              interface
such as IEEE 802.11 and one long-range, low-speed interface such as
              CDPD or other Wide Area Network
connection which may be intermittent. AIR pods
              can be either stationary or mobile. Stationary AIR pods
can be attached to
              lamp posts and traffic lights, hidden in lighted store signs or in subway
              stations. Mobile
AIR pods can be attached to delivery trucks, postal service
              vehicles, buses, police cruisers, taxis or other
vehicles that roam city
              streets. AIR pods are also small enough to be carried in backpacks.
     We
              propose to develop and implement the prototype hardware and software AIR idea,
              and explore what
kinds of infrastructure support are necessary to make these
              devices a key component of network applications.
Research issues addressed
              will be cooperative data sharing, resource scheduling and anticipatory
              caching,
message propagation and wide-area resource discovery.
     The
              proposed mobile networking infrastructure will be tested in a demanding set of
              context-aware mo-bile research projects. The first project is a wearable
              augmented reality system that allows outdoor users to tour a campus
              interactively. A second related project allows indoor users to collaborate with
              those outside over wireless networks. The third project is a mobile robot
              sensing system that can autonomously explore the campus and create rich 3D,
              texture mapped, site models. All of these applications need to interact with
              host computers through limited network access, and we propose to optimize this
              interaction over bandwidth, devices, and locality using context-aware wireless
              networks.
