Title       : Risk and Risk Aversion: A State-Space Approach, with Applications.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0099206

Award Number: 0099206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Werner jwerner@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a new theory of choice under
              uncertainty based on agents' attitudes toward uncertainty when uncertainty is
              described by (a finite set of) states of nature.  Implications of the new
              theory for consumption allocations and prices of financial assets in
              equilibrium are studied too.   The main attitude toward uncertainty this
              project is concerned with is risk aversion.  Risk aversion gives rise to many
              important results in financial economics.   The most frequently used
              specification of risk-averse preferences is the concave expected utility.  But
              this is very restrictive and has little empirical or experimental support. 
              Further, it has no satisfactory axiomatic foundation in the relevant setting. 
              The occasionally used more general class of risk-averse preferences - utility
              functions that are monotone with respect to second order stochastic dominance -
              has proved to be, with exception of some special cases, very difficult to
              characterize.  This project studies a new alternative class of utility
              functions that is broader than monotone functions with respect to second order
              stochastic dominance but yet can be used to obtain very useful results on
              portfolio choice, risk sharing, asset pricing and other areas of financial
              economics.

The project explores a new notion of "greater risk" based on the
              idea of risk as a mean-independent random variable (a state-contingent claim)
              with zero mean.  The project introduces a class of utility functions that are
              monotone with respect to greater risk. Greater risk is far stronger than the
              standard Rothschild-Stiglitz (or second order stochastic dominance) notion of
              more risky.   One difference is that two contingent claims with the same
              distribution are not considered equivalent under ordering by greater risk, in
              contrast to the Rothschild-Stiglitz notion. There is no appealing reason that
              they should be considered equivalent.
The class of utility functions that are
              monotone with respect to greater risk (called averse to mean-independent risk)
              has a nice characterization. Again, this is in contrast to functions that are
              monotone with respect to second order stochastic dominance for which there is
              no useful general characterization. The second important advantage of the class
              of mean-independent risk-averse utility functions is that, as all important
              results in the theory of financial markets - most of them known under the
              assumption of risk-averse expected utility - carry over to that much broader
              class of functions.

