Title       : Noise-Induced Fluctuations in Nonequilibrium Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0099484

Award Number: 0099484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Maier rsm@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Maier
 Small random fluctuations, which are often of thermal origin, are the
              cause of many important and interesting physical phenomena.  These include
              chemical reactions, the nucleation phenomenon in phase transitions (i.e., the
              formation of a droplet of one phase within another phase), and the formation of
              unusual spatially localized states in liquid crystals.  In all of these,
              `noise', i.e., random fluctuations, eventually drives a physical system over a
              barrier, and moves it from one stable state to another. Several special cases
              of this phenomenon were treated by Kramers in 1940,and for several decades
              thereafter, theoretical and experimental physicists relied heavily on his work.
               However, his formulas, and modified versions which other researchers later
              derived, apply only if the physical system is capable of coming to equilibrium,
              in a thermodynamic sense.  Many physical systems are inherently out of
              equilibrium, either because of the unusual nature of their microscopic dynamics
              or random fluctuations, or because they are driven by external forces (for
              example, periodically).

This research will study, both theoretically and
              experimentally, several nonequilibrium systems, and will extend the range of
              theoretical techniques that can be applied to them.  Systems to be investigated
              include systems where the barrier to be crossed oscillates periodically, on
              account of externally applied periodic driving.  A system that exemplifies this
              is a mesoscopic particle confined to a periodically modulated dual optical
              trap, and subject to small thermal fluctuations.  Also to be investigated are
              multistable systems with spatial extent.  In systems with spatial extent, the
              state of the system is infinite-dimensional: it comprises much more information
              than the position of a single particle.  An example is a thin layer of a
              nematic liquid crystal, driven by weak spatiotemporal noise.  Among other
              projects, this research will attempt to extend the Kramers approach to systems
              with spatial extent.

