Title       : Development of Hexaferrite Films for Integrated Optical Waveguide Isolators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a0099681

Award Number: 0099681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Oliver saoliver@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carmine Vittoria  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The magneto-optical and optical properties of thick films of hexagonal ferrites
              (hexaferrites) will be developed to meet the emerging need for integrated
              optical isolators for broad-band telecommunication systems.  Comparisons
              between barium hexaferrite, the prototypical uniaxial hexaferrite, and yttrium
              iron garnet (YIG), the prototypical garnet composition used as the basis for
              developing all presently used magneto-optic materials, shows that barium
              hexaferrite possesses a significantly higher Curie temperature and larger
              Faraday rotation than YIG.  In addition, the optical absorption mechanisms and
              spectral dependence appear to be the same for both materials.  Thus, there is a
              strong premise for believing that the substituted hexaferrite films to be
              developed here may have superior magneto-optical properties and temperature
              stability compared to present-day bismuth-substituted garnets.  In addition,
              the strong uniaxial anisotropy inherent in oriented hexaferrite films may allow
              fabrication of self-biased, magnetically-saturated, waveguide isolators that
              can be incorporated into integrated optoelectronic devices.
As of yet, no one
              has measured hexaferrite films of sufficient thickness for magneto-optical
              applications.  This program builds upon our successful development of thick
              epitaxial hexaferrite films for milimeter-wavelength applications, and will
              systematically measure the structural, magnetic, optical and magneto-optical
              properties of both pure and substituted hexaferrite films.  Techniques for film
              lift-off will also be developed to simplify the fabrication of integrated
              devices.  Particular emphasis will be placed on developing films having high
              Faraday rotation and good thermal stability, and on designing and testing
              optical waveguide isolators that use the uniaxial anisotropy of hexaferrites to
              eliminate external magnets.

