Title       : Experience and Expertise in Strategic Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0099353

Award Number: 0099353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200244             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Walker mwalker@arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Wooders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In recent years experimental methods have become an indispensable component
              of
economic research. Laboratory experiments are used to test economic theory,
              to discover
the properties of alternative institutional rules, and to assist
              in the design of new market
institutions. A few examples are the design of the
              FCC spectrum auctions, the design of a
new market institution for matching
              medical interns with hospitals, and the design of new
market institutions for
              the deregulated allocation of electrical power.
Laboratory experiments in
              economics and game theory rest on the premise of
"transference",
              or"parallelism:" the assumption that the behavior of subjects in
              the
laboratory will be the same as the behavior of people in the actual
              strategic encounters
that the experiments are designed to help us understand.
              If laboratory subjects behave
differently, for whatever reason, this would
              present a challenge for experimental
research: theory that failed in the
              laboratory might perform well in the field, or vice-versa;
the properties of a
              trading rule in the laboratory might be different from its
properties in the
              field; and trading rules designed in the laboratory, and which work
              well
there, may perform poorly in the field.
Recent evidence suggests that
              the behavior of people with expertise in certain kinds of
strategic situations
              may be different than the behavior of people who are "inovices," as
laboratory
              subjects typically are, with little or no experience in the given
              strategic
context. This evidence includes recent research by Walker and
              Wooders in which leading
professional tennis players were found to make
              strategic decisions that were more in
accord with the theory of strategic
              behavior than the decisions of laboratory subjects who
had no prior experience
              in the strategic situation.
The research project consists of experiments
              designed to study whether, and how, the
strategic behavior of experts differs
              from the behavior of less experienced and less expert
decision makers. The
              experiments will be conducted primarily on the World Wide Web,
and they will
              be designed specifically to provide for the development and identification
of
              varying levels of expertise and the means to identify differences in behavior
              that are
associated with differing levels of expertise.
The results of this
              research promise to provide a better understanding of the role of
expertise in
              strategic behavior and of the strategic contexts in which parallelism can
              be
expected to hold, and to help identify the settings in which Web-based
              experiments are
superior and those in which laboratory experiments are likely
              to be superior.
