Title       : Geometry of Non-abelian Hodge Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0099715

Award Number: 0099715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony Pantev tpantev@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Tony Pantev uses techniques from both the abelian and 
non-abelian Hodge theory
              to approach concrete geometric questions as well
as problems in cosmology,
              mathematical physics and string theory. 
The investigator and his
              collaborators study four problems.  The first one
describes a conjectural
              Hodge theoretic criterion for deciding whether
a given homotopy type underlies
              a smooth projective variety. The
second concerns the symplectic topology of
              four manifolds, fibered
over the two sphere. The third project
designs an
              explicit construction of sheaves on a gerby K3 surface
and discusses its
              relations to the physical notion of non-commutative
deformation of fields. The
              fourth project proposes an explicit
construction of the special coordinates on
              the moduli space of
Eucledian $D$-branes by means of secondary Abel-Jacobi
              maps.
The understanding of these questions is essential for unifying
              various
linearization procedures in algebraic geometry, symplectic topology
              
and mathematical physics. It brings us closer to understanding the 
basic
              structure of algebraic varieties and 
enhances the geometric arsenal of
              techniques for building explicit
models of string theory vacua.

This is a
              research in the field of algebraic geometry. Algebraic
geometry is not only
              one of the most intensively researched parts
of modern mathematics, but also a
              crucial testing ground for the
recent influx of revolutionary mathematical
              ideas coming from string
theory physics. The investigator's research sets the
              stage for a
rigorous treatment of the hard conjectures generated by 
              our
current understanding of string dualities and enlarges the arsenal
              of
available tools for understanding the physics of strings.
              The
investigator's methods are applicable to a wide range of
              concrete
problems in astrophysics, quantum gravity and  string theory.
