Title       : Polylogarithms, Mixed Motives and Special Values of L-Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0099390

Award Number: 0099390
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Goncharov sasha@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Goncharov continues his study of the arithmetic aspects of classical
              polylogarithms and their generalizations, such as multiple polylogarithms,
              special values of L-functions of algebraic varieties, algebraic K-theory and
              motivic Galois groups.  Professor Goncharov investigates the structure of the
              motivic fundamental group of the projective line punctured at zero, infinity
              and all N-th roots of unity and its surprising relationship with the geometry
              and topology of modular varieties.  The  motivic fundamental group is a mixed
              motive.  Mixed motives can be investigated via their Hodge and l-adic
              realizations.  The l-adic, i.e. arithmetic, side of the problem concerns the
              action of the absolute Galois group on the pro-l completion of the fundamental
              group of the projective line punctured as above.  When N is 1 it is a classical
              problem studied by Grothendieck, Deligne, Ihara, Drinfeld and many other
              mathematicians.  The simplest case of this problem for general N is equivalent
              to the classical theory of cyclotomic units.  The relationship with the
              geometry of modular varieties is a new tool to study this problem.  The Hodge,
              i.e. analytic, aspect of the story concerns the properties of multiple zeta
              values and their generalizations, multiple polylogarithms evaluated at N-th
              roots of unity.  Professor Goncharov investigates a similar problem about the
              structure of the motivic fundamental group of an elliptic curve with complex
              multiplication punctured at the torsion points and its relationship with the
              geometry of modular varieties.  Professor Goncharov continues his study of
              special values of L-functions and polylogarithms.

This research is in the
              area of number theory, which is the branch of mathematics that is concerned
              with questions about the integers and roots of polynomial equations with
              integer coefficients.  The theory of systems of polynomial equations with
              integer coefficients is important for many applications including questions in
              cryptography and coding theory.  A fundamental invariant of such a system of
              equations is its L-function.  During the last three hundred years the
              L-functions were one of the main sources of new mathematical conceptions and
              theories.  For example, certain L-functions provided vital links in the chain
              that led to the recent proof of Fermat's last theorem.  The proposer uses the
              latest techniques in number theory and algebraic geometry to study L-functions
              and their special values at integer points.

