Title       : Collaborative Research: The Art of Conversation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0099003

Award Number: 0099003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192163             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Morgan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As information technology has become more widespread, it is now
              increasingly
possible for decision makers, such as CEOs and legislators, to
              obtain advice from
a variety of experts with di!ering areas of expertise.
              Conventional wisdom suggests
that, as a result, the decision maker will reach
              better decisions. This, however, ignores
the fact that experts may withhold or
              distort information in the hope of influencing
the decision in a direction
              favorable to them. Thus, a decision maker needs to consider
how the structure
              of communication -- the conversation --affects how informative is
the advice
              received from experts. This project investigates how the structure
              of
communication a!ects the quality of decisions.
The first part of the
              project concerns conversations between an uninformed deci-
sion maker and an
              informed expert. When the expert sends a written report, unac-
companied by
              any dialogue, this results in substantial information loss. A
              face-to-face
meeting between a decision maker and an expert, however, leads to
              an improvement
in the informativeness of expert advice--even though the
              decision maker is completely
uninformed. Both the decision maker and the
              expert benefit from the conversation.
This leads us to examine the following
              questions: How much information can be cred-
ibly transmitted in a
              face-to-face meeting? Is it possible to induce the expert to fully
disclose
              his information?
In many situations, the decision maker himself may be
              knowledgeable about some
aspects of the decision. As an example, an
              entrepreneur may have detailed knowl-
edge about the growth prospects of his
              product, but still require financial expertise in
taking his company public.
              The second part of the project concerns communication
in such
              situations--where both the decision maker and the expert have some rele-
vant
              information. Once again, the structure of communication can critically
              affect
the amount of information exchanged. For instance, there are many
              circumstances
where back-and-forth communication does not lead to information
              gains--even if the
decision maker is informed--and we identify these
              circumstances. This leads us to
ask the following questions: Is the situation
              improved by adding more rounds of com-
munication? Is a face-to-face meeting
              superior to a back-and-forth exchange, such as
via E-mail?
The third part
              concerns situations where decisions are multi-faceted and informa-
tion is
              dispersed among many "specialist" experts. For instance, a piece of
              legislation
may impact both employment and the environment. Different lobbying
              groups are
likely to possess expertise in each of these areas. We study
              whether providing experts
with an opportunity to communicate with one another
              improves the informativeness
of their advice. Is the situation improved if the
              decision maker also participates? Is
the situation improved if there is
              overlap in the experts' specialized knowledge?

