Title       : Topics in Fractal Geometry, Dynamics, and Ergodic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0099814

Award Number: 0099814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Solomyak solomyak@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses problems in dimension theory of
dynamical systems and
              ergodic theory of tilings and substitutions.
In the first direction, it is
              proposed to study the dimension
characteristics of invariant sets for
              non-conformal dynamical
systems and natural measures on them. These questions
              are related
to problems on self-similar sets with overlap and arithmetic
              sums
of Cantor sets. The second direction concerns non-periodic
              self-affine
tilings, their generalizations, and symbolic analogs. There are
              many
links between the two directions; for instance, self-affine tiles
              often
have fractal boundaries, and number-theoretic issues
(e.g., the
              appearance of PV-numbers) are prominent in both areas.
The problems to be
              studied are concerned with dynamical and diffraction
spectra of tilings and
              substitutions.

The mathematical chaos theory deals with the appearance of
              chaotic
motions in dynamical systems (which are mathematical models
              of
various phenomena in physics, biology, economics, etc.). These
chaotic
              motions are often associated with various "fractal" phenomena.
The modern
              dimension theory uses a wide variety of tools to
study the fine structure of
              these motions and their invariant sets
(such as "strange attractors"). Still,
              many aspects of this
"fractal chaotic world" remain mysterious, and the
              proposed research
aims to get further insights into them. The second part of
              the project
is concerned with the so-called "aperiodic order," the
              hallmark
of which is the remarkable class of solids, discovered in the
early
              1980's and called quasicrystals, which exhibit sharp diffraction
spectrum with
              a forbidden 10-fold symmetry. Penrose tilings,
discovered in the 1970's in a
              purely mathematical development, turned
out to be a good model for certain
              quasicrystals, but many open problems
remain, both on the mathematical and on
              the physical side.
The second part of the proposed research investigates some
              of these
problems using the techniques of ergodic theory and symbolic
              dynamics.



