Title       : Single Neuron Computation:Dendritic Information Processing with Studied with
               High-Speed Laser-Scanning Methods.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0099545

Award Number: 0099545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Saggau psaggau@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1108,1192,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The receptive parts of most neurons (nerve cells) in the brain are the branches
              called dendrites.  These dendrites are covered with spiny structures, which are
              part of the functional contacts between nerve cells called synapses.  These
              spines receive signals from the synaptic terminals of other neurons. 
              Neurotransmitters are the biochemical compounds that carry a signal across the
              small gap between the pre- and the post-synaptic sides, and generate the
              electrochemical membrane response in the post-synaptic cell.  Dendritic size,
              complexity, and accessibility, together with the hundreds or thousands of
              synaptic contacts on a single cell, make it technically difficult to study the
              local dynamic mechanisms underlying this synaptic signaling at this microscopic
              scale.  It is very difficult to elicit a physiological multi-site stimulation
              pattern and to perform multi-site recordings of the membrane potential,
              especially to measure local synaptic potentials concurrently at different sites
              in the same cell.  This project uses novel optical methods in addition to the
              powerful 'patch-clamp' electronic technique for whole-cell physiological
              recordings.  An optical workstation has been developed that uses a pulsed
              ultraviolet (UV) laser beam with a novel acoustico-optic control for
              microsecond timing of the position of a spot in the micrometer size range, in
              connection with a biochemical compound that acts as a 'cage' around
              neurotransmitter molecules to keep them 'invisible' for their receptors.  When
              caged molecules are hit with the laser beam, the light energy immediately
              breaks the cage (photolysis) and free transmitter can act on the synapse. 
              High-resolution differential-interference-contrast (DIC) microscopy of neurons
              in culture, with the pulsed random-access laser-scanning photolysis, and a new
              technique of laser-scanning fluorescence microscopy of voltage-sensitive dye
              bound to the cell membranes are combined to allow a new level of
              computer-controlled, non-invasive, high-resolution stimulation and recording. 
              This powerful technology is used to examine the functional role of dendritic
              structural details, to characterize spatio-temporal interactions among
              dendritic synapses, the computational functions that can be assigned to
              dendrites in integrating signals, and the effects of prior activity on
              dendritic behavior.
    Results will be important for understanding the
              fundamental role of dendrites for cellular information processing, and for
              refining computational compartmental models of nerve cells.  The impact of the
              technology also will extend beyond cellular neuroscience to cellular biology. 
              In addition, exceptional cross-disciplinary opportunities will be provided for
              postdoctoral and graduate training.

