Title       : Development of an Electromagnetic Shape Memory Alloy Friction Dammper for Civil
               Infrastructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0099895

Award Number: 0099895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil K. Agrawal anil@ce-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jann N. Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1576,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award is a collaborative research among researchers from the City College
              of New York (CCNY), the University of Tokyo, and the Kyoto University, Japan. 
              The objective of this project is to develop a new and advanced semi-active 
              electromagnetic shape-memory alloy friction damper for protecting buildings and
              other civil infrastructures against strong winds and earthquakes. The new
              semi-active electromagnetic shape-memory alloy friction damper to be developed
              has significant advantages and potential over other semi-active control systems
              currently under development. Specific objectives of this project are: (i) to
              develop a semi-active electromagnetic friction damper, (ii) to develop a
              semi-active electromagnetic shape-memory alloy friction damper, (iii) to
              demonstrate the performance of the proposed advanced semi-active friction
              dampers developed in (i) and (ii), and to verify the theoretical results using
              a 1/4 scaled 5-story building model on the shaking table at the City College of
              New York, and (iv) to demonstrate the application of the proposed semi-active
              friction dampers on a full-scale 5-story frame building at the Disaster
              Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto, Japan. It is mentioned that the budget
              for the proposed research doesn't include the cost to manufacture the proposed
              semi-active electromagnetic shape-memory alloy friction damper. 
The proposed
              damper device for the 1/4 scaled and full-scale testing will be manufactured
              using small research grants from the Professional Staff Congress of the City
              University of New York (PSC-CUNY) and the start-up funds of the PI. The
              semi-active electromagnetic shape-memory alloy friction damper to be developed
              is inherently nonlinear. Effective and practical control strategies will be
              investigated and developed, in particular with respect to the demand of
              near-field earthquakes.

The device is applicable not only to the new
              constructions but also to the retrofit of deteriorated structures. The results
              of this research project are expected to make a significant advancement for the
              state-of-the-technology in auto-adaptive media based protective systems for
              civil infrastructures. The benefit derived from this research project in urban
              earthquake disaster mitigation is not limited to US and Japan, but also
many
              countries in the world.

