Title       : Ice Core Reconstruction of North Pacific Climate Variability and Environmental
               History from the Bona-Churchill Ice Field, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a0099311

Award Number: 0099311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lonnie G. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Mosley-Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP- 00-99311
Thompson

The Principal Investigators will retrieve
              ice cores from the col between Mt.  Bona and Mt.  Churchill, located in
              Wrangell Mountains, southeastern Alaska.  The ice core records will fill a
              significant void in the high resolution climate history of this region and will
              complement and extend the tree ring-based climate records. These records will
              be an important contribution to the suite of high resolution ice core histories
              from other north polar ice fields including, Greenland, Svalbard, the High
              Canadian Arctic the Windy Dome Ice Cap (Franz Josef Land, Russian Arctic) and
              Greenland.  These polar records are part of a global suite of ice core records
              including those retrieved from seven lower latitude, high altitude sites in
              Tibet, South America, and Africa.  These cores have contributed critical
              low-latitude proxy climate histories to the continuing efforts to identify the
              major drivers of Quaternary climate change and to determine the global
              synchronicity of glacial-age climate events. Currently, there are no high
              quality ice core records from Alaska, so these cores should provide critical
              new insights.  The paucity of high resolution climate histories from the
              northeastern side of the Pacific Basin is a major obstacle to advancing our
              understanding of the rapid and recent changes in the dynamic state of the
              Pacific region and its global connections.  Of particular interest are: 1) the
              warming of the last 30 years that appears to be amplified at high elevations in
              the tropics and subtropics and in northwestern North America and northern Asia;
              2) the most recent 'step' change in the dynamics of the Pacific Basin climate
              regime in 1976-77; and 3) the nature of recently identified multi-decadal
              ENSO-like mid-latitude climate variability that may have its roots in the
              tropical Pacific.

The field program will include geophysical and surface
              studies designed to select the best site on the col for recovery of two high
              resolution, well-preserved ice core records to about 500 meters.  The results
              from laboratory measurements of soluble and insoluble aerosol concentrations
              will reveal drought and wet periods and relative storm intensities.  Oxygen
              isotope analyses should provide a proxy for the temperature history and past
              atmospheric circulation patterns in this area.  The high annual accumulation
              and cold mean annual temperatures are good indicators for thick and well
              preserved annual signals in the physical and chemical records that will allow
              excellent time control with annual resolution for the last 1000 years. The
              complete record should extend back at least 5,000 years. 

The significance
              of recent climatic and environmental variations must be evaluated from a
              perspective provided by a globally dispersed, long-term proxy climate records.
              Linking these records from pole to pole allows assessment of the global nature
              of these climatic variations and identification of critical linkages between
              the higher latitudes and the tropics where changes in the global heat source
              can trigger global-scale changes in the climate system. 

