Title       : Reef corals as flexible multi-partner symbioses: symbiont shuffling as a
               response to temperature variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a0099301

Award Number: 0099301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew C. Baker abaker@wcs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wildlife Conservation Soc
	      2300 Southern Boulevard
	      Bronx, NY  104601099    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 5913,5921,5988,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Reef corals are first and foremost symbioses between invertebrate animals and
              dinoflagellate algae. Recent scientific and public concern over the eventual
              fate of corals and coral reefs in the face of continued climate change and
              global warming has led to the suggestion that corals may face widespread
              regional-scale extinction as early as 2030. However, because the dinoflagellate
              symbionts of reef corals are extraordinarily diverse, the possibility exists
              that reef corals may switch or shuffle symbionts in response to changing
              temperatures, and thus mitigate the effects of climate change. This study
              investigates this possibility by examining the effects of natural temperature
              variation on symbiont community distributions over a variety of spatial and
              temporal scales. In doing so, it investigates the paradoxical (in)stability of
              coral reefs while addressing one of the most pressing and significant questions
              in coral biology, ecology and conservation: do reef corals possess a novel
              symbiotic mechanism for mitigating future environmental change?  To answer
              this, a multi-national, multi-year program will be established to monitor
              changes in these symbioses over time, and uses a threefold approach to
              investigating the role of temperature in regulating symbiont community
              structure. It will: (1) undertake latitudinal surveys of corals in three
              countries from two oceans that vary in their host and symbiont diversity; (2)
              survey and experimentally manipulate a model system in US domestic waters where
              temperature regimes vary over small spatial scales (meters); and (3) make
              seasonal comparisons of labeled coral colonies from four countries in three
              oceans.  Using established and reliable molecular techniques that use
              Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms (RFLPs) in 28S-like rRNA genes as
              markers for the >15 symbiont genotypes will also  enable the discovery of new
              symbiont taxa. Preliminary data from Australia indicate that high latitude
              coral hosts contain different symbionts from their tropical conspecific
              counterparts, supporting the hypothesis that different temperatures may favor
              different symbionts, and providing baseline data for comparison with other
              locations. Similarly, data from the 1997-98 El Nino event in Panama provide
              additional evidence indicating that different symbiont taxa vary in their
              susceptibilities to temperature stress. This suggests that different thermal
              optima may indeed promote shuffling of symbionts in response to temperature
              gradients.To date, no surveys of symbiont diversity have explicitly collected
              data to assess the effects of temperature on symbiont distributions. Together,
              the multiple approaches and scales (including experimental work) proposed here
              represent the first test of the hypothesis that corals may adapt to different
              temperatures by modifying their symbiont communities. This knowledge
              contributes to our understanding of the environmental and biogeographic
              controls on symbiont diversity and their significance for reef coral ecology
              and conservation. It also provides critical data for an assessment of the
              potential for long-term symbiont community change in the face of a globally
              warmer climate.
