Title       : Gravitational Radiation and Relativistic Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0099568

Award Number: 0099568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $930000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kip S. Thorne kip@tapir.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Lindblom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1252,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical research is being carried out in two areas related to
gravitational
              waves and their detection.  The first area is the
invention of new techniques
              and technology for advanced
laser-interferometer gravitational-wave detectors.
               These advanced
detectors will entail measuring the motions of 40
              kilogram
sapphire-crystal mirrors with an accuracy so high that the mirrors
              are
governed by the laws of quantum mechanics and not the laws of
              classical
physics. The new techniques and technology entail, among other
              things,
new configurations of mirrors and laser beams designed to deal
              with
quantum effects that are absent in current gravitational-wave
detectors,
              changes in how the laser light is manipulated after it
leaves the
              interferometer, and a reshaping of the cross sections of the
interferometer's
              light beams. The second area of research is the
theoretical modeling of
              astrophysical sources of gravitational waves
with the goal of predicting the
              sources' dynamical behaviors and the
details of the waves they emit.  Among
              the sources being modeled are
oscillations of rapidly spinning, newborn
              neutron stars, the spins of
neutron stars that are accreting gas from
              companion stars (``Low-Mass
X-Ray Binaries''), the late, highly relativistic
              phase of inspiral of
black-hole/black-hole and black-hole/neutron-star
              binaries, collisions
of black holes, and the tearing apart of a neutron star
              by a black
hole.

The research on new techniques and technology for
              gravitational-wave
detectors is a key underpinning for the advanced detectors
              that are
being proposed for construction in LIGO (the Laser
              Interferometer
Gravitational Wave Observatory) beginning in 2006, and for even
              more
advanced detectors in the subsequent decade.  This research makes
              use
of, and contributes to, human knowledge in the area of
              quantum
information theory --- a new, 21st century discipline that
              also
includes quantum computation.  This research is likely to have
              much
impact on areas of technology that---in the coming two or
              three
decades---will confront quantum limits on the accuracy of
              measurement
and will try to evade them via ``quantum nondemolition''
              (QND)
techniques. These areas of technology include quantum optics
              and
nanotechnology.  The research on sources of gravitational waves
              will
provide key underpinnings for analyses of the gravitational-wave data
to
              be produced by LIGO:  It will improve the ability to find
gravitational-wave
              signals in the noisy LIGO data, and it will provide
tools for extracting
              astrophysical information from the discovered
signals.  Thus, this research
              will play a key role in future
gravitational-wave-based studies of black
              holes, neutron stars, and
their oscillations and collisions.
