Title       : Control Design for Nonlinear Smart Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0099764

Award Number: 0099764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph C. Smith rsmith@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas K. Lindner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This investigation focuses on the analysis and design of nonlinear actuators
              which utilize smart material transducers comprised of piezoelectric,
              electrostrictive or magnetostrictive materials.  These transducers have proven
              highly effective in a number of industrial, automotive, defense, aerospace and
              aeronautical applications due to their dual capability for sensing and
              actuating, the magnitude of generated forces, and their broadband nature.  At
              high drive levels, however, all of these materials exhibit constitutive
              nonlinearities and varying degrees of hysteresis.  The goal in this
              investigation is to develop mathematical models and control algorithms which,
              in conjunction with drive electronics, compensate for the nonlinearities
              inherent to these materials.  The strategy in the modeling component focuses on
              utilizing energy mechanisms to develop unified models that are appropriate for
              each of the smart material compounds.  Inverse compensators based on these
              models will then be combined with feedback, feedforward, adaptive and robust
              control laws to provide the control algorithms necessary to achieve linear
              transducer dynamics.  This investigation will advance the state of smart
              material control systems and extend the capabilities of currently available
              actuators for high performance applications by facilitating the construction of
              actuators which have the full stroke and force capabilities of the nonlinear
              constituent smart materials but exhibit linear behavior throughout their drive
              range.
