Title       : Relativistic Heavy Ion Collision Studies with the RHIC STAR Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0099476

Award Number: 0099476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1515400            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Humanic humanic@mps.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Lisa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evan R. Sugarbaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5930,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main physics goals of this project are two-fold: 1) to create in
              the
laboratory a new state of matter called "Quark Matter" by
              heating/
compressing normal nuclear matter to a sufficiently high
              temperature/
density, and, equally important, 2) to uniquely determine whether
              such a
transformation to Quark Matter has actually taken place. Quark Matter
              is
composed of "free" quarks and gluons, the fundamental particles which
are
              bound into protons and neutrons which make up normal nuclear matter. It
is
              predicted that the Universe was entirely in the Quark Matter state
several
              millionths of a second after the Big Bang. The method which we will use
to
              make Quark Matter will be to collide beams of heavy nuclei (e.g. lead
on lead
              and gold on gold) moving at speeds near the speed of light.
These beams will
              be generated by new state-of-the-art particle accelerators
located at
              Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island and at the CERN
laboratory in
              Geneva. To determine whether Quark Matter has actually
been created in these
              high energy heavy ion collisions, large particle
detectors will be present to
              detect the secondary particles which are produced
(mostly pi and K mesons and
              a range of more exotic particles). Theories
predict that unique signatures for
              Quark Matter formation can be
extracted from information obtained from these
              secondary particles. One of the
main roles of the Ohio State University group
              in these experiments is to lead
the analysis of the data from a new type of
              particle detector which OSU
has taken part in developing called a "Silicon
              Drift Detector" and,
hopefully, to extract unique Quark Matter
              signatures.5


