Title       : Judgement Under Uncertainty: Ad Hoc Partitions and Insufficient Reason
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0099209

Award Number: 0099209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig R. Fox cfox@mail.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Most decisions require an assessment of the likelihood of possible consequences.
               For instance, the decision whether or not to undergo surgery requires an
              estimation of the likelihood that the operation will succeed.  Not only do
              people judge probabilities in service to making decisions, but they also use
              these numbers as a currency of communication (e.g., between doctor and
              patient).  A better understanding of the intuitive processes underlying
              probability assessment can lead to prescriptions for improving intuitive
              decision making, strategies for debiasing formal decision analysis, and more
              effective communication.

People rarely know the precise probability of an
              event except when it entails a simple game of chance (e.g., "a fair coin lands
              heads") or stable historic frequencies are available (e.g., "1 in 40,000 people
              inoculated for measles experiences an allergic reaction").  More often, people
              judge probabilities intuitively and with some degree of imprecision.  Past
              research has identified mental shortcuts or "heuristics" that govern this
              process (Kahneman, Slovic & Tversky, 1982), which has recently been formalized
              in support theory (Tversky & Koehler, 1994; Rottenstreich & Tversky, 1997).  In
              this model, judged probability is viewed as the balance of evidence or
              "support" that can be recruited for the target hypothesis (e.g. "rain today")
              relative to its complement ("no rain today").  If the balance of evidence
              strongly favors the focal hypothesis, the judged probability will be close to
              one; if the balance favors the complementary hypothesis the judged probability
              will be close to zero; if the balance is equal a the judged probability will be
              one-half.

The Principal Investigator (PI) observes that when people have no
              evidence available they typically apply the "principle of insufficient reason,"
              assigning equal credence to the elementary events into which the event space is
              subjectively partitioned.  For instance, if five unfamiliar horses are entered
              in a race, a person will typically assign equal belief in the proposition that
              each horse will win, yielding an "ignorance prior" probability of 1/5 for each
              horse.   Assuming one holds the partition constant, this mode of judgment
              yields probabilities that are perfectly calibrated.  Unfortunately, subjective
              partitions usually shift over time.  For instance, a person may judge the
              probability that the Jakarta stock index (JAX) closes above 1,000 to be 0.5
              (assigning equal belief to the events "below 1,000" and "above 1,000") but may
              likewise judge the probability that the JAX closes above 5,000 or even 50,000
              to be 0.5.  Hence, judged probabilities seem to depend crucially on the
              subjective partition that is adopted by the decision maker.

The PI
              hypothesizes that judgment under uncertainty typically reflects a compromise
              between the balance of evidential support and this "ignorance prior," and
              advances and tests a theoretical model that extends support theory to
              accommodate this pattern. 

