Title       : Studies of High Energy Phenomena Using Muons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0099530

Award Number: 0099530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Hedin hedin@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald C. Blazey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne E. Willis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Fortner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary activity of the Northern Illinois University (NIU)
              experimental
elementary particle physics research program is the exploration
              of the
sub-microscopic world with the DZERO detector. The detector,
              constructed and
operated by a 500-member international collaboration and
              located at the
Fermilab National Accelerator Laboratory, is a large,
              general-purpose device
designed to observe and study proton-antiproton
              collisions produced at the
Tevatron.  The Tevatron is the world's highest
              energy accelerator. Presently the group is involved in preparation for the
              second 5-year data collection period of DZERO, and has responsibility for the
              construction and operation of a muon particle detector, muon triggering, and
              muon reconstruction software. The group also has overall responsibility for the
              full DZERO triggering and data acquisition systems. The NIU group will focus on
              continued searches for new forms of matter, such as the Higgs particle, which
              is thought to give mass to all other particles, and supersymmetry, which
              postulates heavy partners to all already discovered particles. 

Over the
              past decades advances in particle physics have resulted in the
construction
              and confirmation of the Standard Model which describes in great
detail and
              accuracy the interactions of the fundamental particles. The
theory is
              incomplete and there are hints that new forces and particles are
required to
              fully describe the microscopic world.  In particular the numbers
of particles
              and the origins of their mass are great mysteries.  The second
run of the
              DZERO detector will offer an opportunity to discover the
mechanism that lends
              mass to particles and an over-arching theory that
unifies the description of
              the microscopic world.  This run will exploit the
improvements to Fermilab's
              accelerator complex which have recently been
completed, allowing significantly
              more sensitive searches to be made.  At a
more immediate level, over the past
              decade the ongoing NIU particle physics
program has offered research
              experiences to more than 100 undergraduates and
Master's students. These
              graduates have accepted employment with
technological firms, the financial
              industry, governmental agencies, and
academic institutions.  A great number of
              the students have become high
school physics instructors.  The NSF sponsored
              program will continue to
offer opportunities and support to these students as
              well as PhD students
admitted into the new NIU physics doctoral program.

