Title       : A MALDI Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer for Protein Analysis and Peptide
               Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0099874

Award Number: 0099874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191295             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Lubman dmlubman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George A. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Bardwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rowena G. Matthews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ayyalusamy Ramamoorthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for acquisition of a MALDI/reflectron time-of-flight
              mass
spectrometer system. This system will be used for studies of  protein
              structure and function by a broad range of investigators including seven
              faculty and students in the departments Biophysics, Biology, Chemistry and
              Pharmacy on the main campus of the University. The system will provide the
              required resolution and mass accuracy to support applications in peptide
              mapping for identification and searching of modification sites in protein
              digests, and for studying various protein-protein and protein-drug
              interactions. A high mass detector will permit monitoring of proteins as a
              function of cellular processes, protein-drug studies and for verifying
              sequences obtained by peptide mapping.  
Mass spectrometry is a widely-used,
              critical technology in the study of protein structure and function, sometimes
              referred to  proteomics.  In addition to the group of seven major users, at 13
              other investigators will benefit from the availability of the MALDI-TOF device.
              Many of these investigators currently rely on instruments in local industry or
              in private laboratories for their research. The new instrument will be located
              in the mass spectrometry facility in the Chemistry Department and will
              accessible for use by investigators from other departments.  In addition to its
              use in research, the instrument will be used in graduate and postdoctoral
              training of a large number of students, including as many as 50 students and
              post-doctoral trainees in the major users laboratories, plus a large number of
              other students, including undergraduates, in these and other laboratories.

