Title       : Earth System Science Works!
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0099141

Award Number: 0099141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon M. Locke slocke@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Libby Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0099141 
Institution: University of Southern Maine
Principal
              Investigators: Sharon Locke and Libby Cohen
Title: "Earth System Science
              Works!"

ABSTRACT

This project enhances and expands the work of ACCESS
              Earth, an intensive summer institute in Earth system science for students with
              disabilities and their teachers previously funded by NASA.  During ACCESS Earth
              teachers and students work with research scientists at the Wells National
              Estuarine Research Reserve on the coast of Maine, examining the impacts of sea
              level rise, climate change, and coastal development.  Teachers and students
              have the opportunity to use technology such as Geographic Information Systems
              and remote sensing to study environmental changes and the dynamics of
              land-sea-air interactions.  Earth System Science Works! will build on the
              current program by providing: 1) mentoring for teachers and students during the
              school year, 2) support for adaptation of existing Earth system science
              curriculum, 3) support for a partnership with the Digital Library for Earth
              System Education, and 4) support for visiting scientists with disabilities to
              attend the summer institute.  Through Earth System Science Works! students and
              teachers will be able to continue their studies in earth system science beyond
              the week of the summer institute.  Students will communicate electronically
              with scientists with disabilities working in earth system science fields and
              will share their interests in science through an interactive Web site. 
              Teachers will communicate with science and education faculty on implementing
              accessible earth system science lessons into their classrooms and will post
              adapted lessons and other ideas on the project Web site.  The goal is to create
              a sustained discussion forum on the accessibility of earth system science
              education at the K- 12 level. 
This project will positively influence the way
              in which earth system science is taught at all educational levels through a
              partnership with the Digital Library for Earth System Education.  A special
              working group of teachers selected by project staff will adapt popular earth
              system science curricula so that they are accessible to students with
              disabilities and will field test the adaptations in their classrooms and at the
              summer institute.  The adapted curricula and strategies for teaching earth
              system science to students with disabilities will be published as an Earth
              System Science IdeaBook, which will be fully integrated into the Digital
              Library.  The timing of this project affords an ideal opportunity to guide the
              development of the library.  Teachers and students will serve as testers of
              library tools, collections, and interfaces and will advise staff on its
              accessibility for persons with disabilities. 

This project seeks to increase
              the number of students with disabilities who pursue earth system science
              careers by changing the methods, materials, and curricula used in high school
              science classes.  Earth system science courses are being offered with
              increasing frequency at both the high school and middle school levels, and the
              Digital Library for Earth System Education will further increase the
              availability of educational resources.  Earth System Science Works! Will
              comprehensively evaluate the accessibility of earth system science education
              and provide new resources for teaching earth system concepts to persons with
              disabilities. 

