Title       : Currency Unions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0099054

Award Number: 0099054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $428521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Barro   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alberto Alesina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Should each country have its own currency? Should one and only one currency
              circulate in each country? How many currencies should circulate in the world:
              1, 10, 50, or the current number of roughly 180?  These issues are at the
              forefront of the policy debate because of the politicoeconomic developments of
              the last few decades, which featured a large expansion of the number of
              independent countries. In 1947, there were 76 countries in the world; today
              there are 193 and, with few exceptions, all of these countries have their own
              currencies. Unless one believes that a country is by definition an optimal
              currency area, either there were too few currencies in 1946 or there are too
              many today. In fact, given the phenomenal increase in trade and financial
              integration between countries (the so-called globalization), one might have
              expected the number of currencies to decrease rather than increase in the
              post-World War 11 period. An additional pressure toward currency unions has
              come from the renewed emphasis on price stability, rather than active
              macroeconomic stabilization, as the main objective of monetary policy. This
              change in policy stance is likely a reaction to the inflationary decades of the
              seventies and eighties. As a result of these developments, the unquestioned
              identity "one-country/one-currency" is increasingly being called into
              question.

This project studies, theoretically and empirically, the question
              of what is the "optimal number of currencies in the world."   The basic
              strategy is to combine new economic analysis with two existing strands of the
              literature. One of these strands is the work on alternative exchange rate
              regimes and optimal currency areas; the second is the literature on formation
              of political jurisdictions and the equilibrium number of countries.
The
              initial theoretical research shows how the benefits from currency union depend
              on trading costs, commitment abilities, co-movements of prices and outputs,
              accommodations of anchor countries to clients, and treatments of seignorage
              revenue. Further work shows how geographical considerations determine
              equilibrium configurations of currency unions.   Further research includes
              empirical estimation of some of the key relationships in the theoretical
              framework, assessment of the sources of home bias in exchanges of goods and
              financial services, treatment of country size as jointly determined with
              currency arrangements, assessment of the interplay between currency union and
              financial development, analysis of underlying commitment abilities of
              policymakers, and more explicit allowance for competition among potential
              anchor currencies.


