Title       : The Classroom of the Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0099230

Award Number: 0099230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivar G. Babb babb@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry G. Lang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott W. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Scheifele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0099230
Institution: University of Connecticut
Principal
              Investigator: Ivar Babb
Title: "The Classroom of the Sea
              (COS)"

ABSTRACT

"Classroom of the Sea (COS)" is a comprehensive
              three-year project that addresses many of the special needs of deaf learners in
              science.  About one in every thousand school age children in the U.S. is deaf
              or hard of hearing and these learners often lag behind their hearing peers in
              cognitive and language development.  COS will address these issues, as well as
              the special communication needs of deaf learners, through a partnership of
              scientists, educators, and students that aims to enhance both teaching and
              learning in middle and high school science education.  The project staff will
              integrate research and education and draw upon the excitement of scientific
              discovery to motivate students, provide situated learning opportunities, and
              identify the scientific and technical concepts that need to be integrated with
              American Sign Language to enhance science instruction to deaf students.

For
              the past four years the National Undersea Research Center (NURC) located at the
              University of Connecticut has been collaborating with the American School for
              the Deaf (ASD) to successfully advance science education for deaf students. 
              This interaction was initiated by ASD's participation in the Aquanaut Program,
              an educational outreach program of NURC that provided deaf learners an
              opportunity to conduct hands-on research using visual technologies, including
              sonars, robots, computers and other marine sampling devices.  This project will
              provide the expertise and infrastructure to develop a standards-based science
              curriculum and problem-based lab and field experiments, evaluate the
              effectiveness of these approaches, while simultaneously improving the ability
              to teach science to deaf learners through language enhancement.

The
              objectives of the Classroom of the Sea program are to: 1) develop an integrated
              science curriculum for deaf students using highly interdisciplinary marine
              science; 2) provide real-world oceanographic research opportunities to enrich
              the curriculum; 3) develop processes for optimizing the use of technical signs
              and American Sign Language in science and technology instruction; 4) adapt and
              develop technologies to disseminate the curriculum, language enhancement
              strategies, and research results to the Deaf community, educators of deaf
              students, and others; and 5) better prepare deaf students to pursue careers in
              science and technology.

COS is comprised of two integrated elements -
              Science Through Marine Science" and Communications Access".  The program is
              based upon the premise that students, and particularly students with
              disabilities such as deafness, can achieve a high degree of scientific literacy
              by learning science in a practical manner, i.e. within authentic learning
              environments.  This will be achieved by studying the many facets (i.e.
              disciplines) of the marine environment.  The second major element of the
              Classroom of the Sea involves "Communications Access," which will emphasize
              functional communication in teaching science through sign language and will
              involve the identification of concepts and terms that lack clear signs within
              American Sign Language (ASL) and the effective use of ASL grammatical features.
               Appropriate technologies will be developed and tested to implement and
              disseminate all elements of the program.

The critical program components
              studied and demonstrated in the Classroom of the Sea project will not only
              benefit deaf learners, but can be applied in school programs to enhance the
              education of all students, especially those with other disabilities or those
              for whom English is a second language.

