Title       : Algebraic and Combinatorial Aspects of Generalized Hypergeometric Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0099707

Award Number: 0099707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo H. Cattani cattani@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is centered around the study of  A-hypergeometric
functions. 
              These have been introduced in the 80's by Gel'fand
and his coworkers as
              solutions of a system of partial
differential equations encoding combinatorial
              data of polytopes. 
Specific problems to be addressed in this project 
              include: the
classification of rational hypergeometric functions and
              their
relationship with toric residues; bounds for the holonomic rank
and
              rational rank; hypergeometric functions arising as periods of
Calabi-Yau
              manifolds.  Potential applications of this work
include a deeper understanding
              of the properties of the
A-discriminant and new algorithms for the computation
              of total
residues -a rational expression on the coefficients of a system
of
              polynomial equations which is of considerable interest in
computational
              algebraic geometry- and, ultimately, the
development of algorithms for solving
              polynomial equations.  

The study of polynomial equations is of fundamental
              importance on
almost all branches of science and technology.  In the last
              few
years it has become clear that the best approaches to their
solution are
              those that combine numerical and symbolic methods. 
The work on this project
              attempts to answer some basic questions
on the symbolic study of a class of
              partial differential
equations closely related to systems of polynomial
              equations with
the goal of developing new algorithms.  This same system
              of
differential equations arise also in Mirror Symmetry, a
fundamental theory
              in high-energy physics, with remarkable
consequences in pure mathematics.  The
              investigator hopes to be
able to relate the symbolic approach to the classical
              algebraic
geometric (Hodge Theory) approach.
