Title       : Nucleon Structure and Nuclear Force Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0099387

Award Number: 0099387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryon D. Anderson anderson@hpacq.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is to support the research activities of two professors,
their
              graduate students and a Senior Research Associate at Kent State
University in
              the area of experimental medium-energy nuclear physics. 
The general
              objectives are the study of the structure of the nucleon
(neutron or proton)
              and the nature of the nuclear force.  This group is
involved in experiments
              being performed, or to be performed at the
Jefferson National Accelerator
              Facility (Jlab) in Virginia and at the
Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC)
              on Long Island, New York.  An
experiment is in progress at Jlab to determine
              the charge distribution
inside the neutron.  The neutron, while neutral
              overall, is known to
consist of objects with both positive and negative
              charges.  These
objects are called "quarks".  The quarks are held together by
              the
exchange of particles called "gluons".  Exactly how the quarks
              combine,
move, and interact inside the neutron is not known.  A
              precise
measurement of the charge distribution, called the Electric Form
              Factor,
will provide one of the most sensitive tests available of various
              models
of the neutron structure.  These measurements are only recently
              possible
and require the electron beam characteristics now available at Jlab
              and
involve the use of a large-volume neutron polarimeter developed by
              this
group in experiments performed during the last decade at
              other
accelerator facilities.  The development, installation, calibration,
              and
operation of the polarimeter represents the unique contribution of
              this
group to this important experiment.  This group plans also to
              perform
another experiment at Jlab to study short-range correlation
              between
nucleons inside nuclei.  Such short-range correlations are known
              to
exist, but the exact nature and strength of such correlations are
              only
poorly determined.  This group will bring its expertise with
              neutron
detectors to help study such correlations involving neutrons.

This
              group has recently joined an effort planned to study interactions
between
              colliding beams of polarized protons using the "STAR" detector
at RHIC (STAR
              stands for Solenoidal Tracker at RHIC).  The object of
this study is to
              determine the exact origin of the intrinsic angular
momentum, or spin, of the
              proton.  The spin, like the charge
distribution, arises from the existence,
              interactions and movements of
the constituents of the proton, generally
              believed to be the quarks and
gluons.  To date, only the contributions from
              the quarks has been
determined;  this project offers the possibility of
              determining the
contribution to the spin of the proton due to gluons.  In
              order to
measure these contributions, it is necessary to observe hadronic
              jets
produced at relatively small angles in the collisions.  This
              group,
together with a collaboration of other researchers from
              Indiana
University, Argonne National Laboratory, and others, will construct
              a
new "end-cap calorimeter" to be installed at one end of the present
              STAR
detector at RHIC.  It will be this group's responsibility to
              provide
characterizations and calibrations of the multi-anode
              photomultiplier
tubes used for particle detection in this new calorimeter.


