Title       : Topics in Linear and Multilinear Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0099881

Award Number: 0099881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Loukas Grafakos loukas@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The author proposes to study a variety of problems in harmonic analysis
related
              to linear and  multilinear  singular integral operators.
More specifically,
              the principal investigator proposes to embark on a
study of multipliers for
              translation-invariant multilinear operators, both broad
enough to cover known
              examples, but also deep enough to include very singular
operators such as the
              bilinear Hilbert transform. A key point of the author's
research will be the
              characteristic function of the unit
disc thought of as a bilinear multiplier
              and its relation to other
important operators in Fourier analysis such as the
              ball multiplier and
Carleson's operator.  A related study of maximal
              multilinear multipliers
will also be pursued. Deep relations between
              Carleson's operator in two dimensions and the maximal disc multiplier will be
              sought. In particular it will
be  investigated whether the analysis developed
              in the study of the maximal bilinear disc multiplier will shed  light on the
              problem of almost everywhere
convergence of Fourier series in two dimensions.
              Problems in linear harmonic analysis that will be investigated include
              estimates for rough singular integrals and sharp inequalities for  operators
              such as the discrete Hilbert transform and the Balayage operator associated
              with Carleson measures.

In music,  harmonics are simple tones whose
              oscillations are integral
multiples of a simple basic frequency and these can
              be used to
disassemble arrangements of complicated sounds.
In mathematics,
              harmonic analysis has a similar objective i.e.
the study of complicated
              objects via their decomposition into simpler
well-understood basic blocks. 
              Irregularities of signals and images
are better located once these are
              decomposed into small pieces and
studied via Fourier analysis. For instance,
              noise and blurring are easily located
with the application of the Fourier
              transform, but nowadays even
more challenging feats can be achieved. This
              proposal is
concerned with the study of certain linear and
              multilinear
multiplier operators   using decomposition techniques.
Multiplier
              operators are defined by altering the frequency of signals via  multiplication
              with a fixed and often nonsmooth function.
In practice, the abrupt
              interruption of radio communication or
television transmission by a
              meteorological phenomenon
are examples of such nonsmooth multiplier
              operators.
The protection against the loss of information can
              be
mathematically modeled  in a quantitative  way (integrability to a
power)
              which is  proposed to be studied here.  This constitutes the first
goal of the
              proposed research. A secondary issue considered in this proposal is obtaining
              sharp estimates for some important and useful inequalities. Sharp estimates
              enrich our understanding of these inequalities as they
often reflect useful
              esoteric  combinatorial or geometric information.
Furthermore, they provide
              improved error estimates often needed in
numerical implementation.



