Title       : Collaborative Research: The Economics of Creativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0099105

Award Number: 0099105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133040             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galenson sogrodow@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Productivity follows a hump shape over the lifecycle. Economists have developed
              models of lifecycle human capital accumulation to explain this pattern  the
              incentive to invest in human capital is greatest at young ages when the
              remaining career is longest. Psychologists have noted the same lifecycle
              pattern but have attributed it to lifecycle variations in the ability to
              assimilate and produce new ideas. According to this view, at first exposure to
              a field, individuals' thought patterns are highly flexible, but as exposure
              (measured by experience in an area) accumulates, existing thought patterns
              become reinforced making it increasingly difficulty to think in different ways.
              Thus, if economists attribute lifecycle variations in productivity to changes
              in the incentives to acquire new skills, psychologists have emphasized
              variations in the ability to assimilate new concepts.

Building on our
              previous work, a pilot analysis shows that across a range of fields, creators
              whose work evolved through experimentation, do their most important work at
              older ages, but that those whose contributions were conceptual, did theirs
              while quite young. While the late peaks are consistent with the human capital
              model, it is impossible to reconcile a peak at the beginning of the career with
              the human capital model. For someone in their 20s or 30s, the finiteness of the
              career has a trivial effect on the incentive to invest in new skills. Nor does
              the human capital model provide a natural explanation for the striking
              differences between these groups.

This proposal presents a new model of
              lifecycle productivity that draws on a declining ability to change thought
              patterns. According to this model, theorists' most important contributions are
              most common at the beginning of their careers because their work is based on
              quick re-conceptualizations, which are most likely before existing thought
              patterns have become reinforced. Empirical work (of equal importance) derives
              from the gradual accumulation of a body of knowledge, so the ability to
              re-conceptualize issues continually is less important. We will test these
              predictions using data collected under funding on a range of disciplines,
              including the sciences, arts, and business. With the increase in educational
              attainment and the greater reliance of science in production, the ability to
              innovate is becoming an increasingly important determinant of earnings relative
              to human capital, making this analysis timely.

The ability to adapt to
              change affects the response to changes in work brought on by technological
              change. The model implies that the adoption of new technologies that require
              re-conceptualizations of work will be greatest among young workers, but that
              old workers will heavily adopt new technologies that draw on existing
              knowledge. A decline over the lifecycle in the ability to adapt to change
              represents a new form of vintage human capital effect, which we will test
              against traditional vintage effects using data on computer adoption. The
              proposed model also provides new explanations for gender differences in the
              occupation structure and for the occupational mobility of older workers.


