Title       : Issues in the Applied Analysis of Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0099091

Award Number: 0099091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ariel Pakes apakes@kuznets.fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: Issues in the Applied Analysis of Markets.

This proposal has
              several parts. The first is to extend prior models of demand
systems in
              characteristic space. These models were primarily developed to
provide a tool
              that enables the user to analyze (own and cross) price and
characteristic
              elasticities of demand. The same models can (and have) been
used to evaluate
              the demand for and the utility derived from new goods, but
their implications
              in those contexts are questionable (these include applica-
tions like
              evaluating the returns to innovations, or constructing price indices).
This is
              because some of the model's properties vis a vis the evaluation of new
goods
              are "counterintuitve".

We consider a change in the demand model that gets
              rid of these coun-
terintuitive implications, and then compare alternative
              ways of evaluating
new goods. One of the alternatives is \hedonic" analysis; a
              technique which
is currently used to correct the CPI for new goods bias. In
              doing this com-
parison I will provide a detailed analysis of alternative ways
              of computing
hedonic corrections. Hopefully this will be of use to the
              statistical agencies.

The second section of the proposal seeks to extend
              methods for computing
and analyzing dynamic games to allow for asymmetric
              information. We focus
on models which can detect and analyze collusive
              outcomes, and show how
the learning and artificial intelligence literatures
              can help provide a simple
tool for such an analysis.

The third section of
              the proposal outlines a new and relatively simple
procedure for estimation and
              subsequent empirical analysis of oligopolistic
markets when either asymmetric
              information, or dynamic considerations, are
important. I hope to explore the
              range of application and performance of
this technique. The technique was
              developed while I was trying to sort out
research strategies for two new
              empirical projects, one on the demand for
pharmaceuticals and one on
              deregulated electric utility markets. The two
final sections of the proposal
              outline these projects.

Both empirical projects are joint with colleagues
              who have worked exten-
sively on the industries studied. Our goal in the
              project on the demand for
pharmaceuticals is to understand how past
              experience, marketing, and infor-
mation on product performance, interact with
              other market characteristics
to shape demand. We are particularly interested
              in the impact of advertis-
ing on demand and on welfare, and on how recent
              institutional changes, like
the development of the Over the Counter market for
              some durgs, impact on
demand and welfare.

The project on deregulated
              British electric utility markets will initially
focus on getting estimates of
              start up and capital costs. This should enable
us to provide measures of
              profitability that take account of these costs. This,
in turn, will enable us
              to quantify the incentives to invest in more generating
capacity that are
              provided by the institutions which determine the newly
derregulated market
              outcomes. Later we hope to engage in a more in depth
analysis of the
              relationship between different aspects of these institutions
and the price and
              quantity allocations that are likely to be generated by the
market.

