Title       : Tribology of Polymer Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0099649

Award Number: 0099649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace G. Sawyer wgsawyer@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0099649
Sawyer
This SGER award will support a feasibility study of the effect
              of nanoparticle strenghthening of polymers for tribological applications. 
              There are strong indications that polymers filled with hard nanoparticles
will
              exhibit significant improvements in tribological performance as
compared to
              traditional filled polymers.  Polymers are widely used in
bearing applications
              because they provide quiet continuous operation, have a
low coefficient of
              friction, absorb vibrations, are compliant and
non-abrasive to the
              counterface, can be easily manufactured, are
inexpensive, non-corrosive, and
              are generally biocompatible.  The challenge
in designing bearings with
              homogeneous polymeric materials is their low wear
resistance (high wear
              rates).  Hard filler particles are frequently added to
improve the wear
              resistance, however these hard filler particles increase
the abrasive wear to
              the counterface and increase the sliding coefficient of
friction.  Lubricious
              fillers are also added to polymers and under certain
operating conditions can
              reduce the wear rate and the coefficient of
friction, however a constant
              supply of lubricous filler must be available at
the wear surface and these
              materials are frequently sensitive to the
environment.  The ideal filler for
              polymers would be inert, reinforcing,
non-abrasive, and reduce the coefficient
              of friction.  There is good
evidence that nanoparticle filled polymers may be
              this 'ideal' composite.
For example, recent studies have shown that the wear
              resistance can increase
in polymer composites filled with hard nanoparticles,
              while at the same time
the wear of the counterbody decreases and the sliding
              coefficient of
friction decreases.  This type of tribological behavior will
              have an impact
in polymeric bearings covering the spectrum from industrial
              applications
needing dry sliding bearings, to orthopaedic implant materials,
              to
self-lubricating bearings for space environments.

In order to design
              composites with the optimum properties and predict
performance, however, some
              severe limitations must be overcome.  First, our
understanding of the
              mechanisms contributing to wear performance in filled
polymers is poor.  For
              example, the role of the filler / matrix interface
and the effect of particle
              size has not been well studied nor are there
appropriate models that consider
              the interface or size of the filler.
Secondly, it is unclear for
              non-lubricious nanoparticles what the mechanism
is that lowers the coefficient
              of friction.  Finally, nanoparticle filled
polymers have not comprehensively
              explored for wear applications despite the
strong evidence suggesting large
              improvements in performance.

The overall scientific goal of the project is
              to gain a fundamental
understanding of the wear mechanisms in filled polymers
              by a) experimentally
isolating the effects of particle size (10 nm to 10
              micrometers), particle
aspect ratio (1 to 1000), dispersion, filler / matrix
              interface, and matrix
properties on performance, and 2) obtaining a parametric
              understanding of
the correlation between wear behavior and other mechanical
              properties, 3)
modeling of the wear properties.
***

