Title       : Transport Processes in Chemical Vapor Deposition of Functionally Graded
               Materials: Fundamental Understanding through Combined Experiments and
               High-Fidelity Mathematical Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0099748

Award Number: 0099748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84451              (Estimated)
Investigator: Surya P. Vanka s-vanka@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nick G. Glumac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1669,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to gain a fundamental understanding of the
              physical and chemical transport processes in the chemical vapor deposition
              (CVD) of functionally graded methods, through a combined experimental and
              computational investigation.  A functionally graded material (FGM) may be
              defined as one in which the composition of the material varies gradually from
              one extreme to another.  Functionally graded materials can successfully be used
              to join two disjoint materials such as metals and ceramics, or provide coatings
              on substrates in such a way as to provide a gradual variation of the thermal
              expansion coefficient. CVD involves the gradual deposition of a material on a
              substrate heated to a temperature where chemical reactions can take place, thus
              forming a thin layer of deposit.  A typical CVD process involves complex
              interactions between flow, temperature, species concentrations, and reactor
              geometry. Understanding the precise interactions between the various flow
              variables is very essential to obtaining the optimum set of operating
              parameters, and their manner of variation.

The fundamental issues addressed
              in the experiments will be the transient planar distributions of the chemical
              species transported by the carrier gas, and of temperature near the surface of
              the substrate.  The objective of the computational study will be to develop a
              mathematical model of the transient flow, heat transfer and chemical reactions
              that occur during the graded deposition process.
