Title       : Workshop Series on Mobile Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0099128

Award Number: 0099128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay Kumar kumarv@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley B. Zdonik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first workshop of a planned workshop series. Its objective is to
              stimulate and focus interest in the emerging area of data management for
              context-aware, mobile computing environments. As wireless bandwidth becomes
              more widely available, the communication infrastructure will be heavily
              wireless oriented. It will provide adaptive connectivity among immobile systems
              and portable devices such as cell phones, laptops, and other such future
              devices. Under this platform the computing will begin to migrate away from the
              desktop toward these devices consequently it will become necessary to managed
              data more carefully.  Industry and academia recognized wireless devices as an
              important area for development, however, the problems of data management have
              not been addressed in a coordinated manner. This workshop aims to fill this gap
              by providing a forum for leading researchers from both industry and academia in
              the areas of infomation management, wireless networking, communications and
              signal processing systems to set the research agenda for the future.  This
              workshop will lead to a more cohesive research community and will result in a
              quicker development and adoption of technologies for this new area. It will
              facilitate the development of new standards and will provide the synergy
              necessary for the US technical community to become a dominant player in this
              field.  The results of the workshop will be made available online through web
              site (http://www.cstp.umkc.edu/nsfmobile/wshop.html/ or
              http://www.cs.brown.edu/nsfmobile/wshop.html/) and will be reported in
              periodicals (e.g., ACM and IEEE) and relevant conferences, workshops or
              meetings. 
