Title       : Quantum Control of Coherent EUV Radiation: New Methods for Phase Matching at
               Short Wavelengths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0099886

Award Number: 0099886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Murnane Margaret.Murnane@Colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, new techniqucs to extend nonlinear optics into the soft-x-ray
              region of the spectrum will be explored. Specifically, precisely controlled
              optical waveforms, structured wave guides, and quasi phase-matching at short
              wavelengths will be used to increase the brightness of laser-based coherent
              x-ray sources. In the past 2 years. dramatic progress has been made in this
              arca, demonstrating new methods for efficient conversion of laser light into
              the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) region of the spectrum, at wavelengths around
              50eV. It is now possible to generate short- wavelength light pulses 1000 times
              shorter than can be generated by synchrotrons-short enough (10 femtoseconds) to
              directly probe atomic motion. It is also possible to dramatically improve the
              conversion efficiency of these very high-order nonlinear processes by using
              phase matching techniques. For example, by propagating the laser beam through a
              hollow fiber, the phase velocity of the optical pulse can be made to match that
              of the generated x-ray beam, thus improving thc conversion efficiency. Finally,
              very recently it was shown that feedback-control algorithms can fine- tune the
              shape in time of the laser pulse driving high-harmonic generation, making it
              possible to optimize the process and selectively enhance a particular x-ray
              photon energy. This is a fundamentally new type of phase matching that occurs
              within a single atom, where the laser pulse shape is optimized so that x-rays
              generated from one half-cycle of the laser interfere constructively with x-rays
              generated by adjacent half-cycles. This is in contrast to more-conventional
              phase matching techniques, where emission from a large number of individual
              atoms is arranged to interfere constructively by matching the phase velocities
              of the driving and harmonic waves.
In the proposed work, several significant
              remaining challenges for generating coherent light in the EUV will be
              addressed. New techniques will he developed that will allow us to apply phase-
              matching techniques to higher photon energies, from 50 - 500eV. Simply
              extending previous work will not suffice because higher-energy x-ray photons
              are emitted at higher levels of ionization, introducing a very large phase
              velocity mismatch between the laser and x-ray beams. Possible new techniques
              include the use of structured waveguides for modulating the nonlinear response
              of the system to obtain quasi phase matching, and the use of two-color
              excitation. This work, when combined with continuing work on the use of
              temporally-shaped pulses, will greatly enhance the understanding of laser-atom
              interactions in this highly nonlinear-regime, and our ability to optimally
              control the x-ray generation process.
This area of research presents a unique
              and challenging combination of forefront basic research and advanced
              technology. Ultrafast, broad bandwidth laser pulses and feedback algorithms
              will be used to coherently control and engineer the electron wave function of a
              radiating atom, with the very practical objective of developing bright,
              coherent, soft-x-ray light sources. This control of matter on the
              sub-nanometer, sub-femtosecond, distance- and time-scales explores the limits
              of fundamental atomic and molecular processes, as well as of optical
              technology. This work will provide excellent training for students in optical,
              computer, electronic, and EUV technologies- technologically- significant fields
              where the needs of industry far outpaee the availability of graduates.
              Furthermore, this new light-source has potential future applications in
              nanotechnology, microscopy, metrology, lithography, the characterization of
              x-ray optics, and in the study of ultrafast dynamic processes using x-rays. We
              and other are actively pursuing many of these applications.



