Title       : Chatter in Rolling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0099567

Award Number: 0099567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kornel F. Ehmann k-ehmann@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is to conduct a theoretical and experimental research program on
              chatter in the rolling of flat products. The theoretical research will include
              the development of dynamic models of mill structures and of the rolling
              process, coupling these models to create a comprehensive model for chatter in
              tandem rolling mills. The research places particular emphasis on the phenomena
              that are known to have a profound influence on tandem mill stability where only
              a few theoretical results are available. These process dependent phenomena
              include the effect of multi-modal three dimensional mill vibrations introducing
              variations in roll-bite geometry; fifth-octave-mode chatter leading to roll
              grinding chatter marks and banding due to debris pickup that can cause
              variations in roll geometry and friction; and the consequences of strip
              transverse vibrations and dynamic friction effects upon the entry angle of the
              strip. The developed structural and rolling process dynamics models will be
              combined into an all-encompassing chatter model to ascertain mill stability
              with respect to negative process damping, strip and roll regeneration,
              torsional oscillations, and other composite mechanisms in single and
              multi-stand mills. Experiments will be conducted on unique, full instrument,
              laboratory-scale mill in combination with data measured on actual
              production-scale mills in industry. This will assist the development and
              validation of the theoretical models. Validation on steel and aluminum industry
              mill stands will be performed. 

The research is expected to result in better
              methods for mill and process design and to lay the groundwork for more
              intelligent mill control systems for the processing of sheet metal.

