Title       : Decentralized Control of Large-Scale Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0099469

Award Number: 0099469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragoslav Siljak dsiljak@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aleksandar I. Zecevic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of the proposed research is to develop a new approach to the
              robust decentralized control of large electric power systems, based on the
              powerful tools of Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMI). This problem will be
              addressed in the general framework of interconnected dynamic systems with
              piecewise continuous nonlinearities. An important advantage of the LMI method
              lies in its ability to incorporate decentralized information structure
              constraints on the gain matrices, and to limit their respective norms. It also
              allows for the inclusion of a variety of additional design requirements, such
              as the degree of exponential stability and time delays. 

Several different
              applications of LMI - based control will be considered. All of them are
              computationally straightforward and well defined, with no tuning parameters or
              any need for trial and error analysis. In the initial stages of the project we
              will develop decentralized control strategies using the classical generator
              model, together with a second order model for the turbine/generator.  The work
              will then be extended to include the design of robust exciter control, in the
              framework of two-axis generator models. In the final stage of the research, we
              will explore the application of LMI to parametric stability. In this context,
              we will consider the elimination of bifurcations by appropriate control
              designs, as well as the robustness with respect to uncertainties in model
              parameters. 


