Title       : Development of Composite Yielding Dampers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0099701

Award Number: 0099701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher C. Higgins chris.higgins@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1576,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Passive control of structures is still evolving technologically, with increasing
              understanding of system behavior, response prediction methodologies, design
              guidance, and field experiences. Valuable information regarding behavior,
              design, and implementation of passive control systems is being developed in
              Japan due to their significant research investment in innovative passive
              control measures for protection of structures against both seismic and wind
              forces. One type of innovative passive control
system that has been developed
              recently in Japan is a type of yielding brace damper. The yielding brace
              contains a single steel plate with large ductility capacity and relatively low
              yield strength that is encased in a grout filled tube, but is not bonded to the
              grout. The key concept of the device is that yielding occurs in the encased
              steel plate equally for both tensile and compressive loading cycles and the
              system exhibits stable hysteretic energy dissipation capability. A new type of
              yielding device is proposed which builds on the economic advantages of the
              yielding brace, but allows tailoring the yielding element materials to achieve
              specific performance requirements and employs noncohesive media to confine the
              yielding elements. These two innovations combined provide controlled post-yield
              slope of the damper that maintains self-centering  capability of a structure
              even during an extreme earthquake when the building
frame may significantly
              yield and soften; provide a generally applicable confining technique that does
              not infringe on existing patents; eliminate high-precision design, detailing,
              and fabrication of devices at the debonding interface; lower damper cost; ease
              of repair/replacement of yielding elements after a damaging earthquake; enable
              inspection; and provide additional friction damping which may be beneficial for
              wind response mitigation. This new device is defined as a composite yielding
              damper (CY-damper).
The combined attributes of CY-dampers may provide
              significant technical and economic
advantages over existing devices. A
              research program, integrating both experimental and analytical components, is
              proposed to investigate the application of CY-dampers for building structures.
              The primary objectives of the proposed research project are to: (1) develop
              prototype CY-dampers, (2) characterize the structural performance of individual
              CY-dampers and optimize damper properties, (3) determine the behavior
              of
building frames with CY-dampers under varying magnitude earthquakes, (4)
              develop analytical models to describe the behavior of CY-dampers and CY-damped
              systems, and (5) provide guidance for the application of CY-dampers directed
              toward performance based design. These objectives will be achieved by working
              in collaboration with a team of Japanese researchers who are the primary
              developers of this system in Japan. Professional relationships and research
              collaboration are on-going between the researchers and significant resource and
              information exchange will take place throughout all phases of the proposed
              research program. Small and large-scale CY-damper tests under reversed cyclic
              loading are proposed. Parameters to be studied include: (1) application of
              different materials including combinations of high and low strength steels or
              other high-performance materials, (2) investigation of different confining
              materials and plate slenderness parameters, and (3) long term durability under
              high-cycle low-amplitude fatigue. A prototype multistory multibay steel frame
              building will be used to facilitate development of realistic test specimens and
              permit comparison between different damper designs. In concert with
              experimental tasks, analytical models will be produced which are compatible
              with available analysis programs and correlate experimentally observed
              response. Simplified and practical analysis methods including equivalent
              linearization techniques will be developed to predict response and develop
              practical design guidance. 

