Title       : Multivariable Operator Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0099357

Award Number: 0099357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul E. Curto curto@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with five areas of multivariable operator theory:
              (i) algebraic conditions for existence, uniqueness, and localization of the
              support of representing measures for truncated moment problems; (ii) model
              theory for 2-hyponormal operators; (iii) structure and spectral theory for
              polynomially hyponormal operators; (iv) operator models over Reinhardt and
              matrix Reinhardt domains; and (v) a multivariable analog of Apostol's Lemma on
              hyperinvariant subspaces for contractions. Concerning the first area, Curto
              plans to extend his recent work (joint with L. Fialkow) on flat extensions of
              positive moment matrices, which has led to a general framework for the study of
              truncated complex moment problems. He plans to apply these methods to study the
              case of singular moment matrices, and to continue to analyze the question of
              localization of the support of representing measures. Curto expects to settle a
              conjecture on the solubility index of a truncated moment sequence, and to
              characterize quadrature domains in terms of their moment matrices. As part of
              (ii), a model theory for 2-hyponormal operators will be sought, along the lines
              of the existing theory for subnormal operators, and using as test ground recent
              results on unilateral weighted shifts. In joint work with W.Y. Lee, Curto has
              introduced the class of weakly subnormal operators and obtained preliminary
              results on its position relative to subnormality and 2-hyponormality, including
              a proof that contractive 2-hyponormal operators with closed range
              self-commutator are extremal for the family of 2-hyponormal contractions. The
              third area is closely related to the first two, in that both originate in
              Curto's work on quadratic and joint hyponormality, which eventually led to the
              solution of the subnormal completion problem for weighted shifts and to the
              existence of non-subnormal polynomially hyponormal operators. Curto will seek a
              characterization of polynomially hyponormal weighted shifts, a structure
              theorem for quadratically hyponormal shifts, and the detection of non-subnormal
              polynomially hyponormal operators through the Pincus principal function. The
              fourth area deals with a Sz. Nagy-Foias dilation theory in several variables,
              by extending existing results to functional Hilbert spaces over Reinhardt
              domains.  The suitability of multi-shifts as standard models and the validity
              of von Neumann's inequality for special n-tuples will be considered. Curto
              plans to extend the description of the spectral picture of multiplication
              operators associated with Reinhardt measures to functional Hilbert spaces over
              matrix Reinhardt domains. Finally, the fifth area deals with the invariant
              subspace structure of commuting contractions on Hilbert space. Two main goals
              will be pursued: (a) an extension to the Taylor spectrum of results on spectral
              dominance currently available only for the Harte spectrum, and (b) an analog of
              Apostol's Theorem in several variables. 

Multivariable operator theory is a
              rapidly evolving area of mathematics, with deep and significant connections
              with areas of differential geometry, topology, complex analysis, and algebraic
              geometry, and with exciting applications to engineering, quantum and
              relativistic mechanics, and computational mathematics. The theory of truncated
              moment problems provide easily accessible formulas for the evaluation of areas
              and volumes of complex regions, of moments of inertia and centers of gravity.
              Dilation theory and invariant subspace theory are essential tools in the
              description of algebraic properties of elaborate physical or engineering
              systems, and the study of transformations on function spaces has often led to
              the solution of problems in control theory, intimately tied to systems theory
              and electrical engineering. Our research project is aimed at resolving some
              outstanding problems in multivariable operator theory, while creating
              recruitment and retention opportunities for women and minorities to pursue
              careers in mathematics, by engaging their participation in projects related to
              the interaction of mathematics with other sciences.





