Title       : Preparation of Amido-amidate Metallacycles for Polypeptide Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0099334

Award Number: 0099334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Deming tdeming@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Timothy J. Deming, of the Departments of Chemistry and Materials Science at the
              University of California, Santa Barbara, is studying the synthesis of
              amido-amidate metallacycles and their use for the catalytic preparation of
              polypeptides. Through analysis of the reactivity of low-valent metal complexes
              with amino acid N-carboxyanhydride (NCA) derivatives, the generality of NCA
              reactivity with transition metals will be illustrated and new candidates for
              NCA polymerization initiators will be developed. Alternate synthetic routes to
              amido-amidate metallacycles, the active propagating species in NCA
              polymerization, will provide more efficient initiators and allow versatility in
              the end-functionalization of polypeptides. By working with amido-amidate
              metallacycles with new, well-defined coordination geometries, stereocontrolled
              NCA polymerization will be explored.

Polypeptides represent one of the major
              classes of macromolecules utilized by living organisms. These large molecules,
              comprised of many amino acids linked together, display a wide range of
              important physical and chemical properties. New approaches to the preparation
              of polypeptides offer promise for the efficient synthesis of molecules
              anticipated to display new and/or unusual properties, including the selective
              transport of ions. Professor Timothy J. Deming, of the Departments of Chemistry
              and Materials Science at the University of California, Santa Barbara, is
              supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his studies
              of new catalytic techniques for polypeptide synthesis, offering promise for the
              selective and efficient synthesis of complex polypeptides with unique molecular
              architectures.
