Title       : Agile Views for Video Browsing: Advanced Surrogates, Control Mechanisms, and
               Usability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0099538

Award Number: 0099538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Marchionini march@ils.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara M. Wildemuth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award.  This project
              will afford people agile views - effortless control over different
              representations - for digital video objects, by providing a multiplicity of
              indexes that are attuned to people's experiences, leverage the features of the
              content, and are easily and rapidly used and changed.   The PI will specify
              such an interface, create prototype instantiations, and develop and apply
              procedures for testing the usability of the prototypes and specifications.  
              Most research on digital video systems focuses on the retrieval of specific
              objects and on one or a few indexing attributes.   This project is unique in
              three ways.   First, it aims to address tasks at the collection level as well
              as at the item level;  thus, in addition to the retrieval task, it aims to help
              people understand a video collection's structure, what is and is not available,
              and what attributes might be useful for retrieval purposes.  Second, it aims to
              provide people with a range of surrogates and to integrate these into an
              effective and efficient interface; it aims to create an environment that
              provides multiple surrogates at the collection level as well as at the
              individual item level, and to provide novel control mechanisms to manage these
              alternatives.  Third, it aims to assess user performance on these different
              tasks using these surrogates;  evaluating browsing behavior is a challenge in
              any medium, and this work will build upon tasks and metrics developed in
              previous studies to go beyond traditional metrics to address time-benefit
              tradeoff measures.  For this project, the video objects will be drawn from the
              Open Video Repository.   Surrogates such as key-frames (in slide shows,
              storyboards, and skims), audio extracts, and keywords will be used as the basic
              representa-tions for specific video segments, and will be user-manipulable
              through a variety of interaction mechanisms.    Additional surrogates (such as
              two-dimensional layouts of metadata and coordinated metadata lists) for
              collections of videos will also be developed, and additional views, i.e.,
              histories (reviews), peripheral views, and shared views, will also be
              investigated within the agile views environment.  The usability of the agile
              views environment (its individual components and the completely-integrated
              interface) will be evaluated iteratively, concluding with assessments of user
              performance (object and action recognition, and video comprehension), tradeoffs
              associated with viewing compaction rates, and user satisfaction with the
              interface.  These evaluation techniques will themselves contribute to research
              and development by providing metrics and techniques for assessing interactive
              browsing.   The ultimate goal of this work is to provide an information-rich
              and interactive environment that enables people to go beyond their innate
              visual and audio abilities to browse video content and process large volumes of
              video information.

