Title       : Study of Heavy Quark Physics with the BaBar Detector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0099505

Award Number: 0099505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $873216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia R. Burchat patricia@hep.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for the research program in experimental particle
              physics of a Stanford University group whose primary goal is the elucidation of
              the source of CP violation through the study of the decay of mesons containing
              the bottom quark.  The program will be carried out with the BaBar detector and
              PEP-II storage ring at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC).  Within
              the BaBar collaboration, this group has been responsible for all detector
              monitoring and control hardware for the Silicon Vertex Tracker (SVT), and for
              the SVT data acquisition software.  In the period of this request, the group
              intends to maintain the SVT systems they designed, built and commissioned: a
              radiation monitoring and beam interlock system based on PIN diodes near the
              beam pipe, a position-monitoring system for the SVT and drift chamber, a
              temperature monitoring and power supply interlock system for the SVT readout
              electronics, and a gas and fluid monitoring system for the SVT.
	The PI
              recently completed a one-year term as Physics Analysis Coordinator (PAC),
              preceded by a term as Deputy PAC.  During her term as PAC, the BaBar
              collaboration presented its first preliminary results on the CP-violating
              phase, b, the B lifetimes, the B0 B0-bar mixing rate, radiative Penguin decays,
              charmless hadronic B decays, and other analyses at the International Conference
              on High Energy Physics in Osaka, Japan.  The Stanford group contributed to
              various aspects of the lifetime, mixing, and CP analyses.  The focus of this
              group will be on continued analysis of BaBar data, concentrating on B lifetimes
              and mixing, rare decays such as B+ - t+ nt  and B+ - K+ n n-bar, and charm
              baryon physics.

