Title       : NSF-EC Activity: Dynamics of Layered, Multifunctional Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0099695

Award Number: 0099695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1560809            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos G. Levi levic@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony G. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tresa M. Pollock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1589,1682,5914,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: 0099695
Univ. of Santa Barbara
Carlos G. Levi

A multidisciplinary
              scientific team will undertake a collaborative program to investigate the
              dynamics of layered, multifunctional surfaces. The focus is on coating systems
              that provide both thermal insulation and oxidation/corrosion protection for
              thermostructural components. The overarching intellectual challenge is
              establishing a science-based protocol for optimizing functionality while
              integrating thermomechanically and thermochemically disparate materials that
              experience large temperature extremes. These systems are inherently metastable
              and evolve via morphological changes, diffusional interactions and
              thermomechanically-induced stresses that generally degrade performance and
              limit durability. The program aims to develop a fundamental understanding of
              the underlying mechanisms that could provide a basis for designing superior,
              durable surfaces. The scientific themes involve phase equilibria between oxides
              and intermetallics, diffusive and thermal transport phenomena in oxides,
              fundamental mechanisms of deformation and basic mechanistic aspects of oxide
              growth. Specific objectives seek to elucidate (a) the role of composition on
              the mechanisms of surface diffusion in fluorite-structured oxides, as well as
              boundary diffusion in intermetallics; (b) the thermomechanical behavior of
              individual layers, as they relate to chemistry and microstructure, and
              complexities associated with their interaction; (c) the interplay between
              processing and material parameters via microstructural modifications; and (d)
              the mechanisms governing thermal transport in porous multicomponent oxides. The
              materials systems of interest are ceramics based on zirconia and rare earth
              oxides, as well as Ni-based intermetallics alloyed with platinum group metals.
              The synthesis technologies are predominantly vapor-based, with precursor
              methods and melt processing used in generating model specimens. Thermodynamic,
              kinetic and mechanics modeling activities will be an essential complement of
              the experimental activities.
The program offers a balanced set of educational,
              scientific and technological benefits. The technological motivation derives
              from the drive to expand the limits and durability of structural materials,
              wherein durable multifunctional surfaces represent a materials challenge of
              highest priority. These material systems are essential to the pursuit of
              improved efficiency and reduced environmental impact for gas turbines, a
              predominant source of power for global electrification, aircraft and marine
              transportation, as well as numerous industrial processes. The societal and
              economic benefits are thus self-evident but are presently limited because of
              insufficient scientific understanding to guide needed improvements in materials
              design, processing and performance. The complexity and richness in fundamental
              issues associated with the dynamics of these layers provide the scientific
              motivation as well as the need for an interdisciplinary research approach. The
              team assembled has an unprecedented combination of expertise and available
              facilities to undertake this research. They are all closely involved in working
              with students and motivated by the unique educational opportunity afforded by
              the NSF-EC program. Accordingly, the projects will be defined to foster
              collaboration among American and European students. Mechanisms will be provided
              for extended reciprocal visits of students working together on a given topic,
              to experience first hand how research is done at the partner institution. By
              working on a broad

