Title       : NSF-EC Activity: Studies of Defects, Disorder and Phase Transitions via Diffuse
               Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0099573

Award Number: 0099573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319297             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon C. Moss smoss@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1665,1734,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              We propose here a joint University of Houston - Max Planck Institute
              (MPI-Stuttgart) program on the diffuse scattering of X-rays and neutrons from
              disordered alloys.  There are three projects involved:  a) The determination of
              detailed local and long-range static atomic displacements in a dilute random
              Ge(0.08)Si(0.92) alloy crystal using anomalous X-ray scattering at the ESRF in
              Grenoble, along with high energy-resolution X-ray or neutron measurements of
              the optic modes and in-band resonant modes; b) The use of a null matrix
              62Ni(0.52)Pt(0.48) crystal (62Ni, which has a negative scattering length, will
              be supplied by the MPI) to eliminate all Bragg, thermal diffuse and Huang
              scattering in order to evaluate both the local order and local atomic
              displacements for comparison with theoretical models for this alloy.  A
              "normal" Ni-Pt crystal will also be used to assess the phonon dispersion curves
              and Huang scattering.  Companion theoretical work on the elastic and electronic
              interactions will be performed in collaboration with our MPI colleagues; c)
              Continuation of theoretical work to understand defect influences on phase
              transitions, in this case the X-ray observation of the conversion of a bulk
              first-order transition in V2H to a tricritical transition in a defective
              (dislocation-dominated) "skin" layer. Students will participate in this
              research.

In this program of work we continue our studies of the detailed
              local structure of alloys - both semiconducting and metallic - through the
              application of diffuse (i.e. non-Bragg) X-ray and neutron scattering.  The
              underlying physics of alloys depends on the precise nature of the interatomic
              interactions, both electronic and elastic.  These interactions may be directly
              probed through a combination of scattering data and theoretical modeling,
              either via simulation or from first principles.  The essential issues are the
              "size" of an atom, i.e. charge transfer, and the way in which the basic
              electronic structure is manifested in local order, alloy stability and,
              ultimately, in the prediction of phase diagrams.  Statistical mechanics lies at
              the heart of these problems, as does the influence of defects, such as
              dislocations, on phase stability and phase transitions.  Our scattering
              program, combined with theoretical modeling, will address these issues in a
              comprehensive way using synchrotron X-rays and reactor-based neutrons. This
              research will be conducted with students who will receive training in one of
              the contemporary forefront areas of condensed matter physics. Through this they
              will be prepared to enter the scientific/technological workforce of the next
              few decades.

