Title       : Placing the Floridian Genetic Break for Nearshore Taxa into a Regional
               Phylogenetic Perspective Using Three Lineages of Marine Mussels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0099084

Award Number: 0099084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diarmaid O'Foighil diarmaid@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Understanding spatio-temporal patterns of biotic diversity represents one of the
              central challenges facing ecologists and systernatists. This challenge is
              particularly acute in the marine environment where we are only just now
              beginning to comprehend the evolutionary processes which have produced the epic
              diversity evident in tropical nearshore faunas. A central paradox in marine
              evolution is how speciation rates in many clades are sufficiently high to
              produce large sibling species complexes on geographic scales that are dwarfed
              by the dispersal potential of their planktonic larval stages.  The aim of this
              project is to address how the Gulf-Atlantic genetic disjunction for regionally
              distributed Caribbean morphospecies scales relative to the genetic structuring
              experienced over the rest of their collective geographic ranges. Three distinct
              phylogenetic trajectories are hypothesized that hinge on whether the
              Gulf--Atlantic genetic disjunction for individual study taxa originated early
              in the history of the Miocene Suwannee Seaway, or postdated it's Pliocene
              closure, and whether or not genetic cohesiveness has been maintained across
              oceanic barriers to dispersal. These hypotheses will be tested using three
              exemplar mytilid morphospecies chosen on the basis of their appropriate
              geographic ranges, ecological abundance in distinct coastal habitats,
              availability of reference congeners on the Pacific side of the isthmus of
              Panama, and possession of rapidly evolving paternally -transmitted
              mitochondrial lineages. Mitochondrial and nuclear gene trees will be generated
              for population samples spanning the southeastern Florida genetic break, the
              oceanic dispersal barrier to Bermuda, and representative locations in the
              Caribbean Basin. Sampling of Caribbean/eastern Pacific congeners will allow the
              identification of transisthmian reference geminate species and provide a
              meaningful temporal perspective for the intraspecific gene tree topologies. The
              project promises to yield important new insights into the nature and origin of
              biotic diversity in both this regional fauna and in the broader marine
              environment.
