Title       : On the Behavior of Solutions of Einstein's Equations and Other Geometric
               Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0099373

Award Number: 0099373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Isenberg jim@newton.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Einstein's gravitational field theory (general relativity), besides
providing
              the most accurate current model for the study of gravitational
physics on the
              astrophysical and cosmological scales, is also the source of
a rich collection
              of mathematically interesting questions. This award will
support a program of
              research which focusses on some of these, including
the following:
1) Study
              of the behavior of the gravitational field very close to the big
bang in
              cosmological solutions of Einstein's equations. Remarkably, it
seems that even
              for solutions which appear to be very different some time
after the big bang,
              the behavior close to the big bang is very similar: It
oscillates in a
              characteristic way. We can show this, numerically or
analytically, for simple
              families of solutions, and we hope to show it more
generally.
2) Construction
              of new sets of initial conditions for the gravitational
field which juxtapose
              two known sets. This is not easy because the initial
conditions must satisfy
              certain nonlinear  partial differential
equations--the Einstein "constraints".
              We are developing techniques for
smoothly joining ( or "gluing") two solutions
              of the constraints into a
single solution.

The first of these projects,
              although it ignores any quantum gravitational
effects, could be very useful in
              our drive to understand the nature of the
very early universe. The second is
              of interest both mathematically and
physically. The mathematical interest
              stems from the fact that the Einstein
constraint system is among the most
              complicated to which gluing studies
have been applied. The physical interest
              comes from the possiblility of
using the developed techniques to set up
              initial data for black hole
collisions and other astrophysical problems which
              are being intensely
studied numerically in anticipation of future data from
              LIGO.


