Title       : Upgrade and Modernization of the Integrated Imaging Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0099706

Award Number: 0099706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69744              (Estimated)
Investigator: J.Michael McCaffery jmccaffery@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denis Wirtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly Wendland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Machamer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Betenbaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for acquisition of an ultramicrotome with cryostage
              and a glass knife maker to be placed in the Integrated Imaging Center located
              in the Johns Hopkins University Biology Department.  The Integrated Imaging
              Center includes both light and electron microscopy equipment and thus provides
              university faculty and students convenient access to conventional and advanced
              techniques in both types of microscopy. The major focus of the Center is the
              utilization of fluorescent and electron dense probes for the purpose of
              investigating cellular/subcellular structure and function.  In recent years,
              the development and refinement of new techniques that use antibodies to
              localize specific proteins within cells has become an essential component of
              any comprehensive study of subcellular structure and function. Typically, the
              antibodies used are chemically conjugated to fluorescent or electron dense
              moiety to facilitate visualization by microscopy. This complements and extends
              results obtained by other approaches.  The Center offers both undergraduate and
              graduate courses in microscopy (as well as regular workshops) as a means of
              providing
training and exposure to the latest, most advanced microscopy
              techniques to students and to faculty.  These courses emphasize the integration
              of microscopic techniques with the use of other cell biological research tools.
               The new equipment will replace older existing equipment that can no longer
              function with the precision required for modern cell biology research.  Among
              the projects that will make use of the equipment are studies of the endocytosis
              pathways of yeast and insect cells, analysis of mitochondrial dynamics in
              yeast, and investigation of the role of golgins in structure and function of
              the golgi apparatus.  

