Title       : NMR Investigation of Segmental Dynamics in Multicomponent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0099849

Award Number: 0099849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Ediger ediger@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In multicomponent systems, the molecular motion of a polymer may be strongly
              affected by the presence of other synthetic polymers, solid substrates,
              fillers, or biological structures.  Such changes in dynamics significantly
              influence transport and mechanical properties.  The long term goal of this
              research is to understand how to predict the changes in polymer dynamics which
              occur with mixing.  Multicomponent polymer systems exhibit complex dynamics. 
              Significant progress can be made by fully characterizing the dynamics of a
              number of model mixtures.  The proposed research will characterize: 1)
              segmental dynamics of both components in a model one-phase blend (low molecular
              weight polystyrene/polyisoprene); 2) longer length and time scale motions of
              both components in a model one-phase blend; 3) segmental dynamics in the limit
              of infinite dilution for several one-phase blends with polyisoprene as the
              minor component; 4) structure and dynamics of a model nano-composite
              (C60/polybutadiene).  In addition, two key conceptual aspects of blend dynamics
              will addressed: 1) the correlation between local mobility and local structure
              in a miscible blend (polyisoprene/polyvinylethylene); 2) the size of the
              regions which determine local mobility.  Characterizing dynamics in complex
              mixtures requires the coordinated application of a number of different
              experimental techniques.  The proposed research primarily relies upon multiple
              field NMR relaxation time measurements and solid-state NMR measurements of
              segmental and normal model motion, and neutron scattering to assess aggregation
              in a nanoscale composite.
%%%
This line of research should lead to an
              understanding of the complex features and useful properties of miscible polymer
              blends, and ultimately the ability to predict these properties.  Insights from
              the study of a model nano-composite could lead to the ability to predict
              transport properties of ions and small molecules near nano-devices in contact
              with polymers.  Comparisons between dynamics experiments and molecular dynamics
              computer simulations will lead to improved forcefields and the ability to
              perform more accurate simulation in materials science and beyond

