Title       : Slow Wave Electrooptic Light Modulators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0099529

Award Number: 0099529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry F. Taylor taylor@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ohannes Eknoyan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The goal of this project is to demonstrate extremely efficient and highly
              linear microwave-to-optical conversion using new modulator design principles.
              The theoretical basis for this proposal was developed recently, while the
              planned experiments will build upon over a decade of research at Texas A&M in
              ferroelectric materials for guided wave optics.
	The proposed electrooptic
              modulators utilize a traveling wave (TW) Mach-Zehnder interferometer
              configuration. Integrated grating reflectors in each interferometer arm form an
              etalon which reduces the average optical propagation speed in the forward
              direction. The 'slow" waveguide structures provide two features which lead to
              improved modulator performance over conventional "fast" TW designs: (1)
              optical/microwave velocity matching in substrates with high electrooptic
              coefficients and dielectric constants, and (2) enhancement of electrooptic
              interaction strength due to the "dwell time" of the light in the modulation
              region. For devices fabricated in the conventional lithium niobate (LN)
              substrate material, these two factors lead to a potential improvement of an
              order of magnitude in electrical power dissipation over conventional
              velocity-matched designs. Additional orders-of-magnitude reduction in driving
              power is anticipated from the use of tungsten bronze substrates such as
              strontium barium niobate (SBN), which have much higher electrooptic
              coefficients than LN. Better response linearity in interferometric modulators
              is also possible using slow wave structures in both LN and SBN.
Etalons with N
              equally spaced reflectors (N _ 3) which exhibit high transmittance over a wide
              spectral range have been designed for use in the slow-wave modulators. Since
              the transmittance of such a structure is periodic in optical frequency, a
              single modulator with appropriate reflector spacing could be used on any
              channel in a dense wavelength-division- multiplexed (WDM) communication
              system.
Modulators designed to operate at a wavelength near 1.5 gm will be
              fabricated in LN and SBN substrates. Conventional lithography, etching, and
              diffusion techniques will be used to produce waveguide and electrode patterns.
              Corrugated gratings will be produced on the surface of the substrate by
              reactive ion etching or ion milling using a holographic phase mask with an
              argon laser as the light source to define the 0.35 gm-period patterns. Measured
              electrical power dissipation, pi-voltage (Va), and linearity of response will
              be compared with results reported for "fast-wave" devices in LNto bandwidths>
              10 GHz.
	These modulators are expected to find application in digital and
              analog fiber optic communication systems, where order-of-magnitude reductions
              in electrical power requirements would have a major impact on the size and cost
              of optical transmission equipment. Furthermore, since the need for very thick
              (~ 15-30 ~tm) electrodes is eliminated, the cost of the integrated optic chip
              can be reduced considerably. Analog fiber optic links operating in the GIfl
              regime would also benefit from enhanced dynamic range, which presently is
              limited by the maximum drive power available from microwave amplifiers and the
              linearity of response of integrated optic modulators.



