Title       : Learning and Reasoning with Relational Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0099446

Award Number: 0099446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roni Khardon roni@eecs.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award. The project
              is devoted to the study of relational structures in the context of machine
              learning and reasoning.  A lot of progress has been made in these areas in
              recent years, but much of this work ignores structure in examples and
              representations.  Relational representations are natural for many application
              areas, e.g. molecular problems in bioinformatics, or sentence structure in
              natural language processing (NLP).  The PI believes that further progress can
              be made by considering relational structures and techniques explicitly in such
              contexts.   A large part of this project is concerned with algorithms based on
              first order Horn expressions, where reasoning problems have long been studied,
              and learning within inductive logic programming .  Recent results suggest that
              some learning problems are feasible if the learner can ask questions.  This
              project will extend that work in an attempt to identify more learnable classes,
              the associated complexity of the problems, and the limits of the approach.  
              The PI will continue work on the LogAn-H system, so that algorithmic ideas
              developed can also feed directly into heuristics for learning from examples. 
              The PI will also explore alternative representations and reasoning mechanisms
              for relational structures, and their effect on learnability.   This includes
              both the use of linear threshold elements (perceptrons) to embed relational
              structures, and the logic-based approach of reasoning with models.  While most
              of the work is concerned with theoretical foundations, applications in NLP and
              bioinformatics will be explored.  All these directions are part of an effort to
              develop foundations for systems that learn their knowledge and use it for
              reasoning.

