Title       : Polarimeter for High Energy Photons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0099487

Award Number: 0099487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Branislav Vlahovic branko@einsteins.sci.nccu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bogdan B. Wojtsekhowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina Central U
	      P O Box 19375
	      Durham, NC  277070099    919/683-6100

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since the completion of the Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility
at
              Thomas Jefferson National Laboratory (JLAB), the precise measurement of
the
              polarization of high energy photons has become an important topic.
For
              example, the scientific program at JLAB's Hall B includes
              fundamental
experiments that require polarization measurements to be accurate
              to at
least 5%, and some of them require an accuracy of 1-2%.  The
              physics
program at the planned Hall D will also depend largely on
              linearly
polarized photons whose polarization must be accurately known. 
	In
              spite of a history extending over 40 years, high energy photon
polarimetry is
              still a relatively undeveloped field.  For high energy
photons, such as those
              produced at JLAB, all known methods for measuring
polarization have low
              analyzing power, and absolute accuracy below that
required for the approved
              and anticipated physics programs. The
polarimeter proposed in this project
              will have an unsurpassed experimental
asymmetry of approximately 1.7 for an
              energy range from a few tens of MeV
up to several GeV. The polarimeter is
              simple in construction, compact, and
its costs will be lower than that for
              polarimeters built according to any
other available method.
	Two prototypes
              have already been built and tested. The performance
of the detectors and the
              electronics met expectations and the measured
analyzing power was as large as
              predicted.  The use of this polarimeter at
Spring-8 enabled the first direct
              measurement of the azimuthal asymmetry
in pair production by linear polarized
              photons in the energy range 1.5 to
2.4 GeV.  However, more improvements are
              needed to produce a polarimeter
that will be permanently in use at JLAB.  This
              project will undertake
those improvements, including additional work on pair
              production theory
and calculations, data acquisition and analyzing software,
              and the
development of detector hardware.
In addition to solving urgent needs
              in polarimetry, providing the ground
for the ultimate experiments at JLAB, the
              development of this program will
bring novel equipment to NCCU, and increase
              involvement of students in
research, advancing the education of undergraduates
              from underrepresented
groups.  


