Title       : Formative Assessment Materials for Large-Enrollment Physics Lecture Classes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0243258

Award Number: 0243258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104914             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Meltzer dem@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing new formative assessment materials for large
              introductory lecture-based general physics courses. Among the project goals are
              to (1) analyze the reliability and validity of these materials, (2) evaluate
              their effectiveness in the process of instruction, and (3) acquire baseline
              data regarding student performance that will be of value to other instructors
              who make use of the materials.

The assessment materials themselves consist
              of carefully sequenced sets of multiple-choice questions, each focused on a
              specific topic.  The individual items are primarily conceptual questions that
              downplay algebraic manipulations, and instead make heavy use of diagrammatic,
              graphical, and pictorial elements.  The materials are intended for use in large
              lecture classes, and they are specifically designed to allow for rapid and
              reliable assessment of student learning during the course of a single class.
              The structure and sequencing of the questions are formulated to maximize
              intense student-instructor interaction on a minute-by-minute basis even in
              large-enrollment classes.  The materials will be used in classes organized
              along active-learning lines in which a classroom communication system is
              available.  This type of system, either electronic or one based on flash cards,
              allows students to rapidly signal multiple-choice responses to questions posed
              by the instructor.  The instantaneous feedback they provide will allow
              instructors to make immediate alterations, as needed, in their presentations
              and in planned instructional activities.  The materials and baseline data
              gathered from these materials will be made available via websites, CD-ROMs and
              through other dissemination methods to reach the education community and other
              interested audiences.

