Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biotechnology and Bioengineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0243910

Award Number: 0243910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vicki Booker                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelika B. Niemz Angelika_Niemz@kgi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda K. Mann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keck Graduate Institute
	      535 Watson Drive
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/607-7853

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0243910 Niemz

This award funds a three-year Research Experience for
              Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Keck Graduate Institute of Applied Life
              Sciences (KGI) for 10 students each summer for ten weeks for research
              opportunities in biotechnology and bioengineering. KGI is a part of the
              Claremont Colleges - a cluster of five undergraduate colleges and two graduate
              schools on adjoining campuses in Claremont, California. The goal of this REU
              site is to involve undergraduate students in collaborative efforts between
              engineers and scientists in the fields of biology, computer science, business,
              and ethics to effectively address cutting-edge topics in biotechnology and
              bioengineering. Research topics will include: microfluidics; bioreactor process
              optimization; microarray technologies; DNA amplification and analysis methods;
              modeling of regulatory networks; and rational design of multi-drug HIV therapy.
              In addition, some students will be able to pursue ethics research related to
              the scientific research at KGI. Students will be recruited nationwide, with a
              special effort to attract women who wish to pursue a career in the
              biotechnology sector. This program will introduce students at an early stage to
              interdisciplinary research and help them develop the professional skills
              necessary to succeed in research careers. The program is designed to aid in the
              future career development of participants through career counseling as well as
              through mentoring relationships with professionals from academia and
              industry.

