Title       : Computational Models of Ion Pair Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0243410

Award Number: 0243410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Streitwieser astreit@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal proposal the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              supports the on- going work of Dr. Andrew Streitwieser in the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley.  The work is aimed at
              understanding chemistry by computations rather than the development of new
              computational methods or algorithms. The reactions of lithium enolates with
              alkyl halides and carbonyl compounds, for example, are important in synthetic
              chemistry and the proposed modeling of experimental results, many of which
              derive from Professor Streitwieser's laboratory, will provide significant
              predictive power and new understanding of this chemistry. Computational
              chemistry has reached the point where much of this chemistry can be modeled
              quantitatively, and it is the thrust of the present proposal using ab initio
              quantum calculations with standard programs. Such modeling allows a wider range
              of the effect of structure on reactivity of these and related reactions, and
              therefore, leads to new chemical principles and a better understanding of ion
              pair chemistry. The results of this project are expected to serve as a focus
              for several review articles to summarize Professor Streitwieser's experimental
              and computational results.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry supports the research activities
              of Professor Andrew Streitwieser of the University of California- Berkeley. 
              Professor Streitwieser continues to be a world leader in understanding
              reactions of ionic species. In addition to answering some fundamental questions
              in physical organic chemistry, post-doctoral and undergraduate students will
              receive unique training in computational methods and ion pair chemistry. And,
              to underscore the broader impact of this work, Professor Streitwieser had eight
              undergraduate students work with him during the last two years.

