Title       : Collaborative Research: Field Testing RAFOS-Enabled SOLO Floats (SGER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0243315

Award Number: 0243315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84954              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Brechner Owens bowens@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1324,9237,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0243315 Owens

This proposal will build three new RAFOS-enabled
              isopycnal-following Sounding Oceanographic Lagrangian Observer (SOLO) floats
              and test them within a sound source
array that is being deployed in the North
              Atlantic. The experiment is an important technology demonstration project that
              brings together software and hardware that have been developed for a number of
              other field programs to produce a novel float with important new capabilities.
              The floats will be based on the SOLO float design so that, at the least, they
              can be tracked every 10 days no matter where they go in the world and provide
              temperature and salinity profiles when they rise to the ocean surface. They
              will be equipped with RAFOS receivers so that when they are within acoustic
              range of sound sources, they can be tracked daily to provide higher frequency
              velocity trajectories that are of order 100 days in length. They will also be
              programmed to follow isopycnals, so that we can observe float displacements
              along isopycnal surfaces that are associated with the primary mixing in the
              ocean. Finally, the floats will be designed to take advantage of new two-way
              communication capabilities, so that they can be reprogrammed if experimental
              requirements change after deployment or if any of their sensors fail. Floats of
              this design will be particularly well-suited for eventual deployment in the
              Southern Ocean. The high velocities and rough sea state of the Antarctic
              Circumpolar Current (ACC) make it a difficult region to deploy and maintain
              current meters, meaning that floats are the preferred method for estimating
              eddy fluxes. Because of its strong flow, the ACC is likely to advect floats out
              of an ensonified basin long before the depletion of the float batteries,
              meaning that pure RAFOS floats may not provide useful data for significant
              portions of their missions. Isopycnal-following capabilities are important in
              the Southern Ocean, because the predominant mixing is thought to occur along
              the strongly tilted isopycnal surfaces of the ACC. 

This proposal will
              support development of technology that merges current RAFOS float capabilities
              with existing ARGO float technology. This development is likely to be useful in
              a wide range of research in physical oceanography and climate..

