Title       : REU Site: Urbanization Impacts on Stream Ecosystems - An Integrated Training
               Experience for Undergraduate Researchers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0243878

Award Number: 0243878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188089             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Michael Walton b.walton@csuohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Stepien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      2121 Euclid Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-3630

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Urbanization Impacts on Stream Ecosystems - An Integrated Training Experience
              for Undergraduate Researchers is a 10-week summer program designed to provide
              students with opportunities to investigate urbanization as a critical factor in
              the current crisis of declining biodiversity.  Students will develop and
              conduct independent research projects emphasizing interdisciplinary studies of
              biodiversity and ecological function of the Cuyahoga River watershed.  The
              experience will begin with a two-week orientation and basic training that
              includes a tour of the watershed and instructions in stream ecology and
              fundamental research skills.  The balance of the program will be devoted
              largely to independent research.  All student projects will be integrated
              around the central concept that urbanization alters the ecology and genetic
              diversity of stream organisms, but students will select among projects
              approaching this hypothesis with different methods and organisms, including
              studies of ecology or genetic diversity of plants, invertebrates, fish, and
              amphibians.  Students will also participate in seminars presented by REU
              faculty and visiting experts emphasizing basic research skills, urban ecology,
              and socio-cultural dimensions of urban ecosystem studies.  In addition,
              students will attend workshops emphasizing (1) educational and career
              opportunities in urban environmental science, and (2) analysis, interpretation,
              and communication of scientific data.  The experience will conclude with a
              research symposium at which students will present their work to REU faculty,
              environmental scientists, and resource management professionals.  Student
              recruitment efforts will target biological and environmental science majors
              from urban institutions lacking ecological research opportunities and
              under-represented groups in the sciences.  For additional information, contact
              Dr. B. Michael Walton at 216-687-3979 or b.walton@csuohio.edu.
