Title       : REU Site: Fluids in the Earth from Surface to Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0243526

Award Number: 0243526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296397             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc M. Hirschmann Marc.M.Hirschmann-1@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emi Ito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site for field,
              analytical experimental, and theoretical study of geological fluids.  Research
              in this program range from surface and near-surface fluid systems to the mantle
              to the core.  Fourteen undergraduate students will be recruited nationally each
              year.

The students will investigate topics with the common theme of fluids
              in the Earth.  They will be involved in various research activities, including
              the impacts of human activities on groundwater quality primarily in karst and
              fractured rock aquifers, limnogeolgogy research on lakes to understand regional
              environmental dynamics, evaulation of the chemical and mechanical effects of
              fluids in metamorphic and igneous systems, the effect of melt on rheology of
              mantle rocks, and numerical hands-on experience with mantle convection and core
              dynamics using scientific visualization.

The program features many
              attributes that foster a cohort experience.  In particular, interns participate
              in two symposia in which they explain their projects and results to each other
              and to members of the department.  In addition, they are exposed to disciplines
              outside their summer research by participating in field trips to Midwestern
              sites (caves, glacial lake/river features, mid-continent rift lavas), by
              touring a wide range of laboratory facilities (rock magnetism, isotope
              geochemistry, rock mechanics, electron microscopy) at the University of
              Minnesota and vicinity.  An important goal of the internship program is to
              foster a sense of community among the summer students as they interact with
              future Earth science colleagues and friends, and so the program includes
              weekend activities such as picnics, boating on Lake Superior, bike rides around
              the lakes in the Twin Cities, and visits to museums.  Program activities
              emphasize the connections and commonality  of research carried out in diverse
              research fields, in order to help develop communication between the students
              and an appreciation for the broad range of problems that can be addressed with
              the same experimental, analytical and computational tools.
