Title       : REU Site: Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience (SAGE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0243869

Award Number: 0243869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480082             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Jiracek   (Principal Investigator current)
              W. S. Baldridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9250,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This site is co-funded through a partnership of the Department of Defense and
              the NSF REU program.
SAGE (Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience) blends
              teaching and research into a partnership between universities, industry, and
              federal laboratories.  The summer portion of SAGE is 4 weeks long for REU; an
              additional week is scheduled in early January for follow-up and advanced
              research.  SAGE faculty come from seven universities and a national
              laboratory.

The primary goal of the REU portion of SAGE is to actively
              involve undergraduate students in all phases of exciting, applied geophysical
              research using the newest field equipment and latest computer
              processing/interpretation tools.  The SAGE REU site has 15 REU students of the
              25-30 students (including graduate students) that attend SAGE each year.  A
              target to have one-half underrepresented REU students at SAGE has been
              achieved.

Students at SAGE participate in every phase of a geophysical
              research program:  they collect data with modern equipment; they process,
              model, and interpret the data with workstations and PC's; and they present
              their results in both oral and written form.  First the students are introduced
              to fundamental scientific principles involved when applying geophysics to
              geologic problems.  Then there are interactive discussions on what the
              objectives of the field research are, what geophysical techniques will be used
              and why, and how the data will be collected.

The central activity of SAGE is
              the hands-on collection and interpretation of field research data.  Students
              work with faculty, teaching assistants, and industry experts in a variety of
              geophysical surveys such as seismic reflection, seismic refraction, gravity,
              magnetics and electromagnetics including manetotellurics.  Industry
              contributions include visits from professionals, evening discussions, financial
              donations, and free equipment use and software loans.  This allows a high level
              of technical expertise not available at most college campuses.
