Title       : Statistical Equivalence Checking Using Partial Haar Spectral Diagrams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0243358

Award Number: 0243358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17081              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell A. Thornton mitch@engr.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Combinational logic equivalence checking is used extensively in various formal
              verification approaches. Problems can be encountered when the candidate
              functions are too large to be represented in the memory of a computer. This
              motivates the need for probabilistic approaches for equivalence checking. This
              project is an exploration of performing probabilistic equivalence checking
              based on the Haar spectrum of two partially represented functions. Subsets of
              Haar spectral coefficients are obtained from partial Haar spectral diagrams
              efficiently. The probability that two logic functions differ can be iteratively
              refined as additional pairs of Haar spectral coefficients with equal numeric
              value are calculated. The problem of representation of very large functions is
              addressed through the use of the partial Haar spectral diagram and the
              probabilistic aspect arises through the use of iteratively refining the error
              probability as more matching pairs of spectral coefficients are found. The use
              of the Haar wavelet is desirable as compared to other transforms since certain
              subsets of the coefficients are mutually independent which greatly reduces the
              complexity of the probability calculations. 

