Title       : Collaborative Research: The Role of Canopy Structure on Variability of Water and
               Heat Fluxes from Forested Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0243598

Award Number: 0243598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65884              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Albertson john.albertson@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9902957
Albertson

This study investigates the exchange of water vapor,
              energy, and momentum between forested watersheds and the atmospheric boundary
              layer (ABL), using a combination of emerging tools in numerical simulation of
              turbulent flow and transport through and above plant canopies and recent result
              from a comprehensive field campaign.  The field experiment, conducted in
              October of 1997, included seven research groups measuring land surface fluxes
              of water vapor, heat, carbon dioxide, and momentum on seven towers situated
              within a pine forest at Duke Forest near Durham, North Carolina.  The data set
              studied here is the first comprehensive experiment that includes simultaneous
              velocity statistics and flux measurements at as many as seven locations in the
              canopy sublayer of a forest along with detailed leaf area density profile
              measurements in space.  To explore and generalize the relationship between
              forest structure and observed heat and water vapor fluxes, an investigation
              using three-dimensional Large Eddy Simulations (LES) is proposed.  These
              simulations are the first to explicitly consider variability in leaf area
              density in space and employ radiative transfer schemes to realistically account
              for energy attenuation by foliage elements.  The simulations, which treat the
              foliage as a multiply-connected porous medium, will permit investigating how
              the spatial structure of forest canopies interact with energy/radiation and the
              turbulent transport dynamics to give rise to the observed spatial patterns in
              land surface flux fields within and above the canopy.  An anticipated result is
              an understanding of what spatial variability in fluxes could be attributed to
              spatial variability in canopy structure for flux measurements within the canopy
              sublayer.  The results from this study will guide future field experiments that
              seek to estimate forest-wide average fluxes from tower measurement and will
              rigorously assess the range of applicability of one-dimensional canopy
              models.

