Title       : Origins of the Island Melanesians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0243064

Award Number: 0243064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Merriwether   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research uses genetic variation to trace the origins of the peoples
              residing in the Pacific Islands that spread southeast from New Guinea into near
              and remote Oceania. By using high-resolution data from the human mitochondrial
              DNA genome, the natives of these Islands and of New Guinea will be compared and
              contrasted with the surrounding populations in Polynesia, Micronesia,
              Indonesia, Southeast and Southwest Asia. Through these comparisons, links
              between the peoples of these regions can be established and the origins of each
              population can be ascertained. This research is particularly aimed at
              investigating the links between language and genetic variation. While language
              and DNA are not physically linked together, they do reside in the same
              individual, and language undoubtedly plays some role in mate acquisition.
              Therefore, the researchers will investigate whether languages that are grouped
              together into higher order language families (e.g. Austronesian and Papuan)
              coincide with genetic groupings of individuals in the Pacific and the
              surrounding areas. This approach can be extended to any part of the planet, and
              to other behaviors besides language, and indeed to other species. 

This
              study makes use of previously collected samples, collected by the investigator
              and collaborators, and greatly increases the level of genetic resolution
              through collection of significantly longer DNA sequences. The research brings
              together linguistic, cultural, geographic, biological and genetic data to
              construct a picture of the initial and subsequent peoplings of Melanesia, and
              to determine the origins of these diverse populations. This work also brings
              together a team of a dozen experts on the Pacific to analyze the results and
              construct the population genetic models. Undergraduate and graduate students
              will be directly involved in the data collection and analysis of the data,
              continuing a long tradition in the Merriwether lab of involving undergraduates
              directly in molecular anthropological research. 

