Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics and Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0243935

Award Number: 0243935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266619             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erlend H. Graf egraf@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Stony Brook Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics and Astronomy
              brings 13 undergraduate students to the Stony Brook campus each summer for
              participation in an eight-week program of forefront research in the
              laboratories of Stony Brook physics and astronomy faculty members.  The
              immediate aim of the program is to provide training in, encourage interest in,
              and appreciation of, scientific research in physics and to facilitate career
              planning by the actual doing of research in a collegial setting, by site visits
              to research laboratories at Stony Brook and Brookhaven National Laboratory, by
              weekly seminars on current problems in physics and finally by presentations of
              student research results in a formal symposium and a written report at the
              conclusion of the program.  Outstanding projects are submitted for presentation
              at national student research symposia.

The program offers research
              opportunities in the areas of astronomy, atmospheric physics, high-energy
              particle physics, instructional laboratory instrumentation, lasers and optics,
              nuclear physics and solid-state/condensed matter physics.  Most projects are
              experimental but a few are theoretical. Recruiting efforts concentrate on
              sophomore and junior level physics majors of high academic standing, many from
              colleges in which research opportunities are limited. The broader aims of the
              program include increasing the national pool of qualified scientific
              researchers, and fostering understanding of research methods to those who go on
              to other fields of endeavor such as, for example, science/ engineering
              administration, patent law, or secondary school teaching.  Particular efforts
              are made to attract women and students from under-represented
              minorities.




