Title       : Ecosystem Function in Heterogeneous Landscapes: The Tenth Cary Conference, April
               28-May 2, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0243867

Award Number: 0243867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Lovett lovettg@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clive G. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monica G. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen C. Weathers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide partial support for a conference entitled  "Ecosystem
              Function in Heterogeneous Landscapes."  The conference will be the tenth in the
              Cary Conference series, which provides a forum for discussion of leading-edge
              issues in the field of ecology and ecosystem science.  This conference will
              explore spatial heterogeneity within landscapes and its consequences for
              ecosystem function.  This topic is important and timely because ecologists are
              now asked to address environmental issues on landscape, regional and global
              scales, even though most ecological research is performed on much smaller
              scales.   Scaling up requires assumptions about the interactions among
              different ecosystems in the landscape or region, but ecosystem ecologists have
              never systematically explored the fundamental nature of those interactions. 
              The conference will bring together a diverse group of about 90 scientists to
              consider this issue in three days of focused discussion on topics such as the
              treatment of spatial heterogeneity in other disciplines, comparison of the
              importance of spatial heterogeneity in various ecosystem types, environmental
              issues in which the consideration of heterogeneity is important, and defining a
              common research agenda for the future.   The format of the conference will
              promote broad thinking and in-depth discussion in plenary sessions, discussion
              groups and one-on-one interactions among individuals. The conference is
              intended to have a broad impact in ecology by making progress on a difficult
              conceptual issue, including a diverse group of speakers and invitees, and
              producing a book that can be used to train the next generation of ecologists.
