Title       : REU Site: Research Internships in Neural and Behavioral Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0243914

Award Number: 0243914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200435             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Shuster stephen.shuster@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This decade-long interdisciplinary REU program, Research Internships in Neural
              and Behavioral Sciences at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff, AZ, will
              provide hands-on research experience for 8 Native American, African American,
              Hispanic, or Asian/ Pacific Islander students, including female students and
              White students who are the first in their family to attend college or
              university.  Students will conduct research in neural and behavioral sciences
              under the guidance of scientists from the Department of Biological Sciences and
              the Department of Psychology.  The 10-week summer research internship will
              integrate 7 major components:  (1) Faculty mentors will provide hands-on
              research experience to students in faculty laboratories, fostering the
              excitement of scientific discovery and allowing students to learn science by
              doing science. (2) Research faculty will present seminars in which they
              demonstrate research techniques, present their research results, and engage
              students in discussion. (3) Professional development seminars will provide
              instruction on how to apply to graduate school, and present scientific results
              at professional meetings. At seminars, students will also discuss ethical
              concerns in research. (4) Students will participate in weekly noon symposia
              where students can socialize, discuss primary literature in their respective
              research areas, and report the progress of their own work. (5) At the end of
              the summer, students will present the results of their projects in a joint
              poster session, ensuring that each student produces a tangible, research
              product at the end of 10 weeks. (6) After each summer program, students and
              mentors completing projects will submit a supplementary travel budget to attend
              a professional meeting in the winter or spring. This final component will allow
              students to present their research at a national or international stage. (7)
              During the summer, students will participate in a variety of educational,
              cultural and social activities. The Program will support travel and logistical
              support for these outings and activities, providing additional opportunities
              for discussion, exchange of ideas and fellowship. 

The Program has four
              specific goals. The first two concern the outcome of student research
              activities, i.e., that students (a) produce tangible, research results during
              the 10-week program, and (b) present and/or publish these results as science
              professionals.  The second two goals concern the impact of research training on
              student careers, and ultimately on the composition of the future scientific
              workforce.  Thus, a quantitative method based on evolutionary selection
              analysis will be used to assess the rates at which members of different
              under-represented student groups (c) proceed through the selection process,
              relative to other student groups, and after completing this Program, the rates
              at which students (d) continue their education and/or pursue careers in
              science, relative to other student populations.  This method not only shows the
              significant contributions the Program has already made in support of students
              from under-represented backgrounds in science, but also provides a means for
              assessing the success of other similar programs 

Application information,
              student presentations from previous years and information on the Program are
              available at http//:jan.ucc.nau.edu/~shuster, or from Emily Omana at NAU
              (928-523-8694; fax: 928-523-7500).

