Title       : REU Site: Interdisciplinary Watershed Studies at the College of William and Mary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0243751

Award Number: 0243751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph M. Chambers rmcham@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This REU Site will create a summer research program encompassing the scope of
              watershed science conducted at the campus environmental field laboratory.  Each
              year eight outstanding undergraduates from across the country and two from
              William and Mary will be selected to participate in student research projects
              mentored by faculty in environmental geology, biology, sociology and economics.
               The cohort of students will work with W&M faculty mentors to determine the
              impacts of changing watershed land use in scientific and socio-economic
              contexts.  Students will complete research projects on the 16-ha Lane Matoaka
              (the oldest man-made impoundment in Virginia) and in streams and associated
              uplands of the two watersheds in which the college owns property. 
              Investigations of current hydrogeologic and ecological status in the two
              watersheds will be completed by determining stream discharge characteristics
              and responses to stormflows, spatial variation in water quality, lake-wide
              budgets for water, sediment and nutrients, and population/community structure
              in aquatic and terrestrial portions of the watersheds.  Because the status of
              the watershed systems is the result of historical changes in land use,
              sociologic and economic examinations of residents' perception of development,
              environmental protection and water and property rights will be used to
              determine the current direction and strength of population and market forcing
              functions.  Access to a richly detailed history of the Colonial Willliamsburg
              region will allow development of a timeline of changes in watershed land use as
              a context for analysis of watershed structure and function.
