Title       : Curriculum Improvement in Practice-Oriented Biology and Computer Science
               Programs Using Student Portfolios
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0243184

Award Number: 0243184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kostia Bergman k.bergman@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melvin W. Simms  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Viera K. Proulx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Veronica Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project moves the assessment of practice-oriented science education from
              indirect to direct measures of student learning. Northeastern University is a
              major research university with a long tradition of practice-oriented education.
              Through its well-established cooperative education program, most students
              alternate periods of full time course work with periods of full time paid
              employment relevant to their major. Even in on-campus settings science
              education has moved beyond the traditional classroom, where instructors
              maintain direct oversight over students, to include new forms of lab
              instruction, collaborative research projects, and independent study. Both the
              cooperative education model and the other new forms of instruction raise
              questions about what is learned in each setting, how the acquired skills can be
              assessed, and how this learning can be integrated into the overall curriculum.
              

The College of Computer Science and the Biology Department of the College
              of Arts &
Sciences at Northeastern University have surveyed students and their
              co-op employers to evaluate student skills and determine where and how they
              were learned. The two units have become campus leaders in assessing learning to
              improve curricula and teaching. Building on this base, this project develops
              portfolios for students to showcase and archive their work. Student learning is
              then evaluated according to well-defined rubrics that set standards of
              measurable progress toward proficiency in desired learning goals. The
              portfolios are stored in digital form on computer servers (so-called electronic
              portfolios) to facilitate communication between the various learning
              environments. Development of rubrics to evaluate student learning in different
              settings is the first major task of the project. This process requires
              in-depth, facilitated discussions among academic faculty, co-op faculty,
              employer supervisors and experienced students. The second task is the designing
              of the portfolio system prototype following the recommendations of the rubric
              development teams and working with an outside database and web-front-end
              designer. The portfolio is piloted during the third year of the project, using
              200 students in Computer Science co-op preparation classes, and 200 Biology
              students from all five years of their program. During the last two months of
              each year the project team reviews progress by consulting with curriculum
              committees, employer groups, student groups and an Advisory Committee formed
              for this project. After the final evaluation the results are disseminated to
              the University Community and to the wider audience of scientists and educators.
              The process of rubric development and portfolio construction can be used as a
              model to understand the relative contribution of different settings to desired
              student learning outcomes, and as a vehicle for regular review and improvement
              of curriculum. The model can be used in a variety of settings with a broad
              range of students; for instance to help improve skills and clarify goals for
              students who are the first in their family to attend college and students for
              whom English is their second language.

