Title       : Conchopata Archaeological Analyses, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0243153

Award Number: 0243153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75398              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Isbell huari@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support the Conchopata Archaeological Analysis
              - 2003, directed by Dr. William H. Isbell, will complete laboratory study of
              artifact collections excavated at Conchopata between 1998 and 2001.  Conchopata
              was the second largest city in Central Highlands Peru during the initial stages
              of the Andean urban revolution and formation of pristine empires  Conchopata
              has been recognized as a center of important religious developments that may
              have promoted imperialism and city life, and our new excavations suggest that
              the site consisted of palaces, tombs and temples, plus dense concentrations of
              residences clustered around these important buildings.  This new program will
              bring together archaeologists from the USA, Peru, Argentina and Canada in a
              coordinated effort to learn more about early urban life in one of the first
              Andean cities, from power, religious ideology and class difference to
              subsistence and the organization of labor.  Between 1998 and 2001, under Dr.
              Isbell's direction, archaeologists excavated the largest area of prehistoric
              architectural remains ever exposed for a highland Peruvian city of early Middle
              Horizon date.  The buildings exposed contained artifacts, ranging from food
              remains to burial offerings that document the way people lived during
              Conchopata s apogee.  Painstaking analysis of these remains will teach us about
              how the residents supported themselves, what kind of industries they practiced,
              their religious rituals, their system of government, how power was
              consolidated, and the role of symbolic communication and ideology in the
              profound changes associated with Peru's early urban revolution.  

These
              results have broad significance for understanding culture change in the past
              and present, the production of social difference, and the emergence of
              centralized political authority.  Do all societies follow similar paths in the
              evolution of cultural complexity and production of differential wealth and
              power?  Some scholars argue that all cultures have developed along similar
              lines, while others insist that Central Andean civilizations were unique, so
              processes of culture change are historical and contingent.  On the basis of
              preliminary examinations of our excavated remains from Conchopata it appears
              that this ancient city shared some features, particularly in the domain of
              subsistence and economic organization, with other early cities of the New and
              Old Worlds.  On the other hand, it appears that the core of Conchopata
              consisted of small palaces, occupied serially, that were centers from which
              ideology, politics and craft manufacturing were organized, until the became
              mortuary monuments.  Perhaps, the first elites also specialized in
              manufacturing things like ceremonial offering pottery, replete with highly
              symbolic iconography.  This may be a pattern unique to Andean Native America.  
               The analyses will discover much more information about the lives lived at
              Conchopata, showing how this early Andean city does or does not conform to
              current theories of universal culture change and processual evolution.  

