Title       : US-Pakistan Workshop: Research and Development in Information Technology,
               Islamabad, Pakistan, April 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0243764

Award Number: 0243764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashfaq A. Khokhar ashfaq@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arif Ghafoor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 5943,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0243764 
Khokhar

Description: This award supports a US-Pakistan Workshop on
              Information Technology to be held in Islamabad, Pakistan, April 2003.  The
              organizers are Dr. Ashfaq Khokhar, Department of Electrical Engineering and
              Computer Science at the University of Illinois at Chicago and Dr. S.M. Junaid
              Zaidi, Rector of the COMSATS (Commission on Science and Technology for
              Sustainable Development in the South) Institute of Information Technology in
              Islamabad, Pakistan.  The purpose of the workshop is to exchange information
              between the US and Pakistani sides on advances in information technology and to
              discuss R&D needs that may be met through cooperative research projects.  The
              key areas chosen for this workshop include:  role of IT in large scale
              enterprise infrastructure, security and protection of IT infrastructure,
              network centric information and computing, IT based applications including
              digital government, e-commerce, e-learning and bioinformatics, and higher
              education and research in IT.  Several parallel sessions will be organized to
              make use of the expertise of expatriate and other US-based leading researchers.
              The workshop will include plenary sessions to introduce cutting edge research
              in each of the four identified areas, and two panel sessions to discuss future
              research trends in IT.  The workshop will provide a platform for fostering
              research collaborations among the researchers from US and Pakistan and initiate
              research and development projects related to key IT research areas. 

Scope:
              This project enables US and Pakistani scientists to discuss an area of great
              importance to both countries, and to identify potential collaborative research
              where the two sides can complement each other's capabilities.  Dr. Khokhar is
              an experienced researcher with a strong record of NSF-funded projects.  He is
              also familiar with the science scene in Pakistan.  Dr. Zaidi is also an
              experienced scientist who leads a major specialized institute for IT in
              Pakistan and who will have the backing of that country's Ministry of Science
              and Technology.  Among the US participants are five junior scientists.  The
              project will increase collaboration in science and technology with Pakistan in
              an area of great importance to both countries.  This project is being supported
              by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of
              Computer and Communications Research.

