Title       : SGER: Exploring Arctic Ice Thickness Distribution with Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0243041

Award Number: 0243041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yanling Yu yanling@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Percival  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research explores the feasibility of using wavelet analysis to assess
              spatial variability in the distribution of arctic pack ice.  Wavelets have been
              used in recent years to analyze a variety of geophysical processes, but they
              have not yet been used to study pack ice.  They provide an exact decomposition
              of the sample variance, for a spatial series, in terms of coefficients that are
              indexed according to both location and scale.  This information can be used in
              turn to statistically assess spatial variability in the variance. Because they
              provide this information, they are a potentially useful tool for use in
              characterizing and studying multi-scale, nonstationary features such as pack
              ice.  This work seeks to demonstrate, through application of wavelet analysis
              to a large existing database derived from submarine-based observations, that
              wavelets can be a powerful tool for determining which spatial scales make the
              greatest contributions to overall variance in arctic pack ice thickness. 
              Knowledge of these statistical properties is essential for assessing whether
              observed variations reflect climate change or are due merely to sampling
              uncertainty.  The anticipated successful completion of this demonstration will
              provide the impetus for a broader research effort that will address pack ice
              response to climate variability.  This work will also help to publicize the
              potential uses of wavelets in studying other geophysical processes and will, in
              so doing, facilitate their integration into university courses on data
              analysis.

