Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Biology: Interdependence Across
               Subdisciplines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0243788

Award Number: 0243788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Davis davis@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay L. Brewster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Vandergon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Nofziger Plank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Swartzendruber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The aim of our summer undergraduate research program is to facilitate the
              maturation of undergraduate students as young scientists in biology by
              immersing them in an interactive, 11-week session of original research
              activities.  The primary goals are to teach students the essentials of the
              scientific method, which are common to a spectrum of biological subdisciplines,
              and to expose students to the benefits of interaction, collaboration and
              interdependence across subdisciplines.  The ultimate hope is to inspire
              students to pursue a life of service in the biological sciences, whether it is
              in research, applied science or education.  The theme for our research
              activities is cellular stress physiology.  Fundamental to all biological
              systems is the requirement for cellular adaptation to stress, thus enabling
              organismal propagation in diverse environments.  Students will have opportunity
              to pursue projects among a wide range of cellular and organismal systems from
              yeast, mammalian cells in tissue culture, amphibian epidermal tissue, to xylem
              vessel elements in higher plants.  The potential types of cellular stress
              responses examined will include salinity-induced osmotic stress, drought
              stress, freezing stress, UV-B radiation stress, biomechanical stress, and
              biochemical stress signaling.  Students will play a pivotal role in the
              conception and design of their personal research projects and will participate
              in a 2-day retreat to formally present, evaluate and refine their research
              proposals.  All projects will be student-initiated and student-generated within
              the framework of active, cutting-edge science.  Students will be supervised by
              faculty-mentors in plant physiological ecology, mammalian cell biology,
              molecular biology, or developmental biology.  Each summer the program will
              begin with a 14-day research orientation workshop during which students will be
              introduced to specific research techniques and immersed in the research process
              (literature review, hypothesis formulation, and hypothesis testing).  Over the
              course of the summer, visiting scientists will hold special research seminars
              and spend time critiquing student projects.  Students will receive professional
              training at special seminars or panel sessions and will participate in
              community outreach by hosting an "open house" for local school children and
              their parents. The program will conclude with a student research symposium,
              student poster session and banquet, bringing cohesion, celebration and closure
              to the summer experience.  Students will receive a stipend of $3600, housing,
              meal allowance and travel assistance.  For more information, contact Stephen
              Davis at davis@pepperdine.edu.
