Title       : Certifying Sustainable Agriculture: Certification Success, Social Impacts, and
               Rule-Making in Mexican Organic Coffee Producer Groups and E.U./U.S. Certified
               Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0243397

Award Number: 0243397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57527              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tad Mutersbaugh tad-mutersbaugh@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Global changes in the ways that agricultural products are produced, harvested,
              transported, processed, distributed, and consumed have dramatically altered
              agricultural business in recent decades.  One set of changes that has altered
              many aspects of the production and distribution chain have been growing demands
              by consumers for organically produced commodities.  This research project will
              examine the certification practices required to certify agricultural products
              for international markets.  A case study of a certified organic coffee
              commodity chain will examine coffee that originates on farms in Oaxaca, Mexico,
              and is transported along certifier pathways to European and U.S. markets. 
              Agricultural product certification provides an environmental conservation model
              that is of particular relevance to spatially dispersed producers, such as
              smallholder coffee farmers, who possess agricultural plots located in areas of
              high conservation value.  This case study will focus on certification practices
              used to verify that coffee originates in certified plots, conforms to certified
              product norms, and is not subsequently blended with non-certified goods. 
              Preliminary studies have found that some farmer organizations are more
              successful in certifying their products than others.  The investigator will
              compare data on certification success that is spatially paired with village
              census data and select eight villages for detailed household demographic
              surveys.  To determine the quantity and character of increased administrative
              labor burdens associated with certification and to ascertain the effect of this
              added labor on village economic management and human capital use, the
              investigator will conduct work surveys that focus on scheduling and spatial
              impacts of certification activities and determine how these affect village
              economic management and human capital formation.  The investigator also will
              examine the particulars of certification work undertaken within villages in
              order to ascertain which demands reflect set within international policy
              forums, such as the International Organization for Standardization and the
              United Nations, and he will compare European Union and U.S. certification
              pathways to identify differences in certification rules and
              regulations.

This project will provide new insights into the impact of
              increasingly complex certification rules and regulations on the agricultural
              practices and well-being of small farmers in Mexico and elsewhere.  By
              exploring the ways that the policies and standards established and implemented
              by international organizations and foreign nations impacts on farm and village
              economic management practices as well as links between producers,
              intermediaries, and consumers, this project will both advance basic knowledge
              and also aid in the search for cost-effective agricultural certification
              mechanisms that may be extended to poorer farmers and areas of environmental
              importance located in developing nations.

