Title       : REU Site: An Integrated Assessment of Physical, Ecological, and Socio-economic
               Aspects of a Watershed System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0243872

Award Number: 0243872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin P. Czajkowski kczajko@pop3.utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison L. Spongberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This ten-week REU Site will provide an opportunity for 12 students each summer
              to conduct research of global significance using the Maumee watershed as a test
              case.  This REU will educate students regarding the interconnected nature of
              hydrological processes, water quality, demographics and economics, land use
              practices, riparian ecosystem quality, sediment contamination, and the legal
              and policy implications of river ecosystem degradation.  Students will work
              with a mentor as they conduct research projects focused on the Maumee River and
              Lake Erie health from environmental, biological, social, and policy
              perspectives.  

The research projects will focus on the Maumee watershed and
              Lake Erie.  Among the Great Lakes, Lake Erie is unique in that its water
              quality problems are primarily related to the specific human phenomena of
              agricultural pollution and urbanization.  The interdisciplinary approach of
              this REU Site allows for a thorough examination of the environmental and social
              issues surrounding the environmental degradation of the Maumee watershed;
              possible remediation and related policy and legal issues will also be explored.
               Students will gain a broad understanding of environmental issues and also
              learn techniques for field observations through collection of environmental
              samples (soil, water, and biological), ground truth observations for remote
              sensing projects, and the use of Geographic Information System (GIS) for some
              projects.
This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to
              attract talented students into careers in science through active undergraduate
              research experiences. 

