Title       : Searches for New Phenomena with High Energy Particle Colliders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0243692

Award Number: 0243692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $639000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald C. Blazey gblazey@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Hedin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Fortner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dhiman Chakraborty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds for a group at Northern Illinois University  (NIU)
              to pursue a research and education program with high-energy particle colliders
              to search for new phenomena.  Their two main activities will be centered on the
              D0 experiment at the Fermilab Tevatron and on Linear Collider Detector
              calorimetry and muon tracking. The goals of the D0 experiment are to study the
              top quark and electroweak bosons, to search for new phenomena such as
              supersymmetric particles and quark compositeness and to study Quantum
              Chromodynamics. The NIU group, in addition to contributing to the searches for
              new physics, will lead the efforts on commissioning the tracking trigger, on
              calibrating the muon scintillation counters and working on the second hardware
              stage of the muon trigger and parts of the muon software analysis code and
              particle identification. They will also coordinate the tau and jet
              identification working groups in D0.

The NIU group is active in linear
              collider R&D, working on a digital hadron calorimeter prototype, on simulations
              and energy flow algorithms and on muon tracking detector design studies.

The
              program will also have a broad impact on education in northern Illinois from
              K-12 through graduate school. The group operates an outreach program for local
              elementary and secondary schools and community centers. This is designed to
              increase scientific knowledge in the immediate area and to familiarize citizens
              with high-energy physics and with Fermilab.

