Title       : REU Site: Conservation of the Tallgrass Prairie Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0243890

Award Number: 0243890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett K. Sandercock bsanderc@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith B. Gido  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gail W. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter K. Dodds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Kansas State University's (KSU) REU Site on 'Conservation of the Tallgrass
              Prairie Ecosystem' provides 8 undergraduate students each summer an exciting
              opportunity to conduct independent, field-based research projects on topics in
              conservation biology and ecology.  The 10-week program offers a stipend of
              $3500 and has four components that contribute to the professional development
              of undergraduate participants: i) a weekly research seminar that educates
              students about the conservation issues related to grassland ecosystems, ii) an
              independent research project that trains students in field methods and
              experimental design, iii) a research symposium that develops student
              presentation skills, and iv) a trip to a national scientific meeting where
              students have the opportunity to interact with professional research
              scientists.  Research activities of this REU Site are centered on the Konza
              Prairie Biological Station, a 3487 ha tallgrass prairie preserve.  Konza
              Prairie is a key research site in the Long-term Ecological Research (LTER)
              Program of the National Science Foundation, and is internationally recognized
              for preserving unique biological resources, including species of conservation
              concern.  The site is subdivided into 60 experimental units with different
              grazing (native bison or domestic cattle) and fire treatments (annual to 20
              years).  Additional resources for this REU site includes access to university
              facilities, a range of laboratory and field equipment for specialized
              ecological research, and mentors selected from a pool of experienced research
              scientists who are leaders in the fields of conservation and grassland ecology.
               Integration of the REU Site with the LTER program allows students to
              participate in new and ongoing field experiments and to utilize long-term data
              sets that provide context for summer projects.  The conservation theme of the
              program emphasizes applications of ecological knowledge to the preservation of
              the biota of the tallgrass prairie, and efforts that predict the effects of
              changing land-use patterns, invasive species and global change on economically
              valuable grasslands.  

The deadline for applications is March 1 and
              participants are selected based on their research interest.  This REU site
              welcomes applications from students of underrepresented groups (minority,
              first-generation or non-traditional), and students at smaller colleges where
              research opportunities may be limited.  Prospective applicants are invited to
              obtain further information and application forms from the Program Coordinator
              (Gail Wilson, PH: 785-532-2892, EM: gwtw@ksu.edu) or by visiting the program
              website (http://www.ksu.edu/bsanderc/reu).

