Title       : Studies of the Dynamics of the Equatorial Ionosphere Using a Latitudinal Network
               of Global Positioning System (GPS) Receivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0243294

Award Number: 0243294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cesar E. Valladares valladar@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The awardee will continue operating a network of five Global Positioning System
              (GPS) receivers near the west coast of South America.  The data are used to
              study the dynamics of the equatorial ionosphere, and to develop techniques to
              forecast the onset of ionospheric scintillations.  The equatorial ionosphere is
              the location on Earth where the most scintillations occur.  The occurrence of
              scintillations is mainly associated with the uprising of low-density plasma
              bubbles in the F region of the ionosphere.  This phenomenon is called
              equatorial spread F.  Thus far, it has not been possible to forecast the
              day-to-day variability of equatorial spread F.  This project includes the
              routine observation of total electron content in the ionosphere, the study of
              the influence of neutral winds on irregularity formation, the design of a
              methodology for forecasting spread F, and in inversion of total electron
              content measurements to ionization profiles.  The data will be disseminated via
              the World Wide Web to other scientists for use in ongoing research efforts. 
              The GPS receivers will be upgraded and software implemented to provide near
              real-time maps of total electron content and scintillations.  A sixth receiver
              will be deployed near the northern boundary of Columbia.  This study will lead
              to improved forecasting capabilities that will help protect navigation and
              communication systems from the adverse effects of scintillation.
