Title       : Reduced Dimension Models for Hydrodynamical Systems: Experiment, Computation and
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0243591

Award Number: 0243591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anette E. Hosoi peko@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to develop reduced dimension models for hydrodynamical
              systems and to foster undergraduate participation in mathematical research.
              While the fundamental equations describing fluid motion, the Navier-Stokes
              equations, are well-known, it is generally computationally expensive and
              analytically infeasible to solve the full equations exactly. To better
              understand these systems, it is necessary to turn to simplified or reduced
              models resulting from systematic approximations of the full equations. The
              semi-discrete approximation techniques which are utilized in this project focus
              primarily on reducing the dimension of the full fluid equations by exploiting
              symmetries or widely disparate lengthscales in specific systems. The resulting
              predictions from the reduced models will be compared qualitatively and
              quantitatively with experimental data.

Fluid dynamics arises in a multitude
              of biological, environmental and industrial applications. This project is
              designed to develop models that describe basic hydrodynamical phenomena such as
              hydraulic jumps that can arise in jet impingement cooling systems and
              hydrodynamical systems with flexible boundaries. The latter include spinning
              magnetic media such as disk drives, and biological problems such as insect
              flight, blood flow in arteries and dynamics of the syrinx in song birds.
              Undergraduate participation is an integral part of both the experimental and
              mathematical aspects of the program. Mathematical models will be tested in the
              new Fluid Dynamics Laboratory which will provide a hands-on environment in
              which students learn to integrate mathematics with physical phenomena. This
              unique approach encourages students to apply their mathematical skills in
              consort with their physical intuition within the framework of contemporary
              research.

