Title       : REU Site in Tropical Ecology and Evolution at El Verde Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0243750

Award Number: 0243750
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alonso Ramirez aramirez@sunites.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The REU program in Tropical Ecology and Evolution, University of Puerto Rico, is
              based at El Verde Field Station, in the tropical rainforest of Puerto Rico. 
              The program goal is to provide research experiences for undergraduates by
              immersing them in an active research environment, providing guidance from
              established scientists while they develop an independent research project,
              providing educational activities designed to equip students with the necessary
              tools to conduct scientific research, and, in many cases, providing them the
              opportunity to study and conduct research in an ecosystem and culture not
              easily accessible at their home institution.

Undergraduate students will
              spend most of their ten-week internship developing a research project in
              coordination with a faculty mentor.  We have enrolled a group of active mentors
              with expertise in areas of plant (e.g., plant population biology, community
              dynamics, and forest ecology), arthropod (aquatic and terrestrial), and soil
              ecology, as well as evolution (e.g., plant reproductive ecology, population
              genetics).  Every year, students will have a wide variety of potential areas of
              study to choose from depending on their area of interest.  Students will also
              participate of seminars and workshops on scientific data analysis, data
              presentation, and techniques to study different groups of tropical organisms
              and ecosystems (e.g., forest, soil, streams).  An ethical component will focus
              on common issues likely to be encountered by students during their careers as
              well as discussions on the role of scientists in modern society.  We consider
              critical to stress to the students the impact that scientists could have in our
              society if they take active roles.  This combination of activities will provide
              students with the tools needed to conduct scientific research in any area of
              science, with emphasis on Tropical Ecology and Evolution.

The REU site in
              Tropical Ecology and Evolution at the University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras,
              will enroll eight undergraduate students every year.  Students will be selected
              based on their academic qualifications (e.g., GPA, letters of recommendation)
              and interest in pursuing graduate studies.  We will give emphasis to students
              from institutions where research programs are not easily accessible (e.g.,
              teaching colleges) and to minorities.  Students will participate in the program
              for 10 weeks during summer break, spending most of their time in the field
              conducting scientific research.  

For additional information contact Alonso
              Ramirez (aramirez@sunites.upr.clu.edu; Telephone: 787-764-0000, ext. 7781) or
              visit the program's web site at http://sunites.upr.clu.edu/REU/index.htm

