Title       : Tufts REU Site: Mentoring Biological Research as a Collaborative Enterprise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0243668

Award Number: 0243668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin M. Orians colin.orians@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara M. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Tufts University Department of Biology has a long-standing commitment to
              mentoring undergraduates in research, as well as a strong track record of
              highly productive interdisciplinary research collaborations.  Science is an
              increasingly collaborative enterprise, requiring the combined expertise of
              researchers from diverse fields.  Students thus require training not only in
              specific research skills within a discipline, but also need to learn how to
              build a successful collaboration.  This REU Site provides a program that allows
              undergraduate students to undertake biological research as a collaborative
              enterprise.  The goals of this summer program are: to increase students'
              proficiency in biological research and collaborative skills, to educate and
              inspire students toward future research careers, and to develop students'
              ability to effectively communicate scientific results.

The 10 week summer
              program entitled, "Integrative Approaches to Studying the Ecology of New
              England Organisms," will provide 10 students opportunities to work closely on
              one of eight collaborative, interdisciplinary projects combining faculty
              expertise in animal behavior, endocrinology, biochemistry, conservation
              biology, and plant ecology.  The program is committed to provide research
              opportunities for undergraduates, including students traditionally
              underrepresented in science and those who might not have such opportunities at
              their home institutions (with an emphasis on local community college students).
               Students will work with two mentors, one serving as the primary mentor, to
              combine research techniques from different fields to design and conduct an
              independent project.  In addition to research involvement, the program includes
              weekly discussions, seminars, field trips, and a student symposium.  For more
              information, contact Colin Orians at colin.orians@tufts.edu.

