Title       : REU Site: Cellular, Molecular and Genetic Approaches to Biological Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0243880

Award Number: 0243880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296429             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. David DavidJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Blockus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Host Institution:	University of Missouri-Columbia
Partner Institutions: 
              	Florida A&M University, Grinnell College (IA), Long Island University-Brooklyn
              Campus, Medgar Evers College (NY), Prairie View A&M University (TX), Southwest
              Missouri State University, St. Elizabeth's College (NJ), Truman State
              University (MO), University of Arkansas-Pine Bluff, Xavier University
              (LA)
Major Field:	Biological Sciences
Subfields:	Cell Biology, Molecular
              Biology, and Genetics
Project Title:	Cellular, Molecular, and Genetic
              Approaches to Biological Problems
Number of Students:	10 per year
Summer
              Weeks on Site:	8
Point of Contact:	      Dr. Linda Blockus;  573-882-5979; 
              BlockusL@Missouri.edu
Web Site:		     
              www.lsurop.Missouri.edu/undergrad/oncampus/NSF_REU.html

Our NSF-REU Site
              Program provides summer research opportunities for 10 undergraduates from 10
              partner institutions including four Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities (Florida A&M University, Prairie View A&M University, University
              of Arkansas-Pine Bluff, Xavier University), two minority-serving institutions
              (Long Island University-Brooklyn Campus, Medgar Evers College), three primarily
              undergraduate institutions (Grinnell College, Southwest Missouri State
              University, Truman State University), and a women's college (St. Elizabeth's
              College).  The University of Missouri (MU) provides a research experience at a
              major comprehensive research university, while faculty at the partner
              institutions are responsible for the selection of the interns.  The partners
              also help prepare the interns for their summer research experience at MU and
              continue their training when they return to their home campus.  

Our
              partnerships are designed to provide a summer research experience for
              undergraduates, especially members of minority groups underrepresented in the
              sciences, who would not otherwise have an opportunity to conduct research in a
              state-of-the-art environment.  This Program is specifically designed to
              stimulate interest in graduate study.

The research programs of the MU
              faculty mentors center on "Cellular, Molecular, and Genetic Approaches to
              Biological Problems."  These research programs use methodology ranging from
              recombinant DNA technology to molecular cytology to sophisticated population
              genetics. The research experience is the heart of the summer program.  Interns
              also develop communication skills through brown-bag lunches, lab group
              meetings, and an end-of-program Summer Undergraduate Research Science Symposium
              and poster session.  They are strongly encouraged to present their research at
              regional and national scientific meetings, with the Program providing financial
              support.  Enrichment activities include seminars by research faculty, panel
              discussions on preparation for graduate school and career options, and a
              science ethics workshop.

