Title       : Experimental Studies of the Liquid-Glass Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0243471

Award Number: 0243471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman Z. Cummins Cummins@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This condensed matter physics project entails light-scattering techniques to
              investigate the molecular glassforming material Salol.  The experiments will
              determine the effects of coupling between  molecular translational and
              orientational dynamics.  The results will test theoretical analysis of Pick,
              Franosch and their coworkers that predicts how the coupling should modify both
              the transverse and longitudinal dynamics.  This investigation will also explore
              some predictions of the recently developed molecular "mode coupling" theory.  A
              new study of the glass transition in sugars will be pursued, beginning with
              galactose and trehalose.  Such sugars are of considerable interest in food
              science where the glass transition occurs frequently, but very few studies of
              dynamics have been reported.  These studies will be carried out in
              collaboration with co-workers at Pusan National University in Korea, whose
              dielectric and calorimetric studies will complement the Raman, Brillouin, and
              Photon Correlation spectroscopy performed in the PI's laboratory.  The broader
              importance of this research lies in the widespread application of glassy
              materials and the importance of understanding the microscopic processes driving
              the glass transition in order to develop improved material processing
              procedures.  Graduate students are being trained in the use of state-of-the-art
              light-scattering techniques that are applicable to a wide range of materials
              and properties. 

In this condensed matter physics project, the properties of
              liquids approaching the liquid-glass transition will be studied with a
              combination of laser light-scattering techniques.  Because glassy materials are
              used in a wide range of applications including fiber optics and plastics, it is
              important to increase our understanding of the microscopic processes driving
              the glass transition in order to develop improved material processing
              procedures.  These studies will explore several new effects and will provide
              detailed tests of new theoretical predictions.  A related study will be carried
              out on the glass transition in sugars, which are of considerable interest in
              food science.  There the glass transition occurs frequently, but very few
              studies of the dynamics have ever been carried out.  The project will train
              graduate students in the use of state-of-the-art light-scattering techniques
              that are applicable to a wide range of materials and their properties.  These
              students will be prepared for careers in the academic world, government or
              industrial laboratories.


