Title       : REU- Site Performance Evaluation of Civil Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0243994

Award Number: 0243994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vicki B. Booker                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Abolmaali abolmaali@ce.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Yuan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Matthys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anand J. Puppala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0243994  Abolmaali

This award provides funding for a three-year Research
              Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Texas at
              Arlington (UTA) for six students per year during eight weeks in the summer to
              conduct hands-on laboratory and field research in structural, geotechnical, and
              construction engineering. Each student will work with one of four small
              research teams focusing on (1) The Seismic Performance of Partially Restrained
              Connections, (2) Repair Performance Evaluation of Fiber-Reinforced Polymer
              Composites, (3) Novel Measurements in a Geotechnical Engineering Laboratory,
              and (4) Residential Foundation Repair Methodology. The REU experience is
              designed such that the students experience the research process through
              developing improved materials and testing procedures; manufacturing and testing
              structural components and systems; collecting and analyzing field data;
              collecting and analyzing data using state-of-the-art laboratory measurement
              techniques; and writing and presenting papers. Each research team will include
              faculty members from the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at
              UTA and industry-based professional advisory members of the Construction
              Research Center at UTA. Both formative and summative assessment and evaluation
              of the REU Site will be performed. Outreach to local K-12 schools by the
              principal investigator to inform local students and teachers about REU Site
              activities, along with involvement of local K-12 math and science teachers in
              biweekly REU site meetings will be done to encourage students to consider
              enrolling in civil and environmental programs after high school and to promote
              professional development of K-12 math and science teachers.   

