Title       : REU -Site: Koros Regional Archaeological Project Field School in Hungary:
               Undergraduate Training in Laboratory Techniques and Participation in Research
               on East European Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0243583

Award Number: 0243583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239008             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Parkinson wparkins@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Yerkes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5916,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides renewal support for an REU Site in archaeological research
              methods in Veszto, Hungary. This is part of a collaborative,
              multi-disciplinary, international research project co-organized by Florida
              State University, Ohio State University, and the Munkacsy Mihaly Museum,
              Bekescsaba, Hungary.  Ten students will have the opportunity to participate in
              research aimed at understanding the later prehistory of the Great Hungarian
              Plain.  They will help excavate the Early Cooper Age settlement of
              Veszto-Bikeri.  They will (1) work side-by-side with Hungarian students as they
              receive instruction in survey and excavation techniques; (2) participate in
              seminars taught by experts on archaeological method and theory and on the
              culture and history of Eastern Europe; (3) visit museums and archaeological
              sites; (4) plan and complete an independent research project; and (5) live in
              the small town of Veszto and learn about life in Hungary from the villagers and
              Hungarian students and archaeologists.  The students will be responsible not
              only for helping excavate the site, but also for analyzing archaeological
              material that will provide a better understanding of prehistoric economic and
              social organization.  They will present papers and publish their results on the
              project website and in archaeological journals.

This award contributes to
              the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers
              in
science through active undergraduate research experiences. 


