Title       : Experimental Investigations of Properties of Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0243046

Award Number: 0243046
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Gramila   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the research supported by this individual investigator grant is to
              increase our understanding of electron physics.  The project has two parts. 
              One seeks to understand a surprising and dramatic behavior of electrons: the
              sign reversal in a measured transport parameter.  This reversal, seen for
              two-dimensional electrons in magnetic fields smaller than one Tesla, was
              entirely unanticipated, and remains without explanation.  Evidence exists that
              the unusual behavior is directly related to the electron spin, offering the
              prospect for new advances in important areas of electron physics.  The second
              part will use a new experimental approach to explore two complex and important
              influences on electrons: disorder and interactions.  These influences have long
              been established as central to electronic properties; yet a full understanding
              of their roles, particularly when both are present, remains elusive.  This
              project will use drag to directly measure the electron density fluctuations,
              thereby investigating the interplay between disorder and electron interactions
              in electron systems.  The insight to be gained through this new approach arises
              from the substantial difference in density fluctuations theoretically
              established between the disorder dominated and the interaction dominated
              regimes.  The training provided students involved in this research aims toward
              answering fundamental questions in the physic of technologically important
              materials, while involving a wide range of state of the art technical methods. 
              Such training is valuable preparation for academic, government, or industrial
              scientific careers.

This individual investigator award supports research
              involving basic questions about the properties of electronic materials.  Two
              primary research directions will be examined through experiments.  One involves
              the surprising discovery of new behavior in a regime that had been widely
              regarded as well understood: two-dimensional electrons in small magnetic
              fields.  Evidence that the spin of the electrons is involved increases the
              prospect for valuable new understanding.  The other research direction involves
              a new experimental approach applied to a longstanding but fundamental issue of
              electronic materials: the influences of disorder and of the interactions
              between electrons.  These influences are widely recognized as being of central
              importance to a broad range of behaviors in electronic materials.  Our
              measurements will provide new insights into this important topic. Complimenting
              the value of the science investigated here is the value of the training
              provided to students.  The experiments themselves are technically challenging,
              involving low-noise measurement with complex sample requirements, and the use
              technologically important materials.  They push the boundaries of measurement
              technology, sample preparation, and even sample growth.  The basic research
              explored in this work offers the prospect of strengthening the intellectual
              underpinnings of a number of important technological areas, from spin based
              electronics to ultra-small devices, which rely on a broad understanding of
              electron physics.

