Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0243824

Award Number: 0243824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley G. Lawson lawson@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick G. O'Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Training and Research Experiences in Nonlinear Dynamics (TREND) REU Site
              focuses on nonlinear dynamics because of its wide applicability to increasingly
              important state-of-the-art research areas and because its consideration of
              simple systems is particularly suited to achieve our goal of involving
              undergraduates in front-line research. The program is located in the Institute
              for Research in Electronics and Applied Physics (IREAP) of the University of
              Maryland, an interdisciplinary center, which brings together faculty from
              engineering and physical sciences.  The program involves ten students who will
              spend 11 weeks in the summer on campus involved in research in small teams
              consisting of undergraduates, graduate students and faculty
advisors. Research
              projects will be theoretical, experimental or both. Examples of research topics
              are: theoretical studies of chaos in time and space, experimental studies of
              patterns in granular media, the development of singularities in fluids and
              solids, nonlinear dynamics in optical systems, nonlinear dynamics in charged
              particle beams and devices, and turbulence and nonlinear phenomena in plasmas.
              

A seminar series will be given to complement and reinforce the learning
              experience.  Students will present the results of their research at a
              mini-conference at the end of the session. They will also be encouraged to
              maintain contact with group members to further their research findings and
              prepare them for publication in journals and presentation at national meetings.
               Targeted students are top undergraduates who have completed their sophomore
              year in the Physical Sciences and Engineering and who are interested in the
              possibility of a career in research and/or education.  Effort will be made to
              recruit students from under represented groups and students from schools
              lacking similar research opportunities.  An equal balance between University of
              Maryland and non-University of Maryland students will be maintained.  This site
              is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
              program.



