Title       : Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0243690

Award Number: 0243690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall H. Morse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia E. Anders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award is for renewal of a summer REU program held at the Wadsworth Center
              of the New York State Department of Health in Albany, NY.  The research
              scientists who supervise the students in this program are also faculty in the
              Department of Biomedical Sciences (BMS) of the University at Albany's School of
              Public Health.  The Wadsworth Center is a unique scientific institution with
              state-of-the-art facilities, in which basic research programs have developed
              alongside service-oriented public health laboratories.  The research interests
              of the participating BMS faculty cover a broad range, with emphasis in
              molecular genetics, cell biology and structural biology.  Ten undergraduate
              students interested in research careers are recruited from institutions with
              limited research opportunities for undergraduates, including small colleges
              across the U.S. and historically Black colleges in the South.  Additional
              students participate in the program with stipend support from the Wadsworth
              Center.  Laboratory projects in basic biological research topics are chosen
              that are likely to engage students' interest, yield results within the
              timeframe of the program, and allow for some degree of student development and
              independence.  Group meetings are held on an approximately weekly basis to
              discuss science- and career-related issues (including the proper conduct of
              science), to hear lectures by visiting scientists, and to monitor student
              progress.  The students give short oral presentations of their work in a
              symposium in the last week of the program, and also submit written reports
              before they leave, to stress the importance of communication skills within
              science.  The program mutually benefits both the students, who gain experience
              conducting academic style research, and the scientists at the Wadsworth Center,
              whose research measurably benefits from the efforts of these students. 
