Title       : Spectral Entropy and Adaptive, Lossy Source Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0243332

Award Number: 0243332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry D. Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              	The efficient digital representation of voice, still images, high quality
              audio, and video, called lossy source compression, has a host of commercial
              applications today.  These applications include digital cellular telephones,
              MP3 players, DVDs, HDTV, videoconferencing, Internet telephony, and the
              transmission/storage of still images.  The best approaches to source
              compression in these applications are adaptive in nature and are based upon a
              technique called nonlinear approximation.  However, these compression methods
              have been designed primarily based on experiments without any guiding theory. 
              This research investigates a new approach to adaptive lossy source compression
              based upon a mathematical quantity called the spectral entropy.  This new
              approach to source compression, denoted as the SpEnt (spectral entropy) method,
              offers a fundamentally sound approach to adaptive source compression that has
              been missing heretofore.  This work develops SpEnt-based lossy compression
              methods for speech, video, and still images that should find applications in
              many commercial products.

The most successful methods for lossy source
              compression today are sample-function adaptive coders (also called
              input-by-input adaptive or realization-adaptive).  In sample function adaptive
              coders, not only might the number of parameters transmitted in each block or
              frame vary from block-to-block (frame-to-frame), but for a given number of
              transmitted parameters, which parameters are transmitted in each block may
              vary.  For such coders with a fixed set of basis functions, it is usually said
              that the coefficients corresponding to the best n basis functions are sent,
              rather than the first n, and this is called nonlinear approximation in harmonic
              analysis.  Campbell derived the quantity that he called the coefficient rate of
              a random process in 1960, and he showed that the coefficient rate depends on
              the spectral entropy (the entropy of the power spectral density of the original
              process).  No coding theorems were proved and no possible implications of
              coefficient rate for source compression were stated.  Recent work by the PI and
              his students produced two new derivations of Campbell's coefficient rate.  One
              derivation allows coefficient rate to be interpreted with respect to a quantity
              called the effective bandwidth of the process.  The other derivation reveals a
              new approach to source compression based upon coefficient rate that adapts to
              each realization of the source.  More specifically, by studying the dominant
              terms in the series expansion of the product of terms, it was shown that in a
              sequence of N samples of a particular coefficient, the number of coefficient
              samples that should be coded is proportional to the coefficient variances. 
              Thus, whether a particular coefficient is being coded or not is changing from
              block-to-block, and thus, lossy compression based upon the spectral entropy
              clearly falls in the class of nonlinear approximation methods.  Motivated by
              these results, this research formulates a new approach to lossy source
              compression, called the spectral entropy (SpEnt) method, and develops SpEnt
              based coders for lossy compression of wideband speech (50 Hz to 7 kHz), video,
              telephone bandwidth speech, and still images.  Further, this work examines the
              role of spectral entropy and Campbell's coefficient rate as fundamental
              quantities in adaptive coding of a sequence of source realizations.  

