Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Algebra, Combinatorics,
               Graph Theory and Matrix Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0243674

Award Number: 0243674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sivaram K. Narayan sivaram.narayan@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ken W. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant will continue  a Research Experiences for Undergraduates site  at
              Central Michigan University (CMU).  Each summer for the next three years
              (2003-05), eight students recruited nationwide will engage in mathematical
              research during the eight-week program.  The primary objective is to stimulate
              talented undergraduate students to pursue graduate work in science and
              mathematics by providing accessible and challenging research problems in basic
              mathematics.  Typical problem areas include the Laplacian spectrum of graphs,
              Schur stability of matrices, the zero-divisor graph of a semigroup, and
              relative difference sets.  

Four faculty members will be active in the
              three-year program; three faculty members will coordinate the effort each
              summer.  Students will work in groups of two with one faculty mentor.  Students
              will make presentations of their progress during weekly seminars.  Each student
              will submit a written report at the end of the program.  Students will be
              encouraged to publish their work and make presentations at professional
              meetings.  Every effort will be made during recruitment process to attract
              applications from students in under represented groups.  

The faculty
              mentors have considerable experience in guiding undergraduate research
              projects.  In 2002 CMU received NSF funding as an REU-site in mathematics and
              that summer program was evaluated as a highly successful project.

The
              students will be provided $2400 in stipend, housing costs, meal allowance, and
              travel support for conference presentations.  CMU will provide access to
              classrooms, seminar rooms, the campus library, computer labs, laptops, printer,
              copying services and recreational facilities.  To complement the research
              experience a number of social and enrichment activities have been planned.  A
              day trip to Dow Chemical or Ford Motor Company will provide some exposure to
              mathematics in the workplace.  A day trip to Mackinaw Island will provide a
              broader historical perspective on the State of Michigan.

The intellectual
              merit of this project is based on the challenging mathematical problems the
              students will attempt to solve.  The students will tackle unsolved problems
              whose solutions (or partial solutions) will improve human understanding of the
              very structure of mathematics.  The broader impacts of the proposed project
              include training undergraduates in research in basic mathematics, increasing
              the participation of women and minorities in science and math activities, and
              involving undergraduates as young professionals in the broader disciplinary
              field. 

Point of Contact:
Dr. Sivaram
              Narayan
989-774-3566
sivaram.narayan@cmich.edu

