Title       : Collaborative Research: Energy Sources for Reproduction and Development in a
               Cold-Seep Mixotrophic Mussel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0243688

Award Number: 0243688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig M. Young cmyoung@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Heterotrophic deep-sea animals require a downward flux of material in order to
              survive and reproduce, whereas animals with chemoautotrophic symbionts at
              hydrothermal vents or cold seeps should theoretically be capable of producing
              gametes more-or-less continuously without the benefit of surface-derived
              detritus. Mixotrophic mussels at cold seeps are intermediate between these two
              situations. They can grow and survive using only methane or sulfide as an
              energy source, but are also capable of filter-feeding on detrital particles or
              plankton in the benthic boundary layer. Available evidence suggests that
              supplemental filtration on bacterioplankton may be necessary to provide
              sufficient nitrogen to the mussels. The cold-seep mussel Bathymodiolus
              childressi, which lives at methane seeps on the Louisiana slope, demonstrates
              periodic rather than continuous reproduction, a pattern not predicted by the
              commonly accepted paradigm that food limitation controls reproductive timing in
              the deep sea. Thus, mixotrophic mussels present a unique opportunity to
              investigate the role of detrital input in the control of gametogenic timing in
              the deep sea. Lipid biomarkers and compound specific stable isotopes will be
              used to determine if energy from surfacederived detritus is differentially
              partitioned between the gonads and somatic tissues of B. childressi. In the
              deep-sea megafauna, seasonal breeders virtually always produce feeding larvae,
              suggesting a possible mechanistic or evolutionary link between surface
              production and larval success. Crisp's rule, the prediction that animals with
              planktotrophic larvae will time their breeding to assure optimal nutrition for
              the larvae, is one such possible link. Crisp's Rule will be examined in this
              study by rearing the larvae of B. childressi in natural water collected at
              various depths.
