Title       : Force-induced Conformational Transitions in Single Polysaccharide Molecules by
               AFM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0243360

Award Number: 0243360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr E. Marszalek pemar@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Force-induced conformational transitions in single polysaccharide molecules by
              AFM
Pyranose ring-based molecules are of extraordinary importance to
              biological systems (e.g.
glucose). Many biologically important polysaccharides
              are composed of pyranose rings and they
are placed under tensile stress in a
              wide variety of cellular structures such as the cell wall of
plants or the
              extracellular matrix (ECM) in animal tissues. Mechanical stress is thought
              to
regulate assembly and physiological properties of these complex elastic
              systems. The
polysaccharides respond to that stress by mechanical
              rearrangements of their components but
the underlying mechanism is not well
              understood. The simplest view assumes that
polysaccharides are entropic
              springs and the pyranose ring structure is typically portrayed as
inelastic
              and locked into a stable conformation. The development of single molecule
              AFM
techniques allowed for critically examining these views. AFM instruments
              can stretch
mechanically single molecules and have superb length and force
              resolution. Stretching of
polysaccharides by AFM revealed that they do not
              behave as simple entropic springs but that
they display yielding phenomena.
              The origin of these elastic deviations was pinpointed to the
pyranose ring
              that was found to undergo, upon stretching, conformational transitions such
              as
chair-boat or chair inversion. These forced transitions change, in a
              step-wise fashion, the
separation of the glycosidic oxygen atoms, and
              therefore affect the contour length of the
polysaccharide chain and its
              elasticity. Axial glycosidic bonds were found to drive those
transitions by
              acting as atomic levers. The long-term objective of this proposal is to
              understand,
at the atomic level, the mechanism of these force-induced
              conformational transitions in
polysaccharides. During the second grant period
              single molecule AFM techniques will be
combined with the tools of
              computational chemistry to examine in detail force-induced
conformational
              transitions in the pyranose ring. The mechanical properties of the ring and
              its
mechanical conformational transitions will be probed by pulling on the
              ring from various
directions and by different attachment points.  

These
              studies will determine the contribution of each type of the monomer to
              the
complex elasticity of a mixed chain and will be valuable in interpreting
              the molecular elasticity of
many native polysaccharides. The experimental and
              theoretical findings of this proposal will be
integrated to develop an
              AFM-based methodology for identifying individual polysaccharide
molecules in
              solution from their unique force-extension spectra. Such a methodology will be
              an
important addition to the arsenal of analytical tools for carbohydrate
              research.
