Title       : Development of Metal-Based Catalysts for the Synthesis of Polymers with Reduced
               Environmental Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0243605

Award Number: 0243605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey W. Coates gc39@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Geoffrey Coates, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,  Cornell
              University, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
              Chemistry Program for his continued work on biodegradable and low environmental
              impact polymers. Coates will use metal-based catalysts to prepare polymers and
              copolymers with precise architectural control, imparting superior properties
              and allowing important applications. More specifically, beta-diiminate zinc
              complexes will be developed as catalysts for epoxide/carbon dioxide
              copolymerization and lactone polymerization. Chiral catalysts based on hybrid
              imine/oxazoline ligands will be developed, potentially leading to optically
              active, tactic polycarbonates. The detailed mechanistic pathways of these
              reactions will also be studied, which should increase the rate of discovery of
              improved catalysts for these polymerizations.

The environmental impact of
              industrially important plastics can be minimized by using renewable feedstocks
              and preparing biodegradable polymers. New catalysts and new reactions will be
              used to contribute to sustainable development. Students will be trained in
              catalyst synthesis, polymer synthesis and polymer characterization. Public
              understanding of science and particularly plastics will be enhanced through
              chemical demonstrations and mass media.
