Title       : REU Site: R.I.S.E. - Research Internships in Science of the Environment at
               Arkansas State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0243765

Award Number: 0243765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robyn Hannigan hannigan@astate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry Farris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AR State U Main Campus
	      P O Box 790
	      State University, AR  724670790    501/972-2100

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Program for Environmental Science at Arkansas State University (ASU)
              provides a 10-week summer research experience for 10 highly motivated
              traditionally under-represented minority undergraduate students interested in
              environmental research.  The summer research program focuses on
              interdisciplinary investigation of aquatic agri-ecosystems in the Delta, Ozark,
              and Ouachita regions of Arkansas.  The land-use in these regions strongly
              influences ecosystem processes such as runoff, nutrient cycling, and aquatic
              and terrestrial habitats.  In addition, the dominance of agriculture
              significantly impacts land- and water-use policy, law and economics. 
              Understanding the chemistry, ecology, geology, policy and economics of
              agri-ecosystems provides a unique opportunity for undergraduate students to
              investigate relations between natural and anthropogenic disturbances on
              ecosystem processes.  The principal objectives are to promote the professional
              development of undergraduate researchers and instill a better appreciation for
              interdisciplinary approaches to problem solving. The REU scholars, individually
              and in small groups, work closely with faculty mentors on research projects
              ranging from ecotoxicology, geochemistry, biogeochemistry, vertebrate and
              invertebrate ecology, to resource management, policy, law and economics.  The
              program challenges scholars to expand their disciplinary focus and develop an
              interdisciplinary perspective.  Weekly project meetings are used to evaluate
              progress, examine interdisciplinary linkages between individual research
              components, and develop new and expanded research plans.  Students also
              participate in ethics seminars where they have an opportunity to debate
              ethical, gender and minority, and environmental policy issues with the program
              staff and invited professionals.
