Title       : Economic Restructuring, Women's Work, and Empowerment in Bangladesh
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0243215

Award Number: 0243215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn B. Ward kbward@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project follows 300 urban women workers in Bangladesh from 2003-2005 in
              order to assess the impact of global and national economic changes on their
              types of employment, income-earning strategies, and empowerment.  This research
              uses quantitative and qualitative methods to generate individual level data
              during a period of rapid change in global trade to answer two general
              questions:  First, what are the macro and individual level determinants of
              Bangladeshi women's work histories and their shifts to another sector, staying
              in the same sector, or migrating abroad?  Second, what are the effects of
              women's work within a particular sector, sector shifts, and work history on
              their empowerment (resources, agency, and outcomes)?   Data are drawn from
              annual surveys and quarterly follow-up interviews that explore women's
              background characteristics, work, family, migration and life activities. These
              methods generate work interval and duration data used in life table and hazard
              models to estimate dynamic models that reflect international, national, and
              individual determinants of women's work and moves among different types of
              formal, informal, and household work over two years. The analyses estimate
              probabilities of women staying in one work area and/or their moves to other
              work that occurred during changes in trade rules, an important issue for policy
              makers who seek solutions to unemployment.  This research evaluates the
              competing claims of World Bank and other researchers such as Ward, Pyle, Carr,
              Chen, Pearson, and Kabeer on the effects of economic restructuring and economic
              development on women workers.  This project's broader impacts lie in its
              potential contribution to economic policy makers, women's rights groups, and
              scholars interested in understanding the consequences of global restructuring
              for women, families, and countries that depend on garment work; the project
              also will provide opportunities for international faculty collaboration and
              student training in the U.S. and Bangladesh. 
