Title       : SGER: An Exploratory Study of a Test Device for Concrete Permeability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0243451

Award Number: 0243451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Zia zia@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Concrete is the most widely used material for the civil
              infrastructure.
Deterioration of concrete is a major worldwide problem. An
              important factor that
affects the durability of concrete structure is the
              permeability of concrete. Low
permeability reduces the entry of moisture and
              aggressive substances into concrete, thus provides better protection for the
              steel reinforcement and limits deterioration of concrete due to
              freezing-thawing. However, for lack of a suitable test method and device, the
              permeability of concrete is not routinely measured as a means of quality
              assessment and control.
In a recent study, the PI and his co-worker conceived
              an innovative method to
measure concrete permeability by using a simple and
              economical test device. The method makes use of an axi-symmetric surface air
              flow model to determine the concrete permeability index. Their work provided
              the proof of the concept and demonstrated that the test device was capable of
              making consistent measurements for concrete with different water-cement ratios
              at different ages. They also verified that air flow within one-half inch from
              the concrete surface was achievable. In addition, they found satisfactory
              correlations between the permeability index with the results of rapid chloride
              permeability tests and chloride penetrations from 90-day ponding tests.
The
              objectives of this exploratory research are to further develop and refine
              the
test method and device. More specifically, the research will address four
              critical issues: (1) determine the effect of the moisture content of concrete
              on permeability, (2) explore techniques to dry the concrete surface to a
              sufficient depth to eliminate the effect of moisture content, (3) improve the
              test device so as to increase the depth of air flow into the concrete, and (4)
              establish an appropriate procedure for the concrete surface preparation in the
              field so that the test device can be applied successfully
