Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Algebra, Analysis, and Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0243834

Award Number: 0243834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Pennings pennings@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hope College will host an REU program for six undergraduates in mathematics. 
              Students will work in groups with one or two faculty members.  Projects will be
              chosen from topics in algebra, probability and analysis.

Primary goals are
              to help talented and motivated students develop as mathematical researchers, to
              promote mathematics research as a career, and to have the participants achieve
              significant mathematical results in partnership with a faculty mentor.  In
              particular, students will 1) learn new mathematics, 2) gain mathematical
              independence by learning to read math texts and journals, 3) solve an original
              mathematical problem, 4) learn to communicate mathematics verbally through
              presentation of problems and papers, and 5) write a mathematical paper suitable
              for submission to a journal.

The program will be eight weeks.  Students will
              initially learn about their own projects and those of other students through
              introductory lectures given by the faculty researchers.  Student research
              begins by reading background material either provided by the mentor or found
              through library research.  The student pairs will then be given their own
              project or problem to solve.  The mentors will be actively involved both in
              helping the students obtain the requisite background understanding, and as
              consultants and partners on the problems.

Students will present results at
              seminars during the last portion of the program.  Students will be encouraged
              to present their work at professional meetings and in published form.  Funds
              will be provided for travel to professional meetings.  In each year of the
              program, at least four of the student participants will be recruited from
              outside Hope College.  A significant effort will be made to recruit women and
              members of minority groups.

As indicated in the above description, the
              intellectual merit of this program consists in discovering new mathematics and
              developing viable mathematical models consistent with the constraints of
              collaborating with undergraduate students.  The broader impacts, which is the
              main focus of this program, is to expose and engage undergraduate students to
              mathematical research and a stimulating environment so as to motivate them
              towards and prepare them for graduate school and a professional career in
              mathematics.

