Title       : An REU Site for Astrophysics at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0243915

Award Number: 0243915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $705863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Jones cjf@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1359,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID:	AST-0243915
Institution:	Smithsonian Astrophysical
              Observatory
PI:		Jones, Christine 

The Smithsonian Astrophysical
              Observatory (SAO) will continue its Research Experiences for Undergraduates
              (REU) Summer Intern Program at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
              in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Ten students will be recruited each year with an
              emphasis on women, underrepresented minorities, and students from colleges
              where research opportunities in astronomy are limited. A wide range of research
              topics will be offered in the following areas: planetary science, supernovae
              and their remnants, star formation, theoretical studies in astronomy and in
              atomic and molecular physics, galaxies, clusters of galaxies, large scale
              structure, active galactic nuclei, laboratory astrophysics, and detector
              development.  Based on their research, each student will write an internal
              paper and give a presentation at an Intern Symposium. Other activities will
              include an introduction to current astrophysics through a series of six
              scientific colloquia and a short lecture course in Cosmology, visits to nearby
              observatories, social events, and a trip to the winter meeting of the American
              Astronomical Society (AAS) to present their work. During the ten-week program,
              interns will live in a Harvard graduate school dormitory. 

For the first
              time, the SAO will add a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program. Each
              summer, two science teachers from Boston high schools or middle schools will
              spend two months participating in research and use this experience to develop a
              new curriculum unit for their classrooms.  Each teacher will return for one
              month during the following summer to update the curriculum unit and prepare a
              web-based version of the curriculum unit, as well as complete, if  necessary,
              their research projects. The teachers will participate in all REU activities
              with the undergraduates, and will also present their research at an AAS
              meeting.    
***
