Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Green Functions on Metric spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0243355

Award Number: 0243355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38063              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nageswari Shanmugalingam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project the principal investigator proposes to develop further the
              theory of analysis on abstract metric spaces by studying Green functions on
              such spaces. The principal investigator will initially focus on four problems.
              The first question seeks to find out whether in the framework of abstract
              metric spaces the corresponding harmonic functions satisfy the strong maximum
              principle. As a long range goal the principal investigator also hopes to
              determine whether the strong maximum principle holds for p-harmonic functions
              for general values of p. The second issue is to construct the Martin boundary
              for Gromov hyperbolic metric spaces that admit Green functions.  It is also
              proposed to study some properties of Green functions, including the uniqueness
              property and the boundary Harnack principle. These two problems will be studied
              for two different constructions of Green functions, one - using the upper
              gradients, and the other - the Cheeger derivative. The fourth problem is to
              construct and study Brownian motion and the heat equation on abstract metric
              spaces.

Potential applications of the research proposed in this project
              include connections between probability theory and analysis on abstract metric
              spaces. Such spaces arise in applications in physics and engineering, and hence
              the questions addressed in the project have a potential impact in physics and
              engineering as well.

