Title       : REU Site Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology at Rochester
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0243789

Award Number: 0243789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181791             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Dewhurst stephen_dewhurst@urmc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine Sia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This REU Site Program is designed to organize the resources, environment and
              experience of a major research University so as to provide enhanced research
              opportunities in Cellular and Molecular Biology to promising undergraduate
              students.  The Program builds upon major strengths in the University of
              Rochester's programs in the Biological Sciences and it is intended not only to
              provide outstanding research experiences, but also to encourage participating
              undergraduates to pursue career paths in the biological sciences.  Students
              will be recruited principally from four-year colleges, including
              minority-serving institutions with which the Program Director has developed
              linkages.  The central research experience will take place during a 10-week,
              full-time work period each summer.  At this time, each REU student will pursue
              an independent research project under the supervision of a specific faculty
              mentor, and with the hands-on guidance of a "bench advisor" such as a graduate
              student or postdoctoral fellow, who will provide assistance with laboratory
              methods and new techniques.  The summer experience will be enriched through
              seminars on a range of research topics and career-development issues (including
              a roundtable discussion of careers in science).  In addition, a GRE prep course
              will be offered for interested students, and all participating students will be
              encouraged to get to know each other through scheduled social activities.  All
              students who do not live in the Rochester area will also be offered no-cost
              housing for the summer in a single on-campus dorm, located within 5-minutes
              walk of the laboratories in which they will conduct their research.  All
              students will be given the opportunity to enhance their communication skills by
              presenting posters on their research at the end of the summer, at a
              mini-symposium that will be attended by other trainees and faculty members. 
              Finally, all students will be strongly encouraged to present their research at
              national and local scientific meetings, and to continue part-time research work
              during the academic year.  The major goal of this program is to help to support
              the progression of promising undergraduates into Ph.D. programs in the
              Biological Sciences.
