Title       : RUI: Gender Socialization Through Play Among Fijian Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0243414

Award Number: 0243414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Brison brisonk@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research in North America indicates that children selectively reinterpret
              messages about gender and social roles from adults to form their gender and
              personal identity.  Cultures in general offer individuals multiple, often
              contradictory, models of self, gender, and community.  This is particularly
              true in our contemporary global village where increased exposure to alternative
              ideologies and lifestyles through mass media, travel and migration lead to
              increased scope for individual "imagination."  This project adds a
              cross-cultural dimension to a literature now based largely on studies of
              Western children.  This will advance our understanding of how children actively
              construct gender roles and will shed light on the factors that influence the
              salience of gender as a category for children.  The researchers seek to explore
              in much greater detail the findings of a preliminary study, which indicated
              that gender roles among adults were clearly defined and dichotomized; children,
              however, did not focus on gender.  This situation contrasts to the emphasis on
              gender among many Western children. These findings suggest that neither biology
              nor an adult emphasis on gender will necessarily cause children to focus on
              gender.  The proposed research will also enhance our understanding of gender in
              the contemporary Pacific by exploring the many possible ways of constructing
              gender available in postcolonial Fiji and the factors that make diverse models
              meaningful to individuals.  The project will involve life history interviews
              with Fijians of all ages, videotaping of children's play and other typical
              routine interactions, and analysis of aspects of children's speech indexing
              gender and other identities. 
The broader impacts of this research include
              fostering the integration of research and education by building on an existing
              term abroad in Fiji in order to give undergraduates an unusual opportunity to
              participate in anthropological research.  Research findings will be integrated
              into an existing webpage about the Fiji Term abroad.  Undergraduate research
              will be included in subsequent publications and in class presentations

