Title       : The Role of EnvZ and OmpR in Osmoregulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0243085

Award Number: 0243085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301074             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. Kenney kenneyl@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              All cells need to communicate with their environment in order to survive. 
              Bacteria employ two-component regulatory systems to accomplish this objective. 
              The simplest systems consist of a sensor kinase, responsible for sensing an
              environmental change and a response regulator, whose output is altered in
              response to the signal (usually a change in gene expression).  The system under
              study consists of EnvZ, the sensor and OmpR, the response regulator.  OmpR
              regulates the genes encoding outer membrane proteins and their expression
              fluctuates in response to changes in the growth medium.  The EnvZ/OmpR system
              is essential for many intracellular pathogens to replicate inside of host
              cells.  The long-term goals are to understand how OmpR regulates gene
              expression, what the signal is that EnvZ senses and how this is transmitted
              across the membrane and eventually to OmpR.  Recent work revealed two distinct
              signaling states of OmpR and proposed experiments will employ
              cysteine-substitutions and cross-linkers to examine the orientation of OmpR
              while bound to its target DNA.  Previous measurements of EnvZ binding to OmpR
              have raised doubts regarding the ability of EnvZ to regulate OmpR-P levels in
              vivo and emphasize the need for a systematic examination of the biochemical
              properties and partial reactions of EnvZ.  The goal is to delineate the steps
              important for signaling in molecular terms.  Understanding how OmpR functions
              as a transcriptional activator and repressor, as well as the cues that it
              responds to will aid in understanding signal transduction in general as well as
              how OmpR regulates expression of virulence genes in pathogens.    

Broader
              Impact-The goal is to contribute to the training of the nation's scientists and
              inspire young people to become interested in science.   After visiting the lab,
              an eighth-grader wrote: "I really enjoyed learning from you about E. coli.  I
              had no idea that studying E. coli could lead to curing different diseases." 
              The lab participates in various science outreach programs that mentor high
              school students.  This gives them an opportunity to participate in laboratory
              research and as a result, some of them choose science as a career.  One of
              these students, now an undergraduate at Bowdoin College, is a co-author on her
              second scientific publication.   Through the American Society of Microbiology,
              Mexican students were sponsored to work in the laboratory to learn new
              approaches, thus fostering international collaborations.  Presently, a
              collaboration with colleagues in Mexico to establish a course sponsored by the
              ASM entitled  "Application of Bacterial Genetics and Genomics to the Study of
              Infectious Disease" is underway for participants in Latin America.  In addition
              to the impact gained by advancing scientific knowledge in our field, the
              research impacts on the training of young scientists.

