Title       : SGER: 3D Nanofabrication via Folding of 2D Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0243805

Award Number: 0243805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100009             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Barbastathis gbarb@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for research on a novel fabrication method for
              structures with nanoscale features which extend in three spatial dimensions.
              The bioinspired nanofabrication technique funded under this grant is comprised
              of two steps.  First, features are defined on a large membrane-like surface
              using state-of-the-art nanolithography. Then the nanostructured membrane is
              folded in a prescribed way to yield the three-dimensional functional system.
              The research will address fundamental questions relating to the design of the
              foldable nanostructures, including material selection, alignment,
              interconnection and packaging schemes.  Theoretical modeling will be
              complemented by development and characterization of experimental prototypes.
              

If successful, the results of this research will deliver low cost, high
              yield and high throughput fabrication methods for miniature devices and systems
              serving numerous applications. The third dimension promises to extend the pace
              of ever faster processors and higher-capacity memories long after the
              feature
sizes of planar electronics reach their minimum practical limit. 
              Beyond electronics, the need to expand to the third dimension is even more
              urgent.  Examples are drug delivery by miniaturized microfluidic implants,
              nanocomposite materials, nanomechanical energy storage elements, miniature
              chemical and
biochemical reactors and diffractive optics for advanced imaging.
              Hybrid systems containing several of these components will be useful in
              homeland security, environmental monitoring, and industrial quality control.
              Moreover, this research will contribute to the education of nanoscale Engineers
              who can think in three dimensions and accelerate the development of products
              and businesses based on nanotechnology.


