Title       : Java and Object Oriented Design: Professional Development for Secondary Computer
               Science Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0243460

Award Number: 0243460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158368             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph J. Bravaco ralph@stonehill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shai Simonson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stonehill College
	      320 Washington Street
	      Easton, MA  02357    508/565-1069

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to provide 25 experienced Massachusetts computer science
              teachers with the foundation needed to teach Java-based courses.  This is done
              in anticipation of the shift in the Advance Placement as well as other courses,
              which should ultimately change many related offerings.  Teachers attend a
              two-week workshop, followed by several school-year meetings, and then a
              culminating in a one-week summer workshop.   During these, they will learn
              enough Java and Object Oriented Programming (OOP) and Design so as to feel
              comfortable and competent in teaching an introductory course using Java and
              OOP.

The funded activities include creating a local peer group of computer
              science teachers and providing local computer science teachers with access to
              computing facilities, network connections and faculty expertise.  In addition
              to addressing the local need, the project staff and participants develop
              materials and resources for dissemination to other secondary school computer
              science teachers.  A nationally publicized conference is scheduled near the end
              of the project, during which experienced OOP teachers present their
              experiences, lesson plans and student work.  Through the web page development,
              an Internet News Group and the regional conference, the project will reach a
              much needed national audience of secondary school computer science teachers.

