Title       : REU: The HERO REU Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0243772

Award Number: 0243772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300253             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenton M. Yarnal alibar@essc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for an REU-Site as part of the Human-Environment
              Regional Observatory project (HERO). HERO is developing the infrastructure to
              study and monitor the human causes and consequences of global environmental
              change in local areas. Local HEROs will select three students from
              Pennsylvania, from Massachusetts, from Kansas, and from Arizona to participate
              in the Site. The students will start their summer research activities by taking
              a two-week short courses that will introduce them to the concepts and tools
              needed to study the local dimensions of global environmental change. After the
              short course, the REU students will return to their home states where they will
              conduct parallel research activities at the local HEROS. The three-person REU
              student teams will work for six weeks with a faculty research mentor, other
              faculty, post-doctoral researchers, and graduate students working at the local
              HEROs. Students will be introduced to such tools as geographic information
              systems, aerial photographs, remote sensing images, and geo-positioning
              systems. The activities will include the mapping and field checking of: land
              cover and land use; natural and technological hazards; essential facilities;
              potentially vulnerable socioeconomic groups, businesses, factories, resource
              extraction and processing facilities, and other commercial sites; and critical
              biological habitats. Students will also engage in interviews and focus groups.
              They will stay linked to their colleagues at the other local HEROs through HERO
              remote collaboration tools.
 
This award contributes to the Foundation's
              continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
              active undergraduate research experiences. 

