Title       : The Fluid to Solid Transitions in Soft Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0243715

Award Number: 0243715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Weitz weitz@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Soft materials are often viscoelastic, displaying characteristics of both a
              fluid and a solid.  Often one behavior dominates, and the material is
              dominantly either a fluid or a solid; however, this can depend sensitively on
              the measurement.  For example, a glassy material can be solid at frequencies
              typically measured, but fluid at very low or very high frequencies.  Thus, the
              transition between fluid-like and solid-like behavior can be quite subtle, yet
              it can provide great insight into the behavior can be quite subtle, yet it can
              provide great insight into the behavior of the material.  This transition
              between fluid-like and solid-like behavior is the overarching theme of the work
              proposed here.  Experiments proposed include investigation of colloidal
              crystals, glasses and gels with confocal microscopy to look at individual
              particles, scattering to measure average effects, and rheology to measure bulk
              effects.  A shear cell will be built for a confocal microscope to probe the
              motion of particles when subjected to shear, and laser tweezers will be used to
              probe local perturbations of structure.  These experiments will provide insight
              into important fluid to solid transitions in soft materials.

Many materials
              that are important in nature and in technology have a dual character they have
              both solid-like and fluid-like when squeezed from the tube or smeared on teeth,
              but maintains its shape and form like a solid when spread on a toothbrush. 
              This research will investigate the nature of a wide class of materials that
              have this dual character, and will focus on the transformation from the
              fluid-like behavior to the solid-like behavior.  The work will search for
              general features that can describe this behavior in wide classes of materials,
              and will investigate the structural properties of the materials that cause this
              behavior.  The research will be highly leveraged through interactions with
              industry, ensuring that problems of practical and technological importance and
              addressed, in addition to problems of fundamental importance.  In addition, the
              research will be coupled with educational efforts, through seminar and workshop
              series that enhance the researcher community for scientists in the local area,
              through projects that will engage undergraduate students and high school
              teachers for summer research, and through the design of a new course to explore
              creativity in scientific research.

