Title       : Assessing the Performance of Surface and Subsurface Engineered Barriers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0243338

Award Number: 0243338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keri Moore khmoore@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,1576,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action provides partial support for the study by the National Research
              Council "Assessing the Performance of Surface and Subsurface Engineered
              Barriers."  These systems are relied upon to retain fluids in heap leach
              treatment in mining, to ensure safe disposal of a variety of waste, to
              complement remediation programs for contaminated sites, and for other
              applications.  Recent advances in technology and understanding, as well as
              assessment of past barrier performance, provide an opportunity to improve upon
              current design, evaluation, and monitoring methods.

Surface and subsurface
              containment systems include caps, bottom liners, and vertical barriers
              constructed with a variety of materials, e.g., concrete, geomembranes,
              compacted clays.  This study will develop and describe an improved framework
              for assessing surface and subsurface engineered barriers.  In 1997, the
              National Research Council completed a workshop report, "Barrier Technologies
              for Environmental Management" (NRC, 1997).  The workshop discussions focused on
              several themes.  The current study will build on some of these themes and will
              provide an improved components-based framework for assessing engineered
              barriers.  It will be conducted by an ad hoc committee under the aegis of the
              Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering, a standing committee
              under the Board on Earth Sciences and Resources.  The ad hoc committee will
              consist of approximately 10 professionals with expertise in areas such as
              municipal/hazardous/radioactive waste containment; hydrogeology; environmental
              engineering; mining; geochemistry; geotechnical/geological engineering;
              instrumentation/sensor technology; geology; risk assessment; and environmental
              regulation.

The ad hoc panel will consider the performance and effective
              lifetimes of current and emerging types of engineered barriers and will
              summarize the state of science and engineering for risk assessment methodology,
              system installation, performance monitoring, and sustainability.  In addition,
              the study will identify data gaps and research needs.  This study will benefit
              operators and regulators by defining the key components of design and
              implementation that define barrier performance effective lifetimes, thereby
              helping to ensure protection of public health, reduce potential risks for
              barrier failure, maximize reliability of systems, and minimize overall costs. 
              In addition, the study's assessment of data gaps will help to focus research
              programs on efforts that will most directly result in improved performance.
              

The study report will be available for  public distribution in accordance
              with NRC policy, and will also be posted on the NAS World Wide Web site.
 


