Title       : RUI: Liquifaction and Post Cyclic Characteristics of Silts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1992  
File        : a9013422

Award Number: 9013422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20397              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sukhmander Singh ssingh@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research program addresses a ground                                       
              failure phenomenon known as liquefaction that                                  
              can result when certain soil deposits, such                                    
              as loose saturated sands, are subjected to                                     
              the strong ground motions induced by                                           
              earthquakes.  Structures built in or on                                        
              ground that liquefies are very prone to                                        
              failure.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Most of the laboratory research on                                             
              liquefaction has involved experiments on                                       
              saturated clean sands, whereas most of the                                     
              natural deposits susceptible to liquefaction                                   
              range from silty sands to sandy silts.  There                                  
              is, therefore, a need to address in the                                        
              controlled environment of the laboratory the                                   
              more difficult problem of the liquefaction of                                  
              silty soils.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research program is to                                   
              understand the liquefaction characteristics                                    
              of silty soils.  One of the main goals is to                                   
              establish threshold limits for the                                             
              liquefaction potential of silty soils in                                       
              terms or grain size and soil plasticity: the                                   
              motivation is to improve the understanding of                                  
              the liquefaction characteristics of these                                      
              soils, as well as their use in remedial                                        
              measures to improve the resistance to                                          
              liquefaction at a particular site.  The post-                                  
              cyclic (that is, post-earthquake) behavior is                                  
              also being investigated: it determines the                                     
              ability of the soil deposit to function                                        
              satisfactorily as a foundation material after                                  
              the ground shaking and resulting liquefaction                                  
              has subsided.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The results obtained from this research                                        
              project will provide the basis for a                                           
              reasonable estimate of the dynamic stability                                   
              of a wider range of naturally occurring soil                                   
              deposits.  The post-cyclic studies should                                      
              provide insights into the phenomenon of                                        
              delayed failure and permanent deformations of                                  
              soil deposits subjected to earthquake                                          
              shaking.
