Title       : A Laboratory for the Culture of Oceanic and Deep-Sea Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1993     
File        : a9013181

Award Number: 9013181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Edwards                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig M. Young youngc@hboi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edith A. Widder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin J. Eckelbarger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harbor Branch Ocean Inst
	      5600 Old Dixie Highway
	      Fort Pierce, FL  349467303    407/465-2400

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With its state-of-the-art submersibles and ROVs, Harbor Branch                 
              Oceanographic Institution (HBOI) is in a unique position to                    
              conduct biological research in deep midwater habitats and at                   
              continental shelf depth too great to reach by SCUBA.  The                      
              submersibles are used by scientists funded by NOAA, NSF, ONR,                  
              Seagrant and other agencies in addition to staff scientists.                   
              Because the two HBOI support ships, both have walk-in                          
              environmental facilities for maintaining deep-water organisms,                 
              specimens can be transported to port for additional work                       
              following cruises.  However, the institution's shore-based                     
              facilities for controlling temperature, pressure, spectral                     
              irradiance and other environmental parameters  are inadequate.                 
              To remedy this situation, the Division of Marine Science at HBOI               
              is currently renovation a laboratory to serve as a culture and                 
              experimental facility for work with midwater and bathyal                       
              organisms.  This facility, which has been given the acronym COOL               
              (Culture of Oceanic Organisms Laboratory) will allow researchers               
              to conduct shore-based physiological, behavioral, embryological                
              and ecological research with organisms collected from deep                     
              waters.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project will provide partial funding for some of the capital              
              equipment needed to outfit the laboratory, namely environmental                
              rooms, circulating water baths, and a small hyperbaric chamber                 
              with associated hardware.  The culture laboratory is to be                     
              located in the same building as a newly designated visiting                    
              investigator laboratory.  Both facilities will be available as                 
              common-use research space for graduate students, postdoctoral                  
              fellows, and staff scientist from the national and international               
              scientific community.
