Title       : University-Industry Cooperation and the European Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9013998

Award Number: 9013998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter E. Massey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
              92        Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 5914,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Among the ramifications of the unification of the European                     
              Community (EC) in 1992 is the potential to create a formidable                 
              research and development (R&D) enterprise.  For example, it is                 
              estimated that by 1992 national civil R&D expenditures of the 12               
              EC nations will reach parity with those of the United States, and              
              thereafter will surpass them.  After unification, the EC will                  
              therefore become one of the world's two major scientific entities.             
              As the EC moves toward unification, a major goal is to remove many             
              of the barriers that have inhibited the kind of university-                    
              industry-government laboratory interactions in Europe that are                 
              beginning to be effective in the United States.  An increase in                
              the proportion of cooperative research based on those interactions             
              is likely to alter the terms of cooperation between U.S. and                   
              European scientists and engineers.  For example, more of the                   
              research conducted by European academic investigators could become             
              proprietary or be restricted to participation by European                      
              scientists.  On the other hand, there is little doubt that                     
              European economic unification, coupled with increasing university-             
              industry-government laboratory cooperation, will result in a                   
              markedly richer European research environment.  While the terms of             
              U.S. participation will very likely change, U.S. scientists and                
              engineers should be able to participate to their advantage,                    
              provided the nature of the evolving European research environment              
              is more clearly understood and provided that understanding is used             
              as the basis of science policy development in the United States.               
                                                                                             
              Dr. Walter Massey, Vice President for Research and for Argonne                 
              National Laboratory, proposes to make an intensive study of trends             
              toward university-industry-government laboratory research in the               
              context of Europe 1992.  He will (a) select a few major corporations           
              in key, technology-intensive industries and explore their research             
              goals through personal interviews with executives in R&D areas, as             
              well as with those at the corporate level; (b) meet with university            
              and national laboratory administrators and scientists to learn of              
              their efforts and the obstacles faced in working with industry;                
              (c) spend time with key members of the EC and its subsidiary                   
              institutions; and (d) meet with senior government officials in the             
              major EC countries to become familiar with their role in the                   
              promotion and sponsoring of joint research activities.  Dr.                    
              Massey's research will provide the basis for both a graduate                   
              course at the University of Chicago and a book.
