Title       : Dissertation Research: Anaylsis of an Extractive Frontier in 18th Century Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9013097

Award Number: 9013097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9866               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Finamore  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Patricia McAnany, professor of                      
              anthropology at Boston University, Mr. Daniel Finamore will                    
              conduct archaeological research to collect data for his doctoral               
              dissertation.  His work will focus on the New River Valley of                  
              coastal Belize and include the excavation of a series of logging               
              camps occupied during the eighteenth century.  Coastal Belize was              
              settled primarily by English seafarers and was a colony of Great               
              Britain.  Although originally egalitarian, an economically                     
              stratified community developed and this process was furthered by               
              the importation of black slaves.  The economy of the colony                    
              depended largely on logging, and tropical wood was harvested and               
              shipped to Europe.  As coastal supplies diminished, the focus                  
              shifted inland, and canals were dug to permit trees to be floated              
              to rivers and hence to the coast.  To this end, inland camps were              
              established.  Mr. Finamore is interested in these because he                   
              believes they will shed light on the relationships and economic                
              interactions between different colonial groups.  Camps differ in               
              nature.  Some were occupied primarily by slaves and others by                  
              small or large property holders.  Mr. Finamore has located a                   
              series of sites based on English documents, and he plans to                    
              excavate a sample to collect and note variation in material                    
              culture.  This in turn will shed light on different lifestyles                 
              and interactions among groups.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will shed                  
              additional light on a little known period of Middle American                   
              prehistory.  It will also increase our understanding of long-                  
              term, inter-ethnic interactions in frontier situations.  Similar               
              highly volatile contexts still exist today in areas such as                    
              Amazonian Brazil and the Philippines, and the results of Mr.                   
              Finamore's work will be directly relevant to our understanding of              
              them.  Finally, the project will further the training of an                    
              extremely promising young scientist.
