Title       : Transmission Electron Microscope for Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9013260

Award Number: 9013260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Edwards                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, located on                     
              Maine's Boothbay Harbor, has been a center for marine research                 
              since 1974.  The Lab is best known for research on marine                      
              phytoplankton.  In addition to hosting both resident and visiting              
              researchers, the Lab is the site of the Provasoli-Guillard Center              
              for Culture of Marine Phytoplankton, the MacIsaac Flow Cytometry               
              and Cell Sorting Facility, and a remote sensing laboratory.  Dr.               
              Robert Andersen, a staff research scientist at Bigelow Lab,                    
              proposes acquisition of a transmission electron microscope (TEM)               
              for the Lab.                                                                   
                   Acquisition of the proposed TEM would have a substantial                  
              impact on both the quality and quantity of research accomplished               
              at Bigelow Lab.  The closest electron microscope is currently in               
              Orono, Maine, a two hour drive from the Lab.  This distance                    
              discourages many visiting scientists from initiating research at               
              the Lab, and hinders those researchers working there.  The                     
              Culture Collection at the Lab is an important international                    
              systematic resource, and the presence of a TEM would facilitate                
              an immediate high level of research activity.  Bigelow Lab has an              
              excellent reputation for supporting visiting scientists with                   
              facilities and instrumentation.  The proposed acquisition of a                 
              multi-user TEM would benefit a wide range of marine biologists,                
              oceanographers, microbiologists and evolutionary systematists.
