Title       : The Sevilleta Field Station: Development of a Regional Research Center in New
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1992  
File        : a9013190

Award Number: 9013190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Schindel                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford S. Crawford ccbosque@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane L. Marshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Duszynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Parmenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Sevilleta Region of Central New Mexico is a large and                      
              ecologically area, and is utilized extensively by a growing                    
              number of research scientists.  The region includes latitudinal,               
              longitudinal and elevational transition zones among numerous                   
              biomes, including Great Plains Grassland, Chihuahuan Desert,                   
              Great Basin Shrub-steppe, Interior Chapparal, Mogollon                         
              (Pinyon-Juniper) Woodland, and Montane Forest.  Additional biotic              
              assemblages within these biomes include Rio Grande "Bosque"                    
              (Riparian Cottonwood                                                           
              Forests) and Wetlands, Subalpine Forests, and Subalpine                        
              Grasslands.  Current scientific research in the region focuses on              
              biotic                                                                         
              responses to climate changes at various time scales (seasonal,                 
              annual, and long-term), biodiversity issues, and ecosystem                     
              restoration following natural and anthropogenic disturbances.                  
                                                                                             
              At present, the University of New Mexico maintains a small                     
              research field station on the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge               
              (a 100,000 ha, centrally located study area), designed to support              
              up to 6                                                                        
              field researchers.  However, the recent user population of the                 
              station had dramatically increased.  In the last five years, the               
              Sevilleta has served as a research site for 125 researchers,                   
              representing 17 universities, 9 U.S. Government agencies, 3 New                
              Mexico State Government agencies, 2 private institutes, and 1                  
              foreign country.  The 1989 station population included 57                      
              researchers (plus technicians and graduate students), with up to               
              35 scientists and technicians operating simultaneously out of the              
              station during peak summer research months (April through                      
              October).                                                                      
              This project will expand the station's facilities and                          
              significantly increase station capacity.  The benefits of a                    
              centrally located, expanded Sevilleta Field Station to the                     
              scientific community                                                           
              included:                                                                      
                   1.   ready access to the many populations and ecosystems                  
                        present in the area;                                                 
                   2.   improve logistical support for field research projects;              
                   3.   enhanced on-site analysis and data processing                        
                        capabilities, GIS and data management systems; and                   
                   4.   an intellectual environment derived from the wide                    
                        variety of scientists from numerous disciplines and                  
                        institutions.
