Title       : National Information Service for Earthquake Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1992   
File        : a9013334

Award Number: 9013334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Anderson                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1380655            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack P. Moehle moehle@peer.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Fenves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides renewed support for the                                    
              National Information Service for Earthquake                                    
              Engineering (NISEE).  The purpose of NISEE is                                  
              to disseminate information on earthquake                                       
              engineering and allied fields to practicing                                    
              engineers and related professionals, academic                                  
              researchers, government agencies and the                                       
              general public.  The NISEE program at the                                      
              Earthquake Engineering Research Center,                                        
              University of California, Berkeley, includes                                   
              the EERC Library, Earthquake Engineering                                       
              Abstracts and Computer Applications.  During                                   
              the last two year grant cycle, the EERC                                        
              Library acquisitions and public service                                        
              transactions continued to increase.                                            
              Earthquake Engineering Abstracts completed                                     
              the conversion of its software to an in-house                                  
              publication system.  The NISEE database was                                    
              made available to users.  Computer                                             
              Applications continued its distribution of                                     
              microcomputer and mainframe computer software                                  
              at the same level as recent years.  The                                        
              program provides a central collection point                                    
              for reports on NSF and other sponsored                                         
              research as well as other developments in                                      
              earthquake engineering.                                                        
                                                                                             
              NISEE will continue to take advantage of new                                   
              information handling technology to increase                                    
              the efficiency of current operations, to                                       
              broaden the spectrum of services provided and                                  
              to expand the audience served.  The Abstract                                   
              Journal and NISEE database will continue to                                    
              expand their audience and bring the Abstract                                   
              Journal to a current publication schedule.                                     
              The EERC Library will begin to convert                                         
              existing manual records into machine-readable                                  
              form.  Computer Applications will expand                                       
              capabilities for software which runs on a 386                                  
              class machine.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This branch of NISEE complements the activity                                  
              of a second branch at the California                                           
              Institute of Technology.
