Title       : RUI: A New Technique for Short-Term Electric Load Forecasting Including Weather
               and Lifestyle Influences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1993   
File        : a9013084

Award Number: 9013084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur R. Bergen                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90063              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali T. Alouani aalouani@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Chandrasekaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to develop a                                   
              probabilistic approach to short-term                                           
              forecasting of electric load demand.  The                                      
              proposed approach accounts explicitly for                                      
              weather and lifestyle influences.  The single                                  
              customer load demand is decomposed into two                                    
              components:  stochastic and periodic.  The                                     
              stochastic components (heating/cooling and                                     
              water heater) are modeled via stochastic                                       
              differential equations.  Semi-Markov theory is                                 
              used to determine the load of these                                            
              components.  The periodic part (the remaining                                  
              part of the load, excluding the stochastic                                     
              components) is determined using time series                                    
              methods.  The second phase of this research is                                 
              to identify the parameters of the models of                                    
              the different components.  A validation of the                                 
              proposed approach will also be performed.  The                                 
              second phase will use the data gathered during                                 
              the Department of Energy experimental project                                  
              on distribution automation and control at                                      
              Athens Utilities in Tennessee.  Since the                                      
              basic building block of the proposed approach                                  
              is the forecast at the single customer level,                                  
              the accuracy of the forecast of the aggregated                                 
              model is enhanced.  The results of these                                       
              investigations will provide the utilities with                                 
              a more accurate technique for short-term load                                  
              forecast at any desired level of the system.                                   
              The availability of an accurate forecast will                                  
              enable the utilities to make more confident                                    
              decisions of operation and planning.
