Title       : How Artifacts Have Politics: A Study of the Role of Design in the Shaping of
               Political Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9013245

Award Number: 9013245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Langdon Winner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The basic assumption upon which Dr. Winner bases this research is              
              that, in an age characterized by rapid, pervasive technological                
              change, the traditional concerns of political thought must expand              
              to included choices that may seem to be merely technical ones.  He             
              argues that the building of new systems in production,                         
              transportation, information, communications, and the like involves             
              not only matters of efficiency, productivity, reliability and the              
              like, but also questions about freedom membership, authority,                  
              community, and the distribution of social power.  One point at                 
              which these issues might be fruitfully addressed is at the design              
              stage of technological development.  Under this grant, Dr. Winner              
              is examining three aspects of design in technological development.             
              First, he is examining a variety of historical examples to show how            
              the design of technological systems can have political                         
              consequences.  Second, he is comparing three traditions of design-             
              -political theory, architecture, and industrial engineering--to see            
              what they have to say about the relationship of form and content               
              in the structures they ponder.  Third, he is attempting to develop             
              a political theory of design, one that can offer advice on value               
              choices to be made about the shape of evolving technological                   
              systems.  He will apply this theory to a number of currently                   
              evolving sociotechnical fields, including the designs of digital               
              bank card systems and their implications for issues of privacy and             
              individual freedom.
