Title       : Construction of Housing Accommodations for Visiting Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1991   
File        : a9013284

Award Number: 9013284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Schindel                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony H. Knap knap@bbsr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clayton B. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Bermuda Biological Station for Research provides resident and              
              visiting investigators with laboratory facilities and access to                
              unique marine environments.  The Station has an excellent                      
              reputation for supporting graduate training as well as research.               
              Unfortunately, Bermuda's appeal among vacationers has made it                  
              prohibitively expensive for visiting researchers to live off-site,             
              and the Station's ability to house visitors has been limited.  As              
              a response to this problem, Dr. Knap, Director of the Station,                 
              proposes construction of housing for 20 visiting scientists.                   
                                                                                             
              The proposed visitor housing will improve the Station's research               
              impact directly and immediately.  The recent growth in research                
              activity will continue to increase, and a greater variety of                   
              research projects will be attracted to the Station.  Increased                 
              visitor housing is integral to the Station's long-range plans for              
              continued leadership in marine studies.
