Title       : Acquisition of a Geographic Information System for the Adirondack Ecological
               Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1990 
File        : a9013331

Award Number: 9013331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Edwards                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Hopkins phopkins@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The State University of New York, College of Environmental                     
              Science and Forestry continues to strengthen the research program              
              and support capabilities of the Adirondack Ecological Center                   
              (AEC).  Recent improvements have emphasized additional personnel               
              support, enhancement of comprehensive environmental monitoring                 
              programs, improvement of work and living spaces for researchers                
              and students, and development of more effective description and                
              documentation of the station and its associated research.                      
              Research program goals call for greater emphasis on integrative                
              studies to investigate ecological processes on a large scale,                  
              with a spatial context and long-term perspective.  The                         
              development of a Geographic Information System (GIS) for the                   
              station and immediate surroundings is a key component of this                  
              effort.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project provides matching funds to purchase computer                      
              hardware and software which will form the core of a                            
              data/information management and advanced spatial analysis system,              
              to complement the excellent ecological research qualities of the               
              AEC.  These qualities include a strategic location and a broad                 
              historical data base pertaining to biological, chemical and                    
              physical variables, dating to the 1930's.  The GIS will                        
              capitalize on these assets, faculty and graduate student                       
              strengths, and visiting scientist programs to advance synergism                
              in ecological research and account for spatial variables in                    
              biological research.  Automation in the collection, storage,                   
              display, and analysis of data and information gained from past,                
              current, and future research at the AEC will substantially                     
              advance the research, improve the management, and increase the                 
              utilization of the station.
