Title       : U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Anisotropy In Grain Aligned Superconducting
               (123)-Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1991  
File        : a9013177

Award Number: 9013177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas K. Finnemore FINNEMORE@ALISUVAX.Bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              13        Physics                                 
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1761,
Abstract    :
              This award supports collaborative interactions between                         
              scientists in the Department of Physics, Iowa State University,                
              led by Professor Douglas K. Finnemore, and Professor Harald                    
              W. Weber and colleagues of the Atomic Institute of the                         
              Austrian Universities, in Vienna.  The two groups have been                    
              studying the anisotropy of the magnetic properties and                         
              current carrying capacity of high temperature superconductors.                 
              Their goal is to develop bulk superconducting materials which                  
              will carry a high critical current and thus be suitable for                    
              conductor material in large magnets.  Their cooperative work                   
              plan relies heavily on their complementary expertise and                       
              facilities.  The Iowa State University group is very                           
              experienced in the theory of anisotropic superconductors, in                   
              sample preparation for grain oriented materials, in measure-                   
              ments of the vortex line energy and in the study of pinning                    
              potentials for vortex motion.  The Austrian group has great                    
              experience with radiation damage in superconductors and                        
              highly accurate studies of the fundamental magnetization                       
              properties of these highly anisotropic materials                               
                                                                                             
              The U.S. group at Iowa State University will prepare the                       
              grain oriented crystal samples, measure their basic properties                 
              and arrange for their irradiation at several U.S. accelerator                  
              facilities.  The Austrian group will measure the magnetic and                  
              structural properties of these materials using different                       
              magnetization instruments (including their 17 tesla magnetiza-                 
              tion apparatus.)  There will also be a thorough study of the                   
              damage done by the ion tracks using transmission electron                      
              spectroscopy.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The development of an understanding of anisotropy effects                      
              for flux pinning in high temperature superconductors would                     
              have both fundamental and practical implications.  Classical                   
              superconductors are highly isotropic compared to the high                      
              temperature materials, so the experiments proposed here are in                 
              a new regime where dimensionality and topology play a more                     
              important role. In addition, there is a large payoff for the                   
              development of new materials and new processing methods to                     
              produce conductors with higher critical current density                        
              values.  There is at present no satisfactory conductor                         
              material for magnetics because the mechanical properties and                   
              the transport critical currents are so poor.  Thus, any                        
              improvement in the critical current carrying capacity of the                   
              high temperature bulk superconductors would have a large                       
              impact on the availability of new magnets and new shielding                    
              materials.
