Title       : Engineers and Economic Conversion: Roles, Values and Attitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9013961

Award Number: 9013961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47607              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha W. Gilliland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              The pressures of international economic competition and the                    
              changes in eastern Europe increase the importance of planning for              
              conversion of our defense economy to civilian work.  Engineers                 
              are among those who are most likely to be involved in conversion               
              issues and to affect the conversion process in a number of                     
              industries, such as electronics, aerospace, transportation                     
              equipment, and instruments.  This workshop project will address                
              the range of issues -- ethical, social, economic, and technical -              
              - which engineers confront as they consider roles in the economic              
              conversion process.  A research team will guide this project.                  
              The approach is to examine these issues through discussion of                  
              prepared presentations by academic researchers and practicing                  
              engineers from the defense industry in a workshop which includes               
              representatives from a range of engineering societies.  The                    
              findings will be synthesized by means of discussion in the                     
              workshop and by the work of the research team immediately                      
              following the conference.  The research team plans four products               
              for dissemination: a synthesis of papers in the proceedings and                
              three monographs, one on research needs, one on policy                         
              implications, and one on implications for engineering education.               
              Members of American Engineers for Social Responsibility and                    
              representatives of five other engineering professional societies               
              will play a leading role in disseminating these products to                    
              appropriate members of congressional committees and federal                    
              agencies, as well as to their members.                                         
                                                                                             
              This proposal is a reasonable request for support to enable                    
              leading scholars and practitioners to begin to address ethical                 
              issues as well as practical problems for engineers in the                      
              conversion process.  The principal investigator and research team              
              are well qualified; institutional support is very good; the                    
              workshop plans are careful and appropriately meshed with related               
              activities; dissemination is likely to be broad and to reach a                 
              variety of audiences.  Support is highly recommended.
