Title       : Process Fault Diagnosis and Control Using Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1992      
File        : a9013349

Award Number: 9013349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Venkatasubramanian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The major goal of this project is to research and                              
              demonstrate a new approach based on neural                                     
              networks towards the design of process fault                                   
              detection and control systems.  Past approaches in                             
              fault diagnostic systems did not properly include the                          
              human expert's reasoning strategies and experience                             
              and hence were not adequate in efficient and correct                           
              trouble-shooting.  This project, will explore a novel                          
              method using neural networks that address the                                  
              important issues which are central to the                                      
              development of knowledge-based systems for process                             
              fault diagnosis and control.  Our method for                                   
              developing knowledge-based systems rests on the                                
              important characteristics of neural networks, namely,                          
              their ability to automatically classify and learn                              
              associations between input and output data and to be                           
              able to handle noisy data.  The P.I. has already                               
              successfully tested his approach on a prototypical case                        
              study involving a CSTR and its support subsystems.                             
              He plans to investigate this approach further by                               
              experimenting with larger prototypes of chemical                               
              process plants as well as for diagnosing dynamic                               
              process faults.  He also proposes to analyze the                               
              robustness of this approach to sensor failures, noisy                          
              and uncertain data, and incomplete information on                              
              symptoms.  It is also proposed to investigate the use                          
              of neural networks for modeling the behavior process                           
              units and their in control.  Furthermore, he proposes                          
              to investigate the integration of neural nets with                             
              knowledge-based techniques.
