Title       : Renovation of H. V. Neal Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1990    
File        : a9013063

Award Number: 9013063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Edwards                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110990             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Evans   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. McCrimmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory (MDIBL) is the                   
              oldest cold-water marine laboratory in the eastern United States,              
              annually providing facilities for between 40 to 50 research                    
              programs ranging from the comparative physiology and biochemistry              
              of osmoregulation and renal and epithelial transport in                        
              vertebrates and invertebrates to endocrinology, developmental and              
              molecular biology.  Scientists throughout the world apply to work              
              at the MDIBL; acceptance is competitive.                                       
                                                                                             
              This project provides matching funds for the renovation of a                   
              sixty-seven year old building, the H. V. Neal Laboratory.                      
              Although continuously used for decades by researchers, including               
              some of the MDIBL's most illustrious summer scientists, the Neal               
              building no longer provides an adequate laboratory environment                 
              for modern electrophysiological, biochemical and molecular                     
              biology research.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Plans call for modernizing the building to provide climate-                    
              controlled research space with vibration-free floors.  The                     
              interior of the building will be modified to provide both                      
              laboratory and work space on two floors by the removal of present              
              interior partitions and the lowering of the first-floor ceiling.               
              Electrical service, lighting and plumbing also will be upgraded.               
              The exterior siding of the building, unchanged since original                  
              construction, will be replaced.  A new entrance will provide                   
              access for handicapped persons.  Renovation of the Neal                        
              Laboratory will increase by two-fold the area of temperature-                  
              controlled modern space for state-of-the-art research at the                   
              MDIBL.
