Title       : Middle Paleolithic Adaptations in Jordan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1993    
File        : a9013972

Award Number: 9013972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66070              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey A. Clark geoffrey.clark@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Geoffrey                
              Clark will excavate a deeply stratified archaeological site, Ain               
              Difla, located in West-Central Jordan.  Prior work indicates that              
              the successive levels are rich in both faunal remains and stone                
              tools which are associated with the Mousterian culture.  Dr.                   
              Clark will continue the excavation there to collect large samples              
              of both cultural and faunal remains.  Using the                                
              thermolumenencence technique he hopes to obtain absolute dates on              
              burnt flint.  With these data, he will then be able to                         
              reconstruct successive environments and to show how Mousterian                 
              culture developed over time and adapted to these changes.                      
                                                                                             
              This area and time period are of great archaeological                          
              significance because fossils seem to indicate the concurrent                   
              presence of both early modern humans as well as a more archaic                 
              Neanderthal form.  It is unclear when and where anatomically                   
              modern humans first appear in Europe and the Near East and                     
              whether the later form develops directly from the earlier.  Some               
              anthropologists argue for in situ development while others                     
              believe that replacement occurred.  Archaeological data such as                
              Clark will collect are relevant to this issue.  Mousterian                     
              culture is traditionally associated with Neanderthals, and                     
              Clark's materials should show whether this tradition at some                   
              point changed and whether this may be associated with the                      
              appearance of a different way of life.                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will increase our                        
              understanding of the emergence of anatomically modern humans.  It              
              will also provide data of interest to a large group of                         
              archaeologists.
