Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Partition of Low-Copy- Number Plasmids in
               Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1994     
File        : a9013967

Award Number: 9013967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart J. Austin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adv BioScience Lab Inc
	      NCI-FCRF, Bldg. 428, PO Box B
	      Frederick, MD  217021201    301/698-1584

NSF Program : 5937      SWEDEN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in genetics                     
              between Dr. Stuart Austin, Advanced Bioscience Laboratories,                   
              Inc., Frederick, Maryland and  Professor Kurt Nordstrom,                       
              Department of Microbiology, University of Uppsala.  The                        
              objective of the proposed project is a study of the dynamics                   
              of plasmid partitioning in bacteria and of partition-specific                  
              incompatibility.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Low-copy-number plasmids are responsible for many economically                 
              important phenomena, such as drug resistance and bacterial                     
              pathogenicity.  In addition to highly accurate replication                     
              controls the plasmids are subject to a partition mechanism                     
              that, at least superficially, resembles mitosis in eukaryotic                  
              cells.  Using components of two model systems, the plasmids                    
              R1 and P1 of Escherichia coli, the investigators seek to                       
              understand how partition is accomplished, and how the                          
              partition systems are integrated into an overall strategy                      
              which ensures the remarkable fidelity with which these                         
              plasmids are maintained in nature.  The collaborative effort                   
              will focus on the question of how plasmid copies are recognized                
              for partition and, to this end, will concentrate on studies                    
              of the distribution of plasmid copies in situations where two                  
              plasmids are competing with each other during key events in                    
              the cell-cycle (partition-mediated incompatibility). They                      
              will also develop a theoretical treatment of plasmid distribu-                 
              tion based on existing and new models for plasmid maintenance                  
              and on their detailed knowledge of the characteristics of the                  
              replication systems of these plasmids.  Dr. Austin and                         
              Nordstrom are leading investigators in the field of plasmid                    
              biology  and their combined expertise is an important factor                   
              in the successful outcome of this project.  The results of                     
              this research are expected to yield data that can significantly                
              advance understanding of the mechanisms of P1 and R1                           
              partitioning.
