Title       : Dissertation Research: Functional Articulation in Diglossia: A Case Study of
               Grammatical and Functional Correspondences in Sinhala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9013361

Award Number: 9013361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8610               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth C. Traugott   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Paolillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Diglossia poses a particular challenge to both grammatical and                 
              variation theory.  Parametric theories of grammar must be                      
              compatible with the varieties of language in a diglossia, and                  
              statements of the variation in a diglossia should also integrate               
              with the parametric properties of grammatical theory.  As an                   
              approach to this problem, this research proposes a notion of                   
              "functional articulation", which allows a formal theory of                     
              grammar to be informed by language use patterns, by associating                
              different grammatical features with different communicative                    
              attitudes.  This notion will be developed in a detailed study of               
              Sinhala diglossia.  Sinhala has been chosen since it exhibits                  
              theoretically significant differences between its two main                     
              varieties, and intermediate varieties of language required to                  
              test hypotheses based on functional articulation.  The study will              
              examine samples of the language found in a wide range of contexts              
              (e.g. textbooks, newspapers, broadcast news, advertising,                      
              personal and formal letters, sermons, speeches, literatures,                   
              etc.).  Comparison and cross-referencing of selected texts will                
              be facilitated by HyperCard.  The distribution of several                      
              grammatical features over the different contexts will be analyzed              
              in terms of their functional correlates and current grammatical                
              theory, focusing on the relationship between agreement and case.               
              The study will address the implications of functional                          
              articulation for modern theories of grammatical universals, and                
              the implications for other diglossic language situations,                      
              education, and language teaching.
