Title       : Technology, Power, and Culture in China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1990   
File        : a9013044

Award Number: 9013044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francesca Bray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Technology has transformed the world.  Yet technology affects                  
              society differently in different cultures.  One needs only to                  
              examine the differences in housing, in heating systems, in                     
              appliances (even in toilets, as illustrated in the novel "Fear of              
              Flying"), in order to see how society shapes as well as is shaped              
              by technology.  In order to understand this interaction of                     
              technology and society, it is critical that we see these forces at             
              work in a number of different settings.                                        
                                                                                             
              In this project, Professor Bray is investigating specific ways in              
              which technological systems relate to various types of power                   
              relations and cultural features within a society, taking pre-modern            
              China as an example. She stresses the role of technology as a                  
              cohesive force embodying relations of production as well as                    
              interacting processes of technological processes of technological,             
              social, and cultural change.  Historians of Western technology have            
              brought considerable sophistication to such analyses, but these                
              methods have not as yet been systematically applied to China.  She             
              is also applying approaches to technology developed by social and              
              cultural anthropologists.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Under this grant, the principal investigator is examining a                    
              restricted number of topics grouped around three thematic headings:            
              divisions of labour (e.g significance of the household as the                  
              predominant unit of production;  the contributions of women to                 
              production); culture mental and material (e.g. the implications of             
              scarcity; how architectural forms reflect cosmological beliefs and             
              social practice); forms of control and the exercise of power (e.g.             
              water control; the importance of standardized measures; access to              
              medical expertise).  Eventually, Professor Bray hopes to develop               
              this approach into a systematic treatment of technology in Chinese             
              society and culture.
