Title       : Exploratory Visit in USSR on Indicators of Public Attitudes Toward Science and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9013428

Award Number: 9013428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : July 1,  1990        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. Lubrano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              86        Sociology                               
              92        Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation (NSF) wishes to investigate                    
              the possibility of adding the Soviet Union to the list of                      
              foreign countries in which data on science and engineering                     
              are collected so as to be comparable to U.S. data compiled by                  
              the NSF and published in Science and Engineering Indicators.                   
              One of the key areas of interest is survey data of public                      
              attitudes toward science and engineering.  In order to                         
              explore the possibility of undertaking cooperative work with                   
              the U.S.S.R. in this area, it is necessary to identify and                     
              make contact with appropriate researchers in the U.S.S.R., to                  
              establish their willingness to perform a national opinion                      
              survey in that country in coordination with a future Science                   
              and Engineering Indicators survey to be performed in the                       
              United States, and to obtain the necessary resources.                          
              Professor Linda Lubrano of American University is an expert                    
              on Soviet social science research and on the general state of                  
              the organization and management of science and engineering in                  
              the U.S.S.R.  Through her extensive contacts in the Soviet                     
              scientific community she will initiate exploratory contacts                    
              on behalf of the NSF in this area.  It is envisioned that                      
              subsequent cooperative work would take place under the                         
              auspices of the NSF-U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences Memorandum                    
              of Understanding in the Field of Basic Scientific Research.
