Title       : Instrumentation for Global Time-Series Photometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1992 
File        : a9013978

Award Number: 9013978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Edward Nather nather@astro.as.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With the possible exception of the Sun, pulsating white dwarfs show            
              the greatest potential for probing the interior structures of stars            
              by experimental means.  A rich variety of vibrating waves, visible             
              at the surface by their change in the star's luminosity, are                   
              excited in these stars that interfere with one another throughout              
              the star's interior.  The pattern of interferences can be used to              
              infer the amount of material each wave travels through, and hence              
              the distribution of material through the star can ultimately be                
              determined.  These principles, similar to those used for decades               
              by seismologists on the Earth, are now being applied to distant                
              stars for the first time.  The white dwarf stars are the best                  
              candidates not only because they exhibit so many vibrations but                
              because their periods are short enough that many wave cycles can               
              be followed by observing the stars' light variations.  The                     
              Principal Investigator has spent most of his research career                   
              designing and building photometric instrumentation to make accurate            
              light measurements.  In a previous NSF award, the PI and his                   
              collaborators found that a prototype three-channel photometer they             
              had constructed (one channel for the program star, one for a                   
              constant "standard", and one for a starless "sky") increases the               
              amount of time during a night that an astronomer can spent actually            
              collecting data.  The new award will permit the PI to construct two            
              portable duplicates of this prototype.  These instruments will be              
              transported by his colleagues to observing sites around the world.             
              As part of an "observing campaign", target stars will then be                  
              observed in tandem by each of these observers as the Earth rotates.            
              Following this campaign the data will be combined and a continuous             
              several day-long string produced that is necessary for the analysis            
              of interior properties of white dwarf stars.
