Title       : Workshop on Systematics, Society and Public Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1991   
File        : a9013012

Award Number: 9013012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24520              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Elaine Hoagland   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Ehrlich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Donald Duckworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Systematics Coll
	      
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   Systematic biology is the discipline that describes and                   
              classifies living organisms, and reconstructs the evolutionary                 
              relationships among species and higher taxa.  The ability to                   
              identify, classify, and compare organisms in an evolutionary                   
              context is critical to many other areas of biology, such as                    
              functional morphology, ecology, biogeography, behavioral studies,              
              and population biology.  Dr. K. Elaine Hoagland, Executive                     
              Director of the Association of Systematic Collections, has                     
              organized a symposium entitled "Systematics, Society, and Public               
              Policy", at which systematists can interact with governmental                  
              policy-makers and a broad range of biologists impacted by                      
              systematic biology.                                                            
                   The proposed symposium will provide a timely forum for a                  
              discussion of the critical role played by systematics in                       
              resolving the international crisis in biological diversity.  The               
              meeting will generate important position papers and will set in                
              motion ongoing interactions between systematists and policy-                   
              makers.
