Title       : FASEB Summer Research Conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication and
               Segregation, Snowmass Village, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9812321

Award Number: 9812321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Myles A. Hoyt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Sclafani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hoyt  9812321  The Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
              (FASEB) is sponsoring a research conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure,
              Replication and Segregation in the summer of 1998.  This meeting will be the
              fifth in a biennial series focused on understanding in detail the organization
              of yeast chromosomes, their replication and segregation.  Each of these
              meetings was considered to be highly successful by many of the participants. 
              In fact, many participants feel that this is the most important meeting in
              their field.  There was unanimous support among the attendees of the last
              conference to convene again in 1998.  A main objective of the conference is to
              bring together a relatively small group of leading researchers in this field to
              discuss the results of recent work and to provide the best possible
              circumstances for the exchange of ideas and information.  It is the only
              conference specifically devoted to this topic.  This meeting is very well
              attended by many scientists in this field.  In addition, the organizers of the
              meeting encourage the participation of female and minority researchers and
              younger, less well established scientists, including postdoctoral fellows and
              graduate students.  Chromosomes carry the genetic information in the nuclei of
              all organisms.  Results of studies of yeast chromosome structure, replication
              and segregation to daughter cells are relevant to our understanding of the
              chromosomal processes carried out in all eukaryotes.
