Title       : Theory of Combustion By Analytical Methods for Real Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  2001   
File        : a9812996

Award Number: 9812996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Forman A. Williams faw@mae.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research applies mathematical methods for partial differential equations to
              analysis of the structure and stability of combustion processes in real
              combustible mixtures.  Diffusion flames, premixed flames and detonations are
              addressed in different parts of the research.  Rate parameters for elementary
              chemical steps are evaluated from the literature on chemical kinetic
              experiments and, through nondimensionalization of the conservation equations,
              appropriate large and small parameters are identified.  These parameters
              typically involve activation energies, leading to activation-energy
              asymptotics, or ratios of reaction rates of      elementary steps, leading to
              rate-ratio asymptotics.  Identification of limiting values of the parameters
              simplifies the conservation equations and enables solutions to be obtained
              largely analytically, without resort to numerical integration of the full set
              of conservation equations.  The methods typically lead to formulas for the
              quantities of interest, such as burning velocities, ignition or extinction
              strain rates, and critical conditions for stability, and the formulas usually
              contain parameters determined by numerical integrations of two-point
              boundary-value problems for ordinary differential equations.  Since these
              equations are much simpler than the starting equations, full parametric
              solutions are obtained, rather than solutions restricted to specific
              conditions.  As a consequence, better understanding of flame structure and
              stability is developed, the essential aspects of the combustion processes are
              identified, and nonessential complications that play no significant role are
              eliminated.  This type of approach has now been completed for methane and
              hydrogen combustion, for example, yielding good four-step and two-step
              memchanisms, respectively.  The new research will address higher hydrocarbon
              combustion, higher alcohol combustion, and production of oxides of nitrogen in
              flames, as well as intrinsic detonation stability and influences of strain on
              flames.  Special attention will be paid to the derivation of useful reduced
              kinetic schemes and to their influences on flame and detonation.  In addition,
              reduced chemistry for describing influences of halogens as inhibitors or 
              extinction promoters in hydrogen flames will be addressed.  The results
              constribute to our knowledge of mechanisms of flame propagation, flame
              structure, flame and detonation instabilities, and ignition and extinction.
