Title       : A Planning Grant for the Virginia Coastal Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9812371

Award Number: 9812371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Blum lkb2e@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will support two planning workshops to  facilitate preparation of a
              Master Plan for the  University of Virginia Coastal Research Center (VCRC). 
              The goal of soliciting input from a variety of  scientists and field station
              managers is to make the  proposed field station a scientifically attractive
              place  for investigators from a broad range of academic  backgrounds as a way
              of enhancing understanding of  coastal systems.  The goal of these workshops
              would be  to plan the research/educational infrastructure that  will serve the
              needs of a diversity of scientists from a  variety of institutions with a
              common interest in  integrated interdisciplinary research.  Ultimately, the 
              product to be derived from the workshops is the Master  Plan for development of
              the site, including enhancement  of existing facilities and construction of
              new, needed  infrastructure.    The first workshop will be conducted at the
              VCRC to  solicit information about the needs of potential  users of the field
              station and advice from others with  experience in development of field
              stations. Specifics  that would be addressed at this workshop would include 
              both Phase I and later phases of the station  construction.  Workshop
              participants will be asked to  assess Phase I facilities with respect to the
              functional  aspects of accommodating the housing and laboratory  requirements
              of a variety of physical and biological  scientists.  Additionally, the
              participants would be  asked to provide insight into the type of field 
              instrumentation, data collection activities, data  management, and logistical
              support envisioned  for later phases of the VCRC development.    The objective
              of the second workshop will be to  prioritize the recommendations of the first
              workshop.  In addition to UVa coastal research scientists,  invitations to the
              second workshop would be extended  to non-UVa scientists who are actively
              seeking funding to  conduct work at the VCRC.
