Title       : Retrospective Analysis of Dispersive and Retentive Behaviors of
               Young-of-the-Year Estuarine Fishes: Are Fish Otoliths Environmental
               Chronometers?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9812069

Award Number: 9812069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Secor secor@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Recent advances in otolith microchemistry have provided researchers with a
              powerful means of tracking fish dispersal throughout ontogeny. The approach
              provides both spatial and temporal information on fish dispersal and movement.
              While the use of otolith microchemistry for reconstructing environmental
              histories of marine fishes is well recognized and reported, the fundamental
              question, whether fish otoliths can function as `faithful environmental
              chronometers?` remains largely untested. This project tests the hypothesis that
              otolith strontium is reflective of changing salinities during the early
              ontogeny of estuarine and marine fishes. The hypothesis will be evaluated in
              the Chesapeake Bay because this system contains extreme ranges in environmental
              gradients. The research will rigorously test the hypothesis that otolith
              strontium is reflective of salinity in both laboratory and field environments.
              The approach will be three-tiered, including: 1) retrospective elemental assays
              of otolith strontium of individuals reared under constant and fluctuating
              schedules of salinity and temperature levels; 2) elemental assays of otolith
              strontium of wild caught and caged individuals, and the relation otolith
              strontium to ambient salinity as a means of field verification; and 3)
              measurement of broad scale (e.g. estuarine ingress and egress) and fine scale
              (within estuary movements) patterns of dispersal by young of the year (YOY)
              estuarine fishes in the Chesapeake Bay. Spatial behaviors will be measured for
              five ecologically important estuarine species with contrasting early life
              tactics: American eel Anguilla rostrata, American shad Alosa sapidissima, white
              perch Morone americana, spot Leiostomus xanthurus, and hogchoker Trinectes
              maculatus. S pecies  specific estimates of accuracy and precision of the Sr:Ca
              ratio will be used to evaluate whether otolith strontium can measure dispersal
              along a salinity gradient and hindcast spatial histories of YOY fishes.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
