Title       : Microelectronics Education Enhancement Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9812848

Award Number: 9812848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Stoebe stoebe@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Pearsall  (Principal Investigator former)
              Paul Yager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Darling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Afromowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Microtechnology is a rapidly expanding field that is growing from its roots in
              integrated circuit fabrication to a broad array of applications that range from
              biotechnology to high-density microfabrication.  This CRCD proposal entitled,
              "Microelectronics Education Enhancement Program," addresses this important
              field of microtechnology by providing students with opportunities for education
              and hands-on experience in subjects that define the broad microprocessing
              technology area.

The goal of this program is to introduce and develop a
              range of microtechnology courses from basic science to applications, including
              laboratory and research opportunities for students, beginning in the sophomore
              year and extending through graduate research.  This will be accomplished by
              introducing students to the multi-disciplinary breadth of microtechnological
              theory and application using a new set of courses:

A new sophomore course
              that will introduce students to the materials properties of Si and it
              applications in microelectronics and microelectromechanical systems(MEMS);
A
              junior year laboratory course, designed to provide hands-on experience in
              lithography and etching, and in developing and characterizing simple
              structures;
A reconfigured senior level course on semiconductor processing
              along with related courses in electronic materials and device packaging; and
              
A process integration course at the graduate level that will act as the
              capstone course for students interested in semiconductor applications, to
              accompany an existing course that serves as a capstone in the MEMS
              area.

These courses will be accompanied by a full range of research
              opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students in the area of
              microtechnology, from MEMS to advanced microprocessor research.

