Title       : SGER: A New Approach to Composition Separation in Crystalizable Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1998      
File        : a9812261

Award Number: 9812261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian R. Harrison irh1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9148,9161,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812261  Harrison    The proposed research in this SGER Award represents a new 
              approach to speeding up crystallization-dissolution processes in  copolymers. 
              Speed is necessary to increase the rate at which  similar-composition materials
              can be separated.  Temperature-  Rising Elution Fractionation (TREF) is
              currently used to separate  crystallizable copolymers based on relative
              crystallizabilities,  and to obtain a distribution of compositions within the 
              copolymer.  Results from TREF were key in developing the latest  class of
              polyolefins using so called `single-site catalysts'.  However, like other
              composition separation techniques, TREF is  slow.  The proposed research uses
              TREF as a starting point to  identify those fundamental parameters that control
              separation in  such systems.  An outcome of the proposed study would be to 
              reduce TREF analysis times in crystallizable copolymers from  days, to an hour.
               One approach to increasing separation speed is  to turn TREF into a true     
              chromatographic technique where  separation between components increases as
              material moves along a  column.  This undertaking has never before been
              attempted and  represents a dramatic departure from the norm.  A zone refining 
              type modification of TREF will be used to introduce  chromatographic character
              into the separation process.  The final  form, as described in the proposal, is
              neither zone refining nor  TREF but could potentially reduce analysis time by a
              factor of  50.  Supplementary methods may aid in separation and other routes 
              to the chromatographic approach also exist.  These will be  evaluated as
              required.  %%%  If successful, composition distribution in crystallizable 
              polymers by `zone TREF' can become as standard as molecular  weight
              distribution by GPC, or melting-crystallinity evaluation  by DSC.  Given the
              potential impact which rapid composition  analysis could have on the plastics
              industry in general, and the  polyolefin segment in particular, early
              evaluation of this  proposed methodology  through a SGER grant is desirable. 
              ***
