Title       : Improving Seismic Performance of Asymmetric Buildings: Plan-wise Distribution of
               Supplemental Damping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9812414

Award Number: 9812414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rakesh K. Goel rgoel@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A symmetric building (buildings with irregular distribution of mass, and/or
              stiffness, and/or strengths in their floor plans) is especially vulnerable to
              earthquakes.  The primary objective of the research project is to develop the
              background and guidelines necessary to improve seismic performance of
              asymmetric buildings by using supplemental damping.

The first phase of
              research will focus on buildings with non-ductile structural elements (beams,
              columns, walls etc.) that can be allowed to experience no damage or very
              limited damage, i.e., buildings that must respond in or close to the linearly
              elastic range of behavior. This is an important class.  Many older buildings in
              high seismic regions like California (designed prior to the development of
              modern seismic codes) as well as most newer buildings in low to moderate
              seismic regions like central and eastern U.S. of all in this category.  The
              second phase will focus on buildings with ductile structural elements, i.e.,
              buildings that may be permitted to respond in the inelastic range of behavior
              but the element demands (displacement, ductility, or energy) must focus on
              proof-of-concept experiments using large scale models of asymmetric buildings
              with supplemental damping devices.  At present, funding is being provided for
              first two of the three phases; funding for the final phase would be requested
              after successful completion of the first two phases.

The investigation
              undertaken will enable the development of improved methods for seismic
              protection of asymmetric buildings, a class that is especially vulnerable to
              earthquakes but not always possible to avoid.  The guidelines and simplified
              design procedures that will result from the proposed research would also lead
              to improvements in performance-based seismic standards such as FEMA-273.
  
              


