Title       : BCU Classifiers for On-line Dynamic Contingency of Electric Power Systems:
               Design, Developments and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9812139

Award Number: 9812139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsiao-Dong Chiang chiang@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9812139  Chiang  This proposal presents an architecture for on-line DSA and
              seeks to develop a dynamic contingency screening scheme based on the direct
              method to make on-line DSA feasible for current or near future power system
              operating environments.  In particular, this proposal will develop BCU
              classifiers to satisfy the following essential requirements for on-line DSA:   
              (1) (reliability measure) absolute capture of unstable contingencies; i.e. no
              unstable (single-swing or multi-swing) contingencies are missed.  In other
              words, the ratio of the captured unstable contingencies to the actual critical
              contingencies is 1.    (2) (efficiency measure) high yield of screening out
              stable contingencies, i.e. the ratio of the stable contingencies detected to
              the actual stable contingency cases is as close to 1 as possible.    (3)
              (on-line computation) little need of off-line computations and/or adjustments
              in order to meet with the constantly changing and uncertain operating
              conditions.    (4) (speed measure) high speed, i.e. fast classification for
              each contingency case.    (5) (performance measure) robust performance with
              respect to changes in power system operating conditions.    To meet the five
              essential requirements, we propose to first perform the following tasks: (1) to
              conduct some theoretical study for development of numerical indices, (2) to
              construct improved numerical energy functions, (3) to develop a more reliable
              numerical implementation of the BCU method, (4) to develop numerical indices
              for detecting the occasional, invalid numerical energy functions, and (5) to
              develop numerical indices to detect the occasional controlling u.e.p.
              convergence problem.  Then, the results of these tasks will be integrated into
              the preliminary version of BCU classifiers to form an improved version of BCU
              classifiers which will satisfy the five requirements for performing on-line
              dynamic contingency screening.  The success of this proposed project has a
              direct impact on making the task of performing  on-line DSA feasible for
              current or near-future power system operating environments.
