Title       : The Costs and Consequences of Air Quality Regulation: Productivity, Emissions
               and Ambient Air Quality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a9812091

Award Number: 9812091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Bui   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eli Berman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The growing cost of environmental regulation has fueled a debate over
              cost-effectiveness in improving environmental quality.  Yet costs of regulation
              are difficult to measure, since abatement costs should properly include
              productivity losses or gains associated with abatement technologies. 
              Technological innovations are often both productivity enhancing and emission
              reducing so an economic assessment of costs imposed by regulation requires a
              comparison with a counterfactual in which plants adopt technologies (that may
              well be emission reducing) in the absence of regulation.  Similarly, the
              benefits of regulation are also difficult to measure, since that analysis
              involves an unobserved counterfactual, the change in air quality in the absence
              of the regulation.  This study  estimates the costs and benefits of air quality
              regulation in manufacturing using an approach that respects the notion of a
              counterfactual, using comparison plants and regions subject to less stringent
              regulations to estimate costs and benefits of local air quality regulation.  
              The study requires construction and documentation of new panel data on local
              regulations in California.  It will develop and document a previously unused
              panel on plant emissions.  These will be linked to existing panel data on
              abatement and production by plants from the Census Bureau.  This approach
              requires developing econometric methods for constructing micro-regulatory data
              in a way that allows subjective coding decisions without biasing results.   
              The decentralized, multi-tiered structure of U.S. environmental regulation
              gives rise to rich variation across geography and industries. The study
              exploits that variation to estimate the effects of regulation on productivity,
              emissions and air quality.  Precision is achieved by combining 1) the Census
              Bureau national sample of plants, including abatement costs; 2) data on local
              regulation for three California air basins; 3) a Californian sample on plant
              emissions; and 4) monitoring station data on local ambient air quality in
              California.  Linked micro data developed here on regulation, productivity
              emissions, and air quality will provide basic public goods for future research
              in environmental economics, productivity, public finance, industrial
              organization, and labor studies. It should allow further research on the
              cost-effectiveness of particular regulations. The project also contributes a
              useful methodology in the econometrics of micro-regulation.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
