Title       : SuperDARN Radar Investigations of Global Scale Processes in the High-Latitude
               Ionosphere: Science and Infrastructure Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a9812078

Award Number: 9812078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1580000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond A. Greenwald   (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Bristow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Michael Ruohoniemi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the operation and maintenance of an atmospheric radar
              facility in Goose Bay, Labrador.  The radar was the first of a worldwide
              network of radars called SuperDARN located in northern and southern high
              latitude regions.  The radars are sensitive to backscatter from ionospheric
              electron density irregularities.  Their primary data products are the drift
              velocity of the irregularities and the magnitude and direction of the electric
              field producing the drift.  SuperDARN is the only experimental technique that
              can provide continuous, large-scale, direct observations of the high latitude
              electric field.  The SuperDARN network is the result of a collaboration with
              scientists from ten countries and this award supports some of the coordination
              effort within the SuperDARN community, including the preparation of data tapes
              from the northern hemisphere sites and the distribution of those tapes to the
              research community.  The investigators will also conduct scientific research in
              two areas: 1)  Global-scale structure and dynamics of high-latitude convection
              and 2) Atmospheric and ionospheric responses to high-latitude electric fields. 
              Knowledge of the global structure and dynamic behavior of ionospheric electric
              fields is fundamental to understanding processes in the near-Earth space
              environment and in determining the importance of electromagnetic energy input
              to the high-latitude regions of Earth's upper atmosphere.
