Title       : FSML: Upgrading Seawater Filtration Capabilities to Enhance Support of Research
               Using Seawater System Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1999    
File        : a9812209

Award Number: 9812209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Tenore tenore@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. R. Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Haasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven S. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will support the upgrade of the seawater filtration
              capabilities
of the sea water system at the Chesapeake Biological Laboratory
              (CBL)
to provide enhanced support research programs involving culturing
              of
marine organisms.  The controlled experimental research that
              characterizes
much of today's activities at marine laboratories includes
              leading-edge
biochemical/molecular and physiological/bioenergetic research on
              the 
ecology of marine organisms.  The nature of the sea water systems
at
              marine laboratories have evolved from simple supply of, at most,
              
coarse-filtered sea water to holding tanks and aquaria to fairly
              sophisticated 
systems that must provide fine-filtered and
              temperature-regulated sea
water to support the experimental studies underlying
              that research.  
Over the last decade the sea water and laboratory support
              facilities at
CBL in its Truitt Controlled Environmental Laboratory(CEL) have
              been
redesigned, reconfigured, and engineered to provide the
              treatment
components that support experimental needs.  Many of the
              research
programs carried out at CBL in the fields of
              ecology/oceanography,
aquatic toxicology, and environmental
              chemistry/geochemistry depend
on the high quality of temperature-controlled
              and filtered sea water
provided to support the experimental studies of marine
              organisms in
the Truitt Controlled Environment Laboratory.

However, the
              present filtration equipment is inadequate for the larger
demand and more
              stringent quality requirements for filtered sea water
to support the research
              needs currently underway and anticipated growth
in the near future. 
              Maintenance of the present system is also labor intensive.
This project would
              replace the current sand filter system with a membrane-
Based micro-filtration
              system that will double the present volume of filtered
water (from 50 to 100
              gpm) and greatly increase suspended particle removal
(from>5 to 1 micron). 
              The new system will eliminate inadequate especially
during summer months when
              research demand for filtered water is especially
high and the need for
              downtime and labor-intensive and costly media changes
using the present
              pressure sand filter technology.  

