Title       : Improving Reliability Analysis with System Data from Operating Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1998    
File        : a9812868

Award Number: 9812868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Kvam paul.kvam@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812868     
Kvam
     In industries that cannot afford extensive testing
              programs to ensure product reliability and effectiveness, operational data is
              necessary for product reliability assessment. This grant supports the
              development of statistical methods for deducing component reliability while the
              component is working in an operational system. Typical systems considered
              include k-out-of-n systems for which k or more working components are needed to
              maintain the n-component system. Research centers on analyzing data from
              operating systems in nonstandard (i.e., non-laboratory) conditions, including
              (1) censored or truncated data, (2) systems that are repaired imperfectly, (3)
              component groups with known stochastic differences, such as one component
              having higher average reliability than another, and (4) components that have
              known reliability properties, such as a failure rate that is known to increase
              with time or use.  For example, with systems that are repaired imperfectly, a
              maintenance policy that dictates when old systems or components must be
              replaced with newer ones is critical. Naturally, this maintenance policy will
              be greatly affected if the failure rate of the components is known to increase
              with system use.
     A primary application for the statistical methods
              developed from this grant are from the nuclear industry, where components are
              so reliable that component testing leads to few or no failures. In many nuclear
              systems, component redundancy is used to ensure high overall reliability, and
              system operation can sometimes mask individual component data. Censoring,
              imperfect repair, and order restrictions often combine in this environment to
              make inference problems difficult. As another application, producers in the
              software industry risk having their products become obsolete during prolonged
              testing programs, thus data from day to day operation may be necessary to
              augment accelerated life testing and other planned analyses of software
              reliability.






