Title       : Filtration Combustion of Ultra-Rich Methane/Air Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9812905

Award Number: 9812905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Kennedy lkennedy@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexei V. Saveliev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Fridman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Kennedy

This is a study of filtration combustion (FC) of rich and
              ultrarich methane-air mixtures with equivalence ratios between 1 and 4. 
              Particular attention is given to the superadiabatic combustion of ultrarich
              mixtures where the overall process can be characterized as combustion-based
              fuel modification and chemical synthesis. In these experiments, essentially
              one-dimensional FC waves are studied.  Temperature profiles and combustion wave
              velocities as well as chemical composition of the products are determined.  In
              contrast with the ultralean case, which results in complete burnout of the
              hydrocarbon fuel with formation of carbon dioxide and water, in the rich wave
              fuel is only partly oxidized in the filtration wave; consequently, the chemical
              kinetics, heat release, and heat transfer are strongly coupled.  The
              superadiabatic (excess enthalpy) combustion in the ultrarich region has
              potential for such applications as fuel reforming and synthesis.  Preliminary
              studies have shown the viability of ultrarich filtration combustion for
              hydrogen production; significant conversion of methane to hydrogen (up to 70%)
              has been achieved in excess enthalpy porous burners.  The present studies
              include the effect of equivalence ratio on the combustion wave velocity, the
              combustion temperature, and the composition of the combustion products; the
              influences of the filtration velocity and the characteristics (chemical
              composition and pore size) of the ceramic materials on the combustion wave
              structure and products; and the effects of pressure on the ultrarich waves.

