Title       : Stochastic Multi-Objective Location, Inventory and Routing 
Models for
               Perishable Commodities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9812915

Award Number: 9812915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404274             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Daskin daskin@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur P. Hurter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Collette R. Coullard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812915
Daskin
     This research provides funding for the development of a
              new class of facility location models that account for integrated location,
              inventory and vehicle routing decisions with an emphasis on facilities used to
              process perishable commodities.  The models will explicitly recognize the
              uncertainty inherent in future demands and costs as well as the multi-objective
              nature of facility location decisions.  In the face of uncertainty, long-term
              siting decisions must be made.  Shorter-term inventory and routing decisions
              can be modified over time in response to changing conditions.  The models will
              recognize the different time scales of the various decision contexts.  New
              methods of approximating the interactions of inventory and routing costs on
              location decisions will be developed.  Much of the work will be done in a
              scenario-planning context to enable decision-makers to explore a variety of
              future conditions. The models will also allow planners to explore a variety of
              objectives that typically affect facility location decisions including: cost
              minimization, service maximization and equity.
     The research will lead to
              improvements in our ability to account for uncertainty and multiple objectives
              in facility location planning.  In particular, new formulations of facility
              location models that better account for inventory management and vehicle
              routing without the need to explicitly model these tactical and operational
              problems in detail will be developed.  New methods of solving the mathematical
              models will also be developed.  This work will lead to an improved
              understanding of the impacts of the interaction of demand uncertainty,
              inventory management and vehicle routing on facility location decisions.  The
              models will be applicable in a variety of public and private sector facility
              siting contexts including: newspaper printing plants, agricultural and food
              processing facilities, and blood banks.  The models will, if successful, lead
              to reduced costs and improved customer service in these and related
              industries.

