Title       : Investigation of Plasma Deposition and Etching Mechanisms for Silicon-based
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a9812332

Award Number: 9812332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen R. Fisher erfisher@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9162,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award is made to Colorado State University in support of the reseach of
              Prof. Ellen R. Fisher by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry
              Division and the Electronic Materials Program in the Division of Materials
              Research. The focus of the research will be a fundamental study of plasma
              deposition and etching mechanisms for silicon-based materials as measured
              mainly by the imaging of radicals interacting with surfaces (IRIS).  The
              objectives of the research are to (1) understand interactions between radicals
              and surfaces, (2) characterize the energetics of plasma-generated radicals, (3)
              explore the balance between etching and deposition in halogen-based plasmas,
              and (4) develop temporally-resolved experiments for pulsed plasma
              systems.
Work elements include measuring the surface reactivity of plasma
              species during deposition and etching of semiconductor materials, determining
              the velocity distributions of radicals under different plasma conditions as
              well as for radicals scattering from surfaces, examining the effect of
              modulating the  molecular beam source and characterizing the materials
              properties of plasma processed substrates through independent surface analysis.
              Plasma species  studied will be methyl and methylene, alkoxy, hydroxy, halogen,
              hydrosilyl, silyl and halosilyl, all on silicon and silicon dioxide
              substrates.

Plasma deposition and etching processes are widely employed in
              the microelectronics industry for processing silicon-based materials. This
              research will advance the  molecular level understanding of the chemical
              processes which occur on semiconductor surfaces and are likely to find
              applications in gate oxides, passivation layers, dielectrics for integrated
              circuits, solar cells, flat panel displays and photoreceptors. Additionally,
              the highly interdisciplinary nature of  the research will provide students with
              excellent training for careers in the microelectronics industry.




