Title       : Molecular Models for H2-Activating Metalloenzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9812355

Award Number: 9812355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcetta Y. Darensbourg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research on metalloenzymes by Dr. Marcetta Darensbourg   of
              the Chemistry Department, Texas A&M University.  The focus of the  
              investigation is the reaction chemistry of (NiFe)hydrogenase, an enzyme   that
              promotes the formation, fixation, and sensing of dihydrogen.  The   active site
              of the Desulfovibrio gigas hydrogenase is heterobinuclear   (Fe, Ni) and the
              iron center appears to be associated with cyano and   carbonyl groups.  In this
              work, the known organometallic anions   CpFe(CN)2(CO) where Fe = Fe(I), Fe(II)
              will be studied for their ability   to signal electron density changes at Cp
              substitutents caused by   hydrogen-bonding or solvent interaction.  Vibrational
              spectroscopy will   be used to monitor the electron density changes
              accompanying redox and   enzyme activity levels.  In addition, newly designed
              dithiolate ligands   will be used to coordinate nickel complexes to the iron
              unit which may   serve as a structural model for the enzyme.  The hypothesis
              concerning   the catalysis process is that either the iron unit provides
              stabilization   via an electron-withdrawing iron site that mediates charge
              through the   thiolates, thus easing accessibility to catalytically active
              Ni(I); or   the dihydrogen production catalysis involves the Fe(II) site, with
              the   nickel dithiolate serving as a bidentate ligand that is electronically  
              tunable by changes in redox state or ligation.  Hydrogenase enzymes perform
              important biological functions that provide   energy to cells.  These enzymes
              have been found to contain two metals,   iron and nickel, at the active
              reaction site, but how these metals   cooperate in the reaction is unknown.  
              Many past studies have   investigated the role of nickel, but this research
              will elucidate the   role of iron, and of the iron-nickel combination.  The
              results may also   be relevant to the functioning of mixed metal industrial
              catalysts whose   functioning is not well understood.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
