Title       : Covalently Cross-Linked Porous Organic Coordination Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  2000    
File        : a9812351

Award Number: 9812351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Lee sl137@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812351
Lee

The project involves a class of porous organic coordination
              solids, in which pore size and functional surface character can be modified
              without the loss of the porous backbone structure.  These solids are currently
              constructed from branched phenylacetylene nitriles linked together through
              nitrile-noble metal coordination bonds.  The goal of the project is the
              iterative replacement of the nitrile-metal coordination bond with purely
              covalent linkages between the organic moieties.  It is proposed to synthesize
              chemically reactive phenyl acetylene alcohol molecules capable of being
              cross-linked to one another in the porous state through addition of
              cross-linking agents such as diidocyanates and disilyltriflates.  Two parallel
              synthetic strategies will be pursued.  In the first strategy, reactive
              monomeric organic building blocks will be held into the desired porous
              structure through coordination bonding, using templates.  The species will then
              be cross-linked to one another without loss of porous structure.  In the second
              strategy, oligomers will be pre-assembled from the organic building blocks
              prior to cross-linking to form porous covalent solids.  The construction of
              organic solids of desired topology is based on the interplay between molecular
              and crystalline structure.  It is also envisioned to consider another paradigm
              in mapping molecular to crystalline shape.  This paradigm is that of minimal
              surfaces.  The interfacial free energy in a porous solid between its
              crystalline and solvent portions is high and hence adopts minimal surface areas
              subject to constrains caused by the molecular architecture.  This design
              principle will be used to make three-dimensional porous solids of the double
              diamond or gyroid type.  These regions will be accessed by controlling the
              local backbone geometry and by dictating the backbone to channel volume ratios
              through the addition of flexible pendent chains to the initial shape persistent
              molecules.  
% % % 
The robust organic porous solids, with tunable cavity
              sizes, should be capable of withstanding conditions necessary for possible
              applications, among them separation and catalysis. 
***

