Title       : New Materials from Radical Chain Polymerizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9812523

Award Number: 9812523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren T. Ford wtford@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              98 12523
Ford


The proposed research will create three new types of
              polymers having properties valuable for new optical and structural materials. 
              The syntheses and the basic chemical and structural characterization of new
              materials will be carried out by chemistry graduate students who are preparing
              for careers in industry or in college/university teaching.  Most of the optical
              and mechanical properties will be determined in the laboratories of
              collaborating physicists and materialsengineers.  Acrylic polymer composites
              will be prepared containing colloidal spheres of silica or polystyrene ordered
              into crystal lattices with approximate dimensions of the wavelength of visible
              light.  The composites will be narrow band rejection filters of visible and
              near infrared light and as model materials for deeper understanding of how the
              morphology affects the tensile properties.  The PI's will also prepare radical
              chain polymers that incorporate C60, the most abundant Buckminsterfullerene, to
              produce films of C60 derivatives for investigation of the relation of the
              structures to the nonlinear optical properties.  A major goal is to understand
              how the C60 is bonded into the polymer structures.  With that understanding new
              polymers will be synthesized to determine how the optical properties depend on
              the pattern of substitution of the C60 structural units.  Finally, vinyl
              monomers will be polymerized in oil-in-water microemulsions to produce
              nanoparticles consisting of one polymer chain and having molecular weights of
              >106 Da.  
%%%
All of the proposed syntheses utilize readily available
              starting materials and radical chain polymerization, the method most common in
              manufacturing of polymeric materials.  Thus new materials from this research
              having practical optical and mechanical properties should be practical to
              produce for widespread application.  This research will create three new types
              of polymers and test their optical and mechanical properties for potential use
              in optical communication devices and in improved plastics.
***

