Title       : Durability of Fiber Reinforced Polymer Materials in Accelerated and Modeled
               Concrete Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9812745

Award Number: 9812745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Max L. Porter mporter@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1444,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812745
Porter
This project addresses important issues regarding the long-term
              durability and accelerated aging characteritics of Fiber Reinforced Polymer
              (FRP) materials used for the replacement of conventional steel reinforcing in
              structural concrete. These type of materials are excellent candidates to
              replace steel reinforcing bars and prestressing tendons in MRI applications,
              marein environments, and many ofther civilian and military infrastructure uses.
              These materials show great promise because they are non-metallic and therefore
              are believed to be generally free of the corrosive problems to which steel has
              been suseptible. The objectives of the reserch involve additional innovative
              short-term laboratory tests that allow accurate, reliable prediction of
              long-term performance of FRP materials. FRP reinforcing bars constructed using
              long-fiber glass strands embedded in a vinyl ester matrix will be examined.
              This research will examine the fundamental nature of the deterioration and
              damage proceses in FRP materials when exposed to concrete environments and
              moisture absorption desorption cycles which will be used to look at innovative
              ways to model the behaviro of these processes and accurately predict the
              long-term behavior by accelerated aging techniques. Steps involve in studying
              the long-term durability of FRP reinforcement in concrete include
              characterizing the nature of concrete porewater and comparing this added model
              to previously  developed models. The scope of this investigation involves
              studying the effects of FRP reinforcing bars exposed to common environmental
              conditions within concrete. This involves the test and analysis of FRP
              reinforcing bars, including control specimens. The scope includes subjecting
              specimens to stress under assumed aging conditions as well as unstressed
              specimens. Following subjection to the aging process, specimens will be failed
              in tension and flexure to determine the loss in strength due to the
              environmental conditions.


