Title       : Accelerated Life Prediction of Machine Structures Under Fatigue Spectrum Loads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1998  
File        : a9812703

Award Number: 9812703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shing-Chung Max Yen myen@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Craddock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed S. El-Zein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Om Prakash Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1444,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              

9812703
Yen
This project intends to develop a design process for service
              life prediction of machines and structures.  There are three major tasks in
              this study: (a) develop an accelerated characterization theory for the life
              prediction under variable amplitude fatigue loads, (b) use the theory developed
              in (a) to predict the life of a machine through an elaborate computer
              simulation, (c) verify the analytical and computational models with the dynamic
              testing of a machine.  In all cases, the fatigue load spectrum under real-life
              condition will be used.

The accelerated characterization technique to be
              developed in the project is based on the observation that the material
              degradation processes under different fatigue conditions (frequency, stress,
              and temperature) have the same general characteristics but are shifted in time.
               This shift in time allows one to predict the long-term fatigue life using the
              data obtained over shorter time intervals.  Based on the proposed theory, the
              fatigue failure is governed by the accumulation of strain energy density toward
              a critical value.  Such a formulation allows one to address the effects of
              loading sequence or any arbitrary combination of loads on the fatigue life.  In
              order to demonstrate the validity of the proposed life prediction concept that
              links materials to machines, a conceptual ground vehicle (CGV) will be designed
              and built.  The CGV will be made of a chopped-fiber reinforced composite
              material.  The investigation of CGV includes conducting both computational
              simulation and experimental verification of the dynamic response of a vehicle
              under a real-life loading history.  The end result of the computational study
              is to predict the life (through stress and strain data) of the CGV using the
              theory developed here.  In the computational simulation study, the geometrical
              modeling and stress analysis of the CGV will be conducted. This study relies
              upon the convergence check between the real-life loading extracted from the
              experiments and that predicted by the computational model. The experimental
              verification of the dynamic response of machine structures will include the
              design and fabrication of a CGV and a series of structural dynamic tests.  To
              extract the real-life loading data, the CGV will be driven on the actual
              terrain with an on-board data acquisition system. Later, the system response
              data will be translated into the fatigue spectrum load for the laboratory test.
               The results of this project can link material selection/evaluation,
              CAD/CAM/FEA/Simulation, and durability/failure analyses into a life cycle
              design synthesis. 


