Title       : Accelerated Testing for Concrete Reinforcing Bar Corrosion Protection Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9812716

Award Number: 9812716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Darwin daved@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl E. Locke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Trung V. Nguyen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1444,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the current study is to develope a detailed correlation between
              accelerated laboratory test and field performance for a broad range of
              corrosion protection systems. The study, carried out in partnership wiith the
              Kansas Department of Transportation and the manufactures of corrosion
              protection systems, takes advantage of ongoing state and university surveys in
              northeast Kansas evaluating the performance of bridge decks. The study includes
              the evaluation and modification of laboratory test procedures to establish
              those that provide the best match with the corrosion behavior of reinforced
              concrete bridge decks subjected to normal and accelerated exposure. The
              corrosion evaluation techniques address the protection provided by epoxy-coated
              bars, correction inhibiting admixtures, corrosion-resistant steel, the effects
              of different deicers, and modifications in concrete mix proportions. The field
              test platforms are subjected to corrosion environments matching those of the
              bridge and to aggressive corrosion environments matching those obtained in the
              labortory. Direct correlation of corrosion performance will allow more
              effective and rational evaluation techniques to be instituted. The final result
              will be more efficient selection procedures, more rapid movement of corrosion
              technology into practice, the extension of structure service life, and the
              overall reduction in the repair and rehabilitation cost associated with
              chloride induced corrosion in reinforced concrete structures.
