Title       : Dissertation Research: A Regional Analysis of Early Woodland Cultural
               Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9812751

Award Number: 9812751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9657               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Cobb ccobb@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Cobb, Mr. Sean Raffertry will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. His goal is to study a large and regionally
              diverse sample of smoking pipes excavated from Eastern and Midwestern US
              archaeological sites dated to the Early Woodland Period (1,000 BC - 0 AD). In
              North America, this period marks the transition from hunting and gathering mode
              of subsistence to the adoption of agriculture and a more sedentary way of life.
              Burial practices were elaborated and items indicative of status such as
              elaborately carved stone sculptures are also present. Their distribution over a
              wide area suggests the presence of shared ritual and ideology. Tubular smoking
              pipes are often found on sites dating to the Early Woodland and despite their
              common occurrence often in ritual contexts (such as burials) there has been
              little synthetic research. With National science support Mr. Rafferty will
              undertake such an analysis. He will travel to museums which contain specimens
              and conduct a detailed stylistic study. On this basis it will be possible to
              estimate the extent of sub-regional variation which exists. He will extract
              residue from pipes' interiors and subject this to chemical examination to
              determine whether nicotine, indicative of tobacco, is present. This regional
              study will be supplemented by a local scale analysis to examine whether pipes
              occur in regular association with other types of burial goods and whether
              (based on skeletal examination) they tend to occur with individuals of
              particular age or gender. On this basis it will be possible to gain insight
              into the degree and nature of ritual use and how this varied over space.  In
              later North American prehistory it is clear that regional archaeological
              traditions were often integrated into larger areal commonalties. The
              Mississippian tradition, for example, extended from the Gulf Coast to the
              northern US and local groups were linked through trade and shared ideology.
              Archaeologists wish to know how far this pattern extends back in time and what
              conditions led to its rise. Mr. Rafferty hypothesizes that because of the
              distribution of pipes, its roots may be found in the Early Woodland period as
              early as 2,000 years ago. This hypothesis will be significantly strengthened if
              he can show the pipes represent more than objects per se, but rather are
              associated with shared ritual behavior.  Although smoking pipes have been
              excavated in many sites and described, no synthetic studies using a consistent
              set of analytic criteria have been conducted. Mr. Rafferty's research is
              original and the data he collects will be widely utilized. The project will
              also assist in training a promising young scientist.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
