Title       : Cooperation, Corporate Culture, and Industry Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9812681

Award Number: 9812681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafael Rob rrob@econ.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9812681  Rob    This proposal looks at human relations in the workplace,
              and how they affect the performance of firms. The general objective is to
              incorporate the psychology of interactions among workers into formal
              (principal-agent type) models of the firm, analyze firm compensation policies
              when this element is present, and determine how these policies are played out
              in a market equilibrium context. More specifically, the following issues will
              be addressed.  1. Is "corporate culture" an asset of the firm which gives it
              excess profit? Why is this asset not imitable? How should management nurture a
              firm's culture?  2. Why different firms - even in the same industry and with
              the same opportunities - use different compensation packages for their
              employees? Some pay employees on the basis of their observed output, others pay
              a flat wage.       3. Why a given firm changes its compensation package over
              time?  4. How does the firm choose a mix of individual vs. cooperative
              activities and how does it direct its workers towards this mix? In particular,
              if too much activity is taking place in teams how should the firm direct
              employees towards individual activities?       5. How does cooperation
              propagate through the firm?       6. What is the role of outside hires vs.
              internal promotions?  7. When should a firm adopt a strategy of fast growth -
              "go for market share" -vs. slow but durable growth - " build to last." Why do
              firms with the same opportunities adopt different strategies..       8. Why
              market leaders stumble and why might that be rational.    To address these
              issues the project employs the hypothesis that employees tend to reciprocate
              the behavior of their colleagues. If their colleagues help them execute their
              duties, they will feel compelled to do likewise. On the other hand, if they
              encounter unfriendly or hostile behavior they will feel no obligation to help
              others.  The method of analysis is to set up formal models of the firm which
              inludes two elements: (1) The compensation policy o f the firm; and (2) The
              reciprocity hypothesis, as stated above. The interplay between the two will
              determine how a firm's "corporate culture" evolves and how profitability
              differences among firms come about.   The potential impact of the project is to
              incorporate elements of "organizational psychology" into analytical models of
              the firm-a largely neglected element in the economic theory of the firm. Then
              we will study the effect that it has on workers' motivation, on the performance
              of firm, and on cross sectional comparisons across firms .
