Title       : FSML: Research Improvements to El Verde Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9812391

Award Number: 9812391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elvia J. Melendez-Ackerman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jess K. Zimmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The El Verde Field Station has been a vital location for  research and training
              in the only neotropical rain forest  under the jurisdiction of the United
              States.  The field  station is located in the Caribbean National Forest,  which
              is an Experimental Forest, a Biosphere Reserve, a  research site for the
              University of Puerto Rico Center  for Research Excellence in Science and
              Technology, and  the site of the Luquillo LongTerm Ecological Research 
              Program.  For more than 30 years, the field station has  been the focus of
              projects by scientists from more than  50 institutions in the United States and
              other countries.  Current research projects are funded by the National  Science
              Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space  Administration, and the  USDA
              Forest Service.    Research facilities at the El Verde Field Station date to 
              the 1930s and their current size restricts ongoing  research activities.  One
              weakness of the Station is the  lack of experimental plant growth and stream
              facilities.  Such facilities would allow plant and animal experiments  under
              controlled conditions.  Previous attempts to  germinate or grow high elevation
              plant species from the  EL Verde Area at low elevation facilities in San Juan 
              have shown that plants become physiologically stressed  (i.e. stunted growth as
              a result of extreme temperatures  and humidity).  Similarly, the amount of
              detail and  control needed to study the ecology and behavior of  aquatic
              organisms of the area is severely limited by the  lack of experimental streams.
               Another important  limitation to research as well as administrative work at 
              El Verde is the lack of a reliable power plant to deal  with recurrent
              electrical power failures.    This project will enact the third of five phases 
              described in the Master Plan for the Development of  Facilities Operated by the
              University of Puerto Rico in  the Luquillo Experimental Forest.
