Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics and Pattern Formation in Physics and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a9812526

Award Number: 9812526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Goldstein gold@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John O. Kessler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812526  Goldstein    This award supports research on nonlinear dynamics and 
              pattern formation in physical and biological systems.  Theoretical research
              well connected with experiment will  focus on the areas of cell growth and
              motion, and on an  alternative explanation of the Rayleigh instability in fluid
               mechanics.  Work in the first area focuses on understanding  the physical
              mechanisms of cell growth in the bacterium B.  subtilis and on the mechanism of
              directed swimming in  peritrichously flagellated bacterial cells.  The proposed
               work would elucidate the physical processes that lead to the  formation of the
              supercoiled  structure of B. subtilis that  results when cell separation fails
              to occur after cell  division, and related physical biology associated with 
              moving filamentary structures. Work in the second area seeks  to elucidate the
              mechanism for directed swimming that  results when co-rotating helical flagella
              bundle together.  Inquiry will focus on the hydrodynamic interactions that 
              occur when this happens and on collective behavior recently  observed in
              suspensions of swimming microorganisms.  The PI  seeks a description that melds
              the areas of elasticity and  hydrodynamics at low Reynolds number to elucidate
              the  physical mechanisms by which microorganisms swim. Recent  experiments on
              shape instabilities of membrane vesicles  induced by optical traps that have
              shown that front  propagation may occur in such tension driven instabilities. 
              Motivated by these experiments, the PI will study the  circumstances under
              which an analogous `propagating  topological transition' might occur in viscous
              two-phase  flow.  Of particular interest are convective instabilities  of jets
              and plumes, buckling phenomena in jets, and the role  of viscoelasticity and
              shear.  %%%  This talented PI will carry out theoretical research in  areas at
              the interface between physics and biology.  The  physical mechanisms by which
              microorganisms swim and a  better understanding of kinds of fluid flow peculiar
              t o  biological systems are a major focus of the research.  ***
