Title       : Experimental Economics Laboratory Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9812055

Award Number: 9812055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason M. Shachat jshachat@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Jason Shachat and Vincent
              Crawford will establish an experimental economics laboratory at the University
              of California, San Diego. At the core of the system 16 Pentium 233 MHZ
              workstations with 128 MB RAM will be linked and placed in a single room,
              configured to ensure sufficient physical isolation of each subject. The
              laboratory will achieve two objectives: 1. provide the necessary facilities for
              faculty and students to conduct research in experimental economics; 2. allow
              the incorporation of experimental economics techniques into undergraduate and
              graduate classroom instruction.   In recent years, economists have adopted
              experimental approaches to gain insight into human decision making behavior.
              Subjects participate in carefully designed decision making exercises and
              receive monetary or other rewards in proportion to the quality of the resulting
              outcomes. The experiments tend to focus on studying the performance of real
              world trading institutions and the effects of different incentive schemes on
              individual behavior. One major line of research to be pursued involves
              institutional performance in exchange economies with multiple equilibria,
              globally instable equilibrium and severe wealth effects and this is a current
              focus of Dr. Shachat's work. Dr. Crawford will conduct a series of experiments
              designed to examine the relationship between cognition and behavior in
              strategic environments. This research will address questions about strategic
              behavior and the extent to which it reflects players' analyses of their
              environment as a game, taking the structure and other players' incentives into
              account.  The University of California at San Diego currently lacks an
              experimental economics laboratory and the new facility will be widely used. In
              addition to research, it will serve as a teaching device for both undergraduate
              and graduate classes. Laboratory exercises which directly involve students in
              economic experiments provide practical demonstrations of economic principles
              and stimulate interest in the subject. Thus the infrastructural impact of the
              laboratory will be significant.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
