Title       : SGER: The Development of Early Word Comprehension: A Partial Knowledge
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9812617

Award Number: 9812617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25656              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendelyn J. Shore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peg H. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project concerns babies' comprehension of words, exploring how partial
              knowledge of a word's meaning affects comprehension, and how context is used in
              comprehension for words at different levels of knowledge.   For known,
              partially known, and unknown target words (e.g., shoe) infants will be shown
              pictures of the referent in appropriate or inappropriate contexts (e.g., a shoe
              on a foot or in a bird's nest).  The pictures of target objects will be
              presented with pictures of other objects from the same level of word knowledge.
               For each pair of pictures, the baby will hear the target word (e.g., `Do you
              see the shoe?), and looking time for the target and non-target pictures will be
              measured.   Babies should look at the objects labeled by known, partially
              known, and unknown words differently depending upon the type of context that is
              present.  That is, babies may be able to make use of an appropriate context to
              aid their comprehension even when the target word is only partially known. 
              However, when objects are presented in an inappropriate context, it is less
              likely that infants will be able to use the context to access knowledge about
              the partially known word.   Even very early word comprehension in infants may
              be affected by the appropriateness of the context in which a label is
              presented.  In addition, the utility of the presented context may depend upon
              an infant's level of knowledge about the word in question.  By investigating
              these possibilities, we will be one step closer to understanding how humans
              process language and the context in which it occurs.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
