Title       : Collaborative Research: Outbursts from an Ice-Dammed Lake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9812944

Award Number: 9812944
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15742              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Walder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Sur-Menlo Park
	      
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative study which includes Portland State University, the U.S.
              Geological Survey, and University of California, Santa Cruz.  Outburst floods,
              or jokulhlaups, occur when ice-dammed water bodies drain suddenly. These floods
              can have devastating downstream effects.  They can dramatically reshape stream
              channels and can be a hazard to human settlements.  The mechanisms (timing,
              size, and geomorphic effect of outburst floods) by which impounded water is
              stored and released have been poorly studied because outburst floods are
              unpredictable.  What is known comes primarily from observations in Iceland
              where subglacial and ice marginal lakes drain periodically.  Elsewhere,
              observations have been serendipitous or after the fact.  The Principal
              Investigators will investigate a site with predictable, annual outbursts on the
              Kennicott Glacier in Wrangell-St. Elias National Park, Alaska.  The drainage of
              ice-marginal Hidden Creek Lake endangers nearby residents and visitors to the
              National Park.

The Principal Investigators will examine outburst flood
              triggering to begin testing and refining existing theoretical models.  Their
              hypothesis is that the ice dam does not form a "tight" hydraulic seal that is
              abruptly broken by flotation.  Instead, as the lake level rises, it initially
              becomes connected to a distributed basal drainage system resulting in a slow,
              stable leak.  The lake level eventually rises enough that hydraulic connection
              is established with an arborescent channel network away from the edge of the
              glacier.  The lake then drains rapidly, and may be related to seasonal
              development of a conduit system or to the termination state of a glacier
              surge.
There are four main components to the field work: 1) to measure ice-dam
              deformation as the lake fills and empties and characterize how the ice dam
              behaves mechanically; 2) to measure lake level as a function of time, determine
              lake hypsometry, and measure the lake's thermal structure. These data will
              constitute fundamental boundary conditions to constrain models of the outburst
              floods; 3) to examine the hydraulic integrity of the ice dam and temporal
              changes in the subglacial drainage system using boreholes; and 4) to monitor
              the flood and changes in channel morphology in the outlet river near the
              glacier terminus.  They will use ground penetrating radar to survey the stream
              bed which will rapidly give detailed cross sections and will be used to
              calibrate discharge and to document channel changes during the flood.  This
              study should provide a better understanding of outburst floods and improve
              prediction methods.  The results will provide insight into glaciological
              processes such as seasonal drainage system evolution, surge termination, and
              the link between basal hydrology and glacier dynamics.




