Title       : Regional Faculty Workshops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a9812888

Award Number: 9812888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $711822             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Peterson gpeterson@abet.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Dayne Aldridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Accred Bd Eng & Tech/ABET
	      111 Market Place Suite 1050
	      Baltimore, MD  212024012    /   -

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              98-12888  Peterson    Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology -
              Regional Faculty Workshops    The Accreditation Board for Engineering and
              Technology, Inc. (ABET) will conduct a series of regional, hands-on,
              engineering faculty workshops to facilitate educational innovation and adoption
              of new educational paradigms by giving faculty the confidence to try
              large-scale curricular innovations with the knowledge that well-designed
              program experimentation will not risk loss of ABET accreditation.    The Action
              Agenda describes the need for a new engineering education paradigm whereby
              students will acquire characteristics, in addition to technical skills, such as
              communication skills, ability to work on teams, and an understanding of the
              impact of engineering solutions in a broad societal, environmental, economic,
              and ethical context.  The problem is how to stimulate and implement innovation
              in curriculum  and instructional delivery and outcomes.  In the past, there has
              been reluctance to implement large-scale reforms due to the perceived risk to
              the accreditation status of the program.    ABET found during the pilot-study
              for the implementation of Engineering Criteria 2000 that engineering programs
              will not take substantial steps towards a new educational paradigm as described
              in the Action Agenda until they are confident that their programs can
              successfully meet the requirements of EC2000.    The expected results of the
              workshops are that faculty will acquire the confidence and skill to develop
              objectives, an assessment plan, and a feedback mechanism to meet the
              requirements of EC2000.  From this, they will be able to implement curricular
              and instructional reform as well as assess the success of those reforms.  ABET
              will develop case studies to assist the institutions and provide training
              materials for ABET program evaluators.  From these workshops, an network of
              faculty will be developed, assisting in the exchange of information on best
              practices in assessment and innovation.  The faculty  will also have an
              opportunity to strengthen ties with industry and determine ways to gather
              information on the changing needs of the employers of engineering graduates.
