Title       : FSML: A New Generation of Integrated Fire Research Equipment for Archbold
               Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9812423

Award Number: 9812423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilary M. Swain hswain@archbold-station.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin N. Main  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Menges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Archbold Biological Statn
	      P.O.Box 2057
	      Lake Placid, FL  338522057    813/465-2571

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This facilities improvement project will support a new  generation of more
              up-to-date general use fire equipment  for Archbold Biological Station.
              Archbold supports  research and education by providing access to study areas 
              and organisms on its 2,000 ha globally significant  scrub preserve, one of the
              most distinctive regions in  the U.S.  This remnant xeric ecosystem lies  on a
              narrow, north-south ridge of relict, sandy dunes  running down the center of
              the Florida peninsula.  It is characterized by endemic shrubby scrubs, with 
              adaptations to droughty, nutrient-poor sandy soils. Fire  is the dominant
              ecosystem process in scrub, with extremely  high intensity, patchy, variable
              fire behavior.  Archbold  provides experimental manipulation, through large and
               small-scale prescribed fire, to test hypotheses about  ecological responses to
              fire.  The prescribed fire program  has made Archbold one of the most exciting
              and productive  field stations for studying fire ecology.  The entire  scrub
              ecosystem at Archbold is fire-dependent, and  virtually all research relies on
              an active and effective  prescribed fire program.  Prescribed grassland fires
              at  the MacArthur Agro-ecology Research Center, a major  division of Archbold
              at a 4,200 ha cattle ranch, are  Archbold established in 1941, is a
              not-for-profit  independent research facility in central Florida,  dedicated to
              long-term ecological research.  Staff,  visiting investigators, and students
              conduct research  primarily focused on the organisms and environments of the 
              Lake Wales Ridge and adjacent central Florida.  Areas of  research strength
              include ecology and conservation  biology, in particular long-term processes. 
              A major  emphasis is the relationship between species and fire as  an ecosystem
              process.
