Title       : Efficient Process Adjustment for Quality Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9812839

Award Number: 9812839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298960             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Box gebox@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812839
Box
     This grant provides funding to develop statistical methods
              for improved quality control in the manufacture of parts.  Such methods are of
              special importance, for example, in the automotive and electronics industries. 
              The research concerns the appropriate development of feed-forward and feedback
              adjustment methods to supplement presently used monitoring techniques and to
              further minimize product variation.  The new techniques will take into account
              the costs of making process changes and of the costs of necessary delays that
              can occur in getting the appropriate data.  The methods will also be designed
              to work well even when departures from the underlying assumptions occur.  Other
              research is planned on surveillance of systems. New methods will be designed
              that can quickly determine the occurrence of process malfunctions while
              minimizing the occurrence of false alarms that can be used while the process is
              being systematically adjusted.  These methods are being tested in cooperation
              with the Low Emission Partnership (LEP) of General Motors, Chrysler and The
              Ford Motor Company.  
     Appropriate process adjustment techniques can
              produce maximum process capability at minimum cost so that an existing
              industrial process can most closely approach its potential to manufacture items
              that meet the stringent specifications needed for present day competitiveness.
              The work on process surveillance can greatly extend and illuminate applications
              of process monitoring.  In the past industrial quality control has been
              discussed almost exclusively in terms of process monitoring using Shewhart and
              quality control charts.  This is evidenced by the content of the dozens of
              published books and of many of the courses taught in industries and
              universities.  This research will put into the hands of a very wide community
              appropriately tailored systems of feed-forward and feedback control and of
              system surveillance at an accessible level and will augment the techniques
              already in use.

