Title       : A Workshop for Tsunami Research Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9812276

Award Number: 9812276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41953              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Liu pll3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9812276  Philip Liu, Cornell U.    This action is to support a workshop in
              Baltimore, MD, 8-9 May  1998, to  discuss the needs in tsunami coastal
              engineering within the  proposed  National Network for High Performance Seismic
              Simulation (NHPS).  While the  focus is on the needs within coastal
              engineering, the interface  with  facilities for structural and geotechnical
              engineering seismic  simulation  will be considered.  The proposed NHPS
              responds to the need, expressed via a series of  workshops extending over a
              period of twenty years, to obtain  experimental  data on the behavior of
              engineering materials, soils, and  constructed  facilities exposed to
              earthquake strong-ground shaking and/or the  related  runup of a tsunami.
              Integral to the NHPS is the concept of  connecting the  experimental facilities
              via a modern high-performance computer and  communication network in order to
              enhance the capabilities of the  individual facilities through synergism, and
              to provide remote  access by  off-site users.  It is planned to extend the
              network to include  key  experimental facilities around the world.  The tsunami
              research community is considering the upgrade of two  existing  research
              facilities: a large three-dimensional facility with a  directional  wave
              generator, and a two-dimensional wave tank. Each facility  would be  used both
              for numerical-experimental comparisons and for  experiments for  which current
              theoretical-numeral approaches are not possible. The  objective of this
              workshop is to discuss challenging research  topics to be  addressed, and the
              specific experimental facilities needed to  perform the  associated
              experiments.  It is expected that the deliberations of this workshop will: (1) 
              contribute to a clearer definition of the experimental facilities  to be 
              included within the NHPS, and the experiments that can be  undertaken using 
              these facilities; and (2) begin a discussion of important culture  changes 
              associated with the NHPS resulting from remote access  capabilities, the  
              rapid dissemination of results, and the need to give appropriate  authorship 
              credit for the rapid publication of experimental results.
