Title       : Positron Annihilation Induced Auger Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a9812628

Award Number: 9812628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander H. Weiss weiss@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812628
Weiss

In this project the PI wishes to capitalize on his invention
              of the technique of Photoinduced Auger Electron Spectroscopy (PAES) by
              extending it to incorporate three novel experimental aspects.  Compared to
              conventional Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES) the PAES method probes the top
              most atomic layers of materials non-destructively and selectively.  The PAES
              spectra that are produced are also free from the large secondary electron
              background that complicates conventional Auger spectroscopy.  The PAES method
              has proven to be a major advance in the filed of Auger spectroscopy and is now
              being introduced in many laboratories.  In the proposed work the PI will not
              only continue the investigations already underway but also attack the problems
              of the growth and stability of ultra thin films of metals and semiconductors on
              semiconductor substrates, of the elemental composition of the top layer in
              model multi-component heterogeneous catalysts, and of surface segregation to
              the top layer in NiAl alloys.  Major new applications of PAES will be directed
              to the studies of defects in semiconductors and to fundamental studies of
              positron annihilation with core electrons, with specific attention  given to
              the identification of charged defects and vacancy impurity complexes in GaAs,
              InP, Si, and CdTe. Additionally, the PI proposes to use PAES-annihilation-gamma
               coincidence experiments to measure, for the first time, the Doppler broadened
              annihilation gamma spectra associated with an individual core level. The
              experimental facilities will be upgraded through the completion of a highly
              efficient time-of-flight PAES spectrometer and the development of highly
              efficient field assisted positron moderators.  These, and other activities,
              will be carried out with graduate students and post doctoral research
              associates who will thereby receive training in an area of experimental physics
              that is of great importance to industrial technology in the 21st
              Century.
%%%
In this project the principal investigator will extend the
              application of his invention of a new technique for studying the properties of
              solid materials and ultra thin films deposited on them.  This technique, called
              Photoinduced Auger Electron Spectroscopy, has major advantages over the
              conventionally used Auger Electron Spectroscopy and is now introduced in many
              laboratories in the USA as well as in other countries.  The present proposal
              presents a rich and varied research program, including the extension of the
              technique through the construction of ancillary apparatus.  Graduate students
              and post doctoral research associates will receive excellent training in an
              area of experimental physics that is of importance to the industrial technology
              of the 21st Century.  
***

