Title       : Electronic Information Literacy for Educational Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9812358

Award Number: 9812358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jamie Callan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This research project is carried out in a collaboration with David Raker,
              Education Department at Westfield State College and Rachel Lewellen, W.E.B. Du
              Bois Library at the University of Massachusetts. The goal of this research is
              to improve the abilities of K-12 students to find, evaluate, and organize
              information available on the Internet. These skills comprise a significant
              subset of the Information Literacy skills that Library Science teaches. These
              skills might have been optional when libraries, with their carefully selected
              materials, were the primary source of educational material. When the
              information source is disorganized and uncensored, as is the Internet, these
              skills are essential to a well-informed populace. The approach consists of
              building a Web search interface in which Information Literacy skills are
              matched to Information Retrieval (IR) tools in a way that teaches skills while
              helping students locate information on the Internet. Improved queries are
              created from the student's information need, supporting information from the
              surrounding educational environment, and query expansion from
              educationally-focused databases. Information filtering techniques identify, and
              if desired eliminate, retrieved information at the wrong grade-level or
              containing inappropriate content. Analysis of results is supported by
              extracting best document passages, frequent concepts, and proper names. Result
              sets are organized by clustering similar documents. Content evaluation is
              supported by citation analysis, and additional searches for supporting
              information. The results of the research will be tools and techniques to train
              a generation of students to find the information they need, quickly and
              reliably, in a disorganized and noisy medium. These skills are essential in a
              society based on free speech and many communication channels. The results will
              be disseminated through scholarly publications, through the Internet, and
              through industrial collaborations.
              
http://ciir.cs.umass.edu/research/IIS-9812358      

