Title       : Dissertation Research: The Social Organization of Early Copper Age Communities
               in the Koros Region of the Great Hungarian Plain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9812677

Award Number: 9812677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. O'Shea Oshea@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. John O'Shea, Mr. William Parkinson will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will survey  the Koros River valley system in
              the Great Plain of Hungry to plot the distribution of Early Copper Age (ECA)
              sites and will also analyze material excavated from the settlement of
              Vesto-Magor which dates to the same period. Although substantial information is
              available for the preceding Late Neolithic period in this region, surprisingly
              little is known about ECA settlement patterns. Vesto-Magor is one of the few
              sites from this interval which has been carefully excavated and much of the
              material is slated for reburial in the near future. Mr.Parkinson will conduct a
              detailed analysis of the abundant ceramic remains. Because pottery style
              changes relatively rapidly over time, study of this chronological marker will
              allow sherds recovered from surface contexts to be dated through ceramic
              comparison. Vesto-Magor contains house remains and through examination of such
              data it will be possible to reconstruct family and site size as well as social
              organization. Mr. Parkinson will also systematically survey the region to
              locate other ECA sites and collect surface materials. He will note site size
              and plot location and with this information it should be possible to
              reconstruct settlement pattern.  The transition from the Late Neolithic (ca.
              5,000-4,500 BC) to ECA (ca. 4,500-4,000) on the Great Hungarian Plain is marked
              by dramatic changes in the archaeological record - changes in the spatial scale
              of cultural groups, house form, settlement type, settlement location, trade
              networks and mortuary practices. These changes in material culture suggest that
              the population underwent a radical social transformation about 4,500 BC. This
              transformation affected not only inter-group relationships, as indicated by
              changes in trade-networks and settlement organization, but also intra-group
              relationships, as indicated by changes in house form and mortuary customs. In
              neither the Late Neolithic nor ECA is there strong evidence for
              institutionalized social ranking, suggesting that the social groups in question
              were structured according to some sort of tribal or autonomous village
              organization. Therefore the social transformation must be understood in terms
              of the wide range of variability that occurs within tribal forms of social
              organization. This is a significant fact and it poses a challenge to
              traditional modes of anthropological thought. Most often archaeologists view
              the transition from Neolithic to Copper age in terms of the development of
              social complexity and the emergence of a hierarchical form of social
              organization. The Hungarian data indicates that change during this period can
              be more complex and not attributable to this single factor. An excellent case
              study is thus provided to search for other causes of change.  This research is
              significant because it will allow the recording and analysis of important
              archaeological materials which will soon be lost to scientific study. It
              addresses an interesting theoretical question and will assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
