Title       : Fast Decision Support Queries in Main-Memory: Algorithms, Optimization and
               Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9812014

Award Number: 9812014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Ross kar@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An organization may place its data into a centralized database from which
              complex decision-support queries can be made. These queries typically need to
              process and combine large amounts of data very efficiently. Answers to these
              queries can be very valuable in the application domain, enabling informed
              changes to organizational behavior. New techniques for evaluating and
              optimizing general decision-support queries are being developed in the context
              of a main-memory database. It is becoming possible to store gigabytes of data
              in RAM. Thus one begins to ask whether decision support query processing could
              obtain the performance benefits of having data reside in main memory. The
              approach taken is to study the performance issues associated with processing
              complex queries in main memory. By designing and using algorithms, access
              structures, and data representations tailored to main-memory databases, we can
              avoid much of the overhead that is apparent in a disk-based system even when
              the data set fits in main-memory. By allowing updates only in an off-line batch
              window, one gains the flexibility to organize the data in a way that is tuned
              for fast query response. A prototype system is being implemented to demonstrate
              the benefits of the proposed techniques, measured in terms of query response
              times. The system has a Web interface. The prototype will be evaluated using
              medical data from the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center. The novel
              techniques developed in the course of this project will have broad use in
              applications that process complex queries over datasets that can fit in main
              memory. 
http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~kar

