Title       : FSML: Database Management and Connectivity for Three Tropical Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9812349

Award Number: 9812349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Hartshorn ghartsho@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The most valuable product of field stations is the  information generated on
              site.  Modern data management and  communications technology allows the
              accumulated knowledge  garnered from years of research at a particular site to
              be  preserved and made easily accessible to scientists,  students,
              policy-makers, and the public on site or anywhere  else.  Information obtained
              at great cost (e.g., research  datasets, site descriptions and history, and
              programmatic  experience) should be available for more complete use.  Yet  this
              vision is not easily realized.  A principal obstacle to  modernizing data
              management at field stations has been the  absence of a consensus on metadata
              standards, retrieval  methodology, and appropriate operational procedures. 
              Recent  work led by the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) has  generated
              a common approach to these issues for Neotropical  field stations.    OTS will
              implement a model program to develop on-line  accessibility to the data
              resources of its three biological  stations in Costa Rica--Las Cruces, and Palo
              Verde.  This  requires moving to minimum functional standards for power 
              supply, communication links, servers, local area networks,  work station
              conformation, back-up units, and relevant  software, as well as for training,
              operational procedures,  and rescue of key datasets.  The new data
              documentation  standards, on-line search software, and operational  protocols
              are currently being tested at La Selva.  OTS will  expand implementation to the
              rest of La Selva as well as to  Palo Verde and Las Cruces, eventually impacting
              over 300  research projects, 120 field courses, and 5,000 scientists  and
              students who use the stations each year, not to mention  those who access the
              system from outside.  This will entail  not only training programs aimed at
              staff and users alike,  but also efforts to capture information being produced 
              currently and older databases identified as particularly  valuable. These sites
              will be used to train data managers  from oth er tropical field stations so as
              to foster expansion  of the ILTER network and enhance interaction with its 
              collaborators in several countries.
