Title       : Fast Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Electromagnetic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9812895

Award Number: 9812895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor A. Tsukerman itsukerman@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9812895
Tsukerman
Finite Element (FE) analysis is very widely used for
              computer simulation of electromagnetic fields in various engineering
              applications. Although significant progress has been achieved over the last two
              decades, considerable computational difficulties remain.  Very fine FE meshes,
              with hundreds of thousands of elements or more, are often needed to achieve a
              desirable accuracy, and the computational time may be prohibitively high.

In
              the proposed project, a qualitative advancement in electromagnetic FE analysis
              will be achieved by applying adaptive finite element methods with multilevel
              preconditioners to a variety of electromagnetic problems in micromagnetics and
              geophysics. Fast adaptive methods will lead to a drastic increase in the speed
              and accuracy of electromagnetic field computation. The project is
              interdisciplinary in its nature and is intended to bridge the gap between
              state-of-the-art computational methods and electromagnetic
              applications.

Preconditioned Hierarchical Basis Multigrid methods will be
              applied to magnetic recording problems, in particular to multiparticle systems
              (magnetic tapes, thin film media) and to magnetic recording heads.
              Magnetostatic ("demagnetizing") fields as well as dynamic processes described
              by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation will be modeled. Multilevel
              Preconditioners will also be applied to static and eddy current problems in
              geophysics.

Adaptive mesh refinement will be systematically implemented in
              several application areas.  In micromagnetics, it will provide a way to trace
              the domain wall motion. In geophysical applications, for which very large
              computational domains are typical, adaptive mesh refinement should lead to a
              reasonable accuracy on meshes of manageable size.

Mesh refinement strategies
              for tetrahedral elements and other types of elements will be evaluated on the
              basis of precise a priori characterization of element shapes proposed by the
              applicant: the general maximum eigenvalue criterion and, for first order
              tetrahedral elements, the minimum singular value condition for the element
              'edge shape matrix'.

Two graduate students are to be involved in the
              proposed project. An obvious benefit to these students will be their exposure
              to modern computational methods, electromagnetic field analysis and various
              practical applications.

Several companies have already expressed significant
              interest in the applicant's research. Industrial collaboration with companies
              in magnetic recording industry, oil exploration services and finite element
              software is very likely to develop in the course of the proposed project.

It
              is felt that the results of this project would be of both theoretical and
              practical significance: they would facilitate fast three-dimensional field
              analysis of magnetic recording media and heads, galvanic and induction logging
              in geophysics, and will have important implications for nondestructive testing,
              optimization, and in other areas.
***

