Title       : The Yield Strength Anomaly in B2 Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a9812211

Award Number: 9812211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Baker ian.baker@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812211  Baker    The aim of this research is to explore whether the vacancy- 
              hardening model that explains the yield strength anomaly in  FeAl is applicable
              to other B2 compounds that show a similar  temperature dependence of yield
              strength.  The model is  general and could be applicable to a wide variety of
              crystal  structures, which show a yield anomaly.  The research  involves single
              crystal growth, mechanical testing and  slipline analysis, and transmission
              electron microscopy  (TEM) of single crystals of CoTi, CoHf and CoZr. 
              Measurements of vacancy concentrations are made for  different annealing
              temperatures using the Simmons/Balluffi  method, whereby the density measured
              by dilatometry is  compared to that measured by x-rays.  The activation 
              enthalpies for both vacancy formation and vacancy migration  are determined and
              compared with values obtained from the  vacancy-hardening model.  In order to
              determine the  dislocation/vacancy interactions associated with the yield 
              strength anomaly, TEM in-situ straining experiments are  performed both as a
              function of temperature and on crystals  containing different quenched-in
              vacancy concentrations.  Mechanical testing includes determination of the 
              tension/compression asymmetry of the yield stress as a  function of temperature
              in single crystals of different  orientations.  The compression tests are
              performed in a wide  range of strain rates with the very high strain rate tests
               being performed at Los Alamos National Laboratory.  Specialized mechanical
              tests using a Gleeble test machine,  which allows very rapid heating and
              quenching, are performed  at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  This apparatus
              enables  yield strength measurement to be performed at the yield  strength peak
              temperature with different vacancy  concentrations present.  TEM examination of
              slip-plane-  sectioned specimens rapidly-cooled after testing in the  Gleeble
              allows dislocation structures truly representative  of high temperature testing
              to be examined.  %%%  Intermeta llic alloys exhibit unique mechanical
              properties  that could enable their use in high temperature structural 
              applications.  This research should advance understanding of  the mechanical
              behavior of this important class of metal  alloys.
