Title       : Dissertation Research: Analysis of Prehistoric Southwestern Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9812260

Award Number: 9812260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Charles Adams ecadams@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. E. Charles Adams, Mr. Patrick Lyons will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct a ceramic analysis to
              reconstruct late prehistoric social organization in the Winslow, Arizona region
              and to determine points of origin of its inhabitants. Archaeologists have
              focused attention in the Winslow area because of the large number of ancestral
              Hopi villages present, their size, and the relative suddenness with which they
              appeared. Between 1,260 and 1,280 AD, after a 45 to 80 year hiatus, the region
              was apparently colonized by two populations, each building its own villages and
              bearing its own ceramic tradition. After initial contact, interaction seems to
              have increased, based on the presence of shared ceramic wares. Because a
              relatively high population density was achieved in this unpredictable desertic
              environment, and because groups developed integrating mechanisms across tightly
              defined cultural boundaries, they have been the subject of intensive
              archaeological interest. Abrupt clear cut appearances such as that postulated
              for the Winslow area are uncommon. The fact that in this case more than one
              group was involved offers the opportunity to study a well defined case of
              cultural interaction.  Ceramics are usually well preserved and abundant in the
              archaeological record,  and both their method of manufacture and decoration are
              determined by culture specific rules. Mr. Lyons will take advantage of this
              fact to compare ceramics from different villages around Winslow to determine
              the extent of differentiation at the time of supposed migration and the
              subsequent degree of stylistic intermingling. He will analyze whole ceramic
              vessels housed at the Field Museum in Chicago. He will also compare these to
              slightly earlier materials from neighboring regions in an attempt to determine
              points of origin. In collaboration of the University of Missouri  nuclear
              reactor, he will conduct a trace element analysis of both potsherds and
              potential clay sources to match raw material source with finished product and
              reconstruct the extent of interaction among villages. This work will allow both
              cultural historical reconstruction as well as insight into the social and
              political organization of the region. It will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.  *    - À- v- +- ±@                  +   _          
                         Ûª? ÑOh ª'  +'ª?0   Ý           +       Õ               $       H   
                 l        +       ¢       ?                       D       h       +          
                                              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
