Title       : Modeling NOx Reduction on Catalytic Surfaces with Molecular Beam Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9812760

Award Number: 9812760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco Zaera francisco.zaera@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal is a continuation of Prof. Francisco Zaera's investigation of
              the catalytic reaction of combustion exhaust gases on noble metal surfaces.
              Prof. Zaera's laboratory is specialized in the use of molecular beam techniques
              for intrinsic kinetics determination, and surface infrared vibrational
              spectroscopy for chemisorbate characterization. Under the previous grant,
              progress was made in correlating between kinetics and mechanisms observed under
              high-vacuum to those under catalytic reaction conditions. In the present
              proposal, NO and CO reactions on Pd (and Rh) single crystals at high
              temperature will be studied under high-flux pulsed molecular beam conditions,
              to resemble the real catalytic reaction conditions. In addition, other gases
              typical in combustion exhaust, e.g., CO2, H2O, O2, will be included in the
              molecular beam in order to determine the influence of competitive adsorption on
              the adsorption cross-section and the reaction kinetics. A rapid step-scanning
              infrared reflection-absorption spectroscope will provide the time-dependent
              surface coverage and composition information. The mechanism of adsorption will
              be modeled with Monte-Carlo techniques and the reaction parameters will be
              derived from the transient kinetics study. This research has significant
              implications in the development of novel catalysts for the remediation of
              combustion exhaust gases. It is recognized as a primary need in complying with
              modern global standards of gas emission.
