Title       : Workshop on Uncertainty in Modeling and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9812786

Award Number: 9812786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18380              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Crowley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc Indus&Appl Math(SIAM)
	      
	      Philadelphia, PA  19103    /   -

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Crowley  9812786       The investigator and his colleagues organize a workshop
              on  uncertainty in modeling and simulation.  Its aim is to sketch out  broad
              scientific questions and promising avenues of research  related to uncertainty
              issues, to document the potential impact  of the issues, and to produce a
              report outlining key research  issues.  The report will be distributed in print
              and via the web.       Uncertainty issues arise throughout science and
              engineering.  The problems these fields tackle involve nonlinear phenomena and 
              complex systems that are not well understood; observations are  not error-free
              and are irregular in space and time (weather and  climate data typify these
              characteristics); and many natural and  engineering processes are inherently
              stochastic or chaotic.  The  mathematical and statistical models of such
              systems share the  same features of complexity, nonlinearity, and
              stochasticity.  Scientists, mathematicians, and engineers analyze and compute 
              with these models to understand and predict the underlying  systems.  Therefore
              the recognition and the management of  uncertainty are important issues in both
              analysis and computation  as well.  Hence the meeting involves engineers,
              mathematicians,  and scientists.  The interplay between these disciplines is 
              essential to form the required perspective of opportunities and  challenges
              that arise from dealing with uncertainty.  Identifying  key research issues is
              an important step in guiding research; the  results affect every area of
              science and engineering.
