Title       : SGER: SH2 Phosphotyrosine Signalling in Living Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9812248

Award Number: 9812248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus M. Hahn KHAHN@SCRIPPS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9812248  Hahn, Klaus      Project Summary    The spatial organization of
              signaling components is critically important in the regulation of signaling
              pathways within intact cells.  Signals are often produced only when signaling
              molecules are brought together in supramolecular complexes, or when a protein
              is activated in a specific subcellular location.  Although there is clear
              evidence for the importance of spatial organization in signal transduction, it
              has been very difficult to gather quantitative information about
              protein-protein interactions in the intact cell.  The purpose of this project
              is to examine the location and kinetics of receptor-dependent tyrosine kinase
              activity in intact cells.  Receptor tyrosine kinases can trigger multifarious
              cellular responses produced by different extracellular stimuli even though
              signaling is mediated through interactions of the phosphorylated receptors with
              a common set of binding domains (SH2 domains) of downstream molecules. 
              Evidence suggests that the different responses are produced by variations in
              the intracellular locations and kinetics of the interactions between the SH2
              domain with its partner receptors.  A main part of the project will be to
              synthesize novel fluorescent reporters for the SH2 domain of phospholipase C
              gamma.  The goal is to attach the fluorescent dye to this SH2 domain at a
              position that makes its fluorescence highly sensitive to its molecular
              environment.  If the method is successful, this dye will report where and when
              the SH2 domain binds to specific activated receptors, in this case epidermal
              growth factor receptor or nerve growth factor receptor.  Thus, the formation,
              breakdown and trafficking of these complexes can be monitored in real time. 
              Development of the SH2-based indicator will employ peptide synthesis of the
              labeled SH2 domain and a novel combinatorial screening assay that will enable
              the selection of that labeled peptide with the optimal fluorescent properties. 
              While the focus of this project will be on SH2  interactions, this approach
              should be generally applicable for the design of reporter molecules to study a
              wide range of protein-protein interactions in living cells.
