Title       : Time-Series Response to Mid-Ocean Ridge Volcanic Event: Juan de Fuca and Gorda
               Ridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a9812294

Award Number: 9812294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149741             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Cowen jcowen@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Project Summary

Time-Series Responses to a Mid-Ocean Ridge Volcanic
              Event:
Juan de Fuca and Gorda Ridges


Ridge axis diking/eruptive events
              are episodic perturbations that trigger a sequence of interrelated and rapidly
              evolving physical, chemical, and biological processes associated with the
              formation of ocean crust.  Volcanic activity produces hydrothermal discharge
              with a distinct geochemical signature, and triggers specific geochemical and
              microbial responses in the adjacent crust and overlying water-column. 
              Observing and quantifying co-variation among related processes provides basic
              new constraints on presently immature models of submarine volcano-hydrothermal
              systems.  Chemical and biological parameters within hydrothermal plumes change
              rapidly, with the steepest rate of change occurring over seconds to days
              following their discharge and subsequent mixing in the deep sea.   Here we
              propose to mount comprehensive rapid and follow-up field responses to a
              remotely detected MOR volcanic event.  Our project emphasizes time-series
              observations and experiments on key dynamic physical, geochemical, and
              geomicrobial properties of an evolving hydrothermal event plume. A rapid
              response to these events will allow us: (1) to obtain the initial flux--that
              unaffected by aging; (2) to study the chemical and biological evolution of
              hydrothermal event plumes, representing a natural, temporarily constrained
              experiment for monitoring transformations within hydrothermal effluents; (3) to
              exploit event plumes as an invaluable window to the subsurface biosphere.  


