Title       : Development of Mixing Indexes for Scale-Up of Polymer Processing Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9812969

Award Number: 9812969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ica Manas-Zloczower ixm@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9812969
Manas-Zloczower
	Mixing is an important component of practically
              every polymer processing operation.  Material processability and product
              properties are highly influenced by mixing quality.  Applying the findings of
              fundamental research on mixing mechanisms to processes taking place inside
              complex industrial mixing devices, such as internal mixers or twin screw
              extruders, poses a big challenge.  Developing scale-up rules for translating
              the results of experiments on small laboratory mixers to industrial equipment
              is another typical problem encountered in practice.  This research project is
              aimed at identifying the important design and processing parameters enhancing
              realization of the mixing process in various processing equipment.  Research
              will be conducted to define mixing criteria for process control and
              optimization and for equipment scale-up.
             The work  will be
              conducted in close cooperation with researchers at DuPont Experimental Station
              in Wilmington, Delaware.  Flow simulations of various mixing equipment and
              development of mixing criteria will be conducted at Case Western Reserve
              University.  Flow visualization and compounding experiments will be performed
              at DuPont Experimental Station.  This interactive program could provide
              valuable findings to gain further insight and understanding into the mixing
              mechanisms and material behavior during processing.  In turn, an in-depth
              knowledge of the equipment used and the behavior of the materials being
              processed will render the key for process optimization and the development of
              scale-up rules.  The results of this research will far and foremost help
              enhancing the efficiency of existing manufacturing processes in the polymer
              processing industry.  However, the information base generated through this work
              will impact also on equipment manufacturing.  Comprehension of the links
              between equipment design and process efficiency can lead to future generations
              of machines for processing of advanced materials.

