Title       : Synchronized Stochastic Systems with Applications in Manufacturing,
               Communication and Reliability Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9812994

Award Number: 9812994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan H. Xu Shx@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haijun Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812994     
Xu
     Today's manufacturing, communication and other operating
              systems are complex, flexible, and integrated. To improve the overall
              performance of these systems, various policies and protocols that emphasize
              coordination, synchronization, and operational concurrency have been introduced
              and implemented.  Examples of such systems include synchronized communication
              networks and  assemble-to-order manufacturing/inventory systems.  Most
              classical models, which are suitable under the premise that events occur
              individually and independently, cannot adequately capture the essential
              features of synchronized systems. This project intends to develop new
              analytical models and results for synchronized systems that can provide
              practitioners with helpful insights for the effective design and management of
              these systems. 
     The goal of the project is to systematically develop a
              theory for the new notion, use the new theory to analyze the dependence
              structures of synchronized queueing and reliability systems, and highlight its
              wide applicability in various operating systems. Specific objectives are to
              develop good computable bounds, efficient heuristics, and important
              characterizations of system performance measures whose explicit computations
              are either intractable or computationally intensive.   The insight gained from
              this  research porject  will be summarized into a set of design and control
              principles for the efficient and effective management of synchronized operating
              systems. The outcome of this project is expected to bear both theoretical and
              practical significance in diverse applications, including assemble-to-order
              systems, synchronized communication networks, and reliability systems with
              simultaneous subsystem failures.


