Title       : MOTI: Strategic Project Management - Making Projects Our Next Competitive Weapon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9812730

Award Number: 9812730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald Senich                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298549             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron J. Shenhar ashenhar@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald N. Merino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Reilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812730  Shenhar   This research is focused on the development on an
              integrative, strategic framework for dealing with management of projects in
              modem organizations. While recognized as a distinguished discipline and
              accumulating an extensive body of knowledge, project management is seldom
              perceived today by organizations as a competitive weapon, and project
              performance is still disappointing in many ways.  Most projects still suffer
              from time and budget overruns, and when completed, many do not meet customer or
              management expectations. This research will focus on building for a better
              understanding of the project phenomena using the concept of contingency in
              project management and the UCP (uncertainty, complexity, pace) model for
              distinction among projects. The research framework will combine three
              dimensions: style, adaptation, and learning.  The idea of style, previously
              addressed at the operational level, will be extended to include the components
              of strategy, culture and attitude, organization, processes, and tools;
              adaptation will concentrate on seeking new contingencies and study higher
              elements of style for different kinds of projects; and learning will be
              addressed at the corporate, project, and individual levels.   This study will
              show how to develop an integrated strategic focus on project management in the
              modem corporation; how to make project management a central competitive weapon
              in the company's core competencies; and how to train young and experienced
              managers to understand and face the demands of today's complex projects.
