Title       : Dissertation Research: "Reconstructing" Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Mobility
               Patterns in Archaeology: A Perspective from the Near East
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9812516

Award Number: 9812516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10224              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Bamforth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Douglas Bamforth, Mr. Mark Becker will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. His goal is twofold: to apply new techniques of
              analysis to archaeological materials to demonstrate their utility and to gain
              insight into the processes which led to the domestication of plants and animals
              in the Near East. At approximately 12,000 years ago evidence for a shift in
              lifestyle in the Israel-Sinai area is evident. Peoples known as the `Natufians`
              established large permanent or semi-permanent villages, adopted ceramics and
              displayed many of the attributes associated with pastoral and agricultural
              societies. Although they did not in fact have domesticates and relied on hunted
              and gathered foods, clearly they were on a trajectory which led in this
              direction. Archaeologists however do not agree on how their predecessors were
              organized during  the Upper Paleolithic Period, from ca. a35,000 to 12,000
              years ago which preceded this. Some argue that the pattern observed in the
              Natufian developed gradually and that evidence for increasing sedentization is
              present in the Upper Paleolithic. Others believe that the Natufian pattern
              occurs abruptly and its appearance is quantum in nature. The distinction is
              important because the alternatives suggest different underlying processes are
              involved.  Mr. Becker will examine this issue by studying a series of 6 Upper
              Paleolithic sites located in the Sinai Desert. He will focus on stone tools and
              the byproducts of their manufacture because these are the most common materials
              recovered in such sites. Through use wear analysis he will determine the range
              of activities which took place in each location. He will refit tools with the
              byproducts of their manufacture and spatially plot these within sites. These
              data provide information on single vs. multiple occupations. By using such
              procedures it is possible to determine the range of activities conducted in
              individual settlements and the relative length of time each was occupied. The
              six sites under consideration span the Upper Paleolithic period and thus it can
              be determined whether directional change occurred through time.  This research
              will test the applicability of relatively new analytic techniques to Near
              Eastern archaeological material. It will address a significant anthropological
              question and assist in training a promising young scientist.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
