Title       : Atom-Resolved Dynamical Study of the Role of Hydrogen in Low Temperature
               Materials Growth and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a9812416

Award Number: 9812416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290589             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Boland boland@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812416
Boland
This project focuses on atom-resolved dynamical studies of the
              role of incident and adsorbed H atoms in the growth of low-temperature
              electronic materials by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The approach is to
              address the complex behavior of H atoms by performing a wide range of
              atom-resolved dynamical measurements using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM).
              Initial studies will examine the behavior of molecular SiHX fragments produced
              by dissociative reaction of gas phase growth precursors such as disilane with a
              Si(100) surface. The diffusion and/or decomposition of these species in
              real-time will be followed to determine the role of neighboring vacancy
              (dangling bond) sites. The studies will be performed under largely passivated
              conditions that mimic real low-temperature growth environments. Vacancy sites
              will be deliberately generated under controlled conditions where they can be
              induced to collide with the molecular fragments. The rates and energy barriers
              to diffusion and decomposition will be directly measured, as will the influence
              of incident H-atoms on these processes. The detailed mechanism of H2 desorption
              from the Si(100) surface will also be probed in real-time. These measurements
              will be performed at temperatures where H-atoms, and hence the dangling-bond
              products of desorption, are mobile surface species. Particular attention will
              be paid to the role of defects and surface steps in the desorption process.
              Using an ion-beam, controlled defect densities will be generated to determine
              their impact on surface diffusion, recombination and H2 desorption. The role of
              ion-induced H2 or H-atom removal will also be investigated and compared with
              the thermally activated desorption mechanism. Using this approach a fundamental
              understanding of H-atom dynamics and Si growth is expected to be established
              helping to form the basis for controlled growth of advanced low-temperature
              materials.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of materials science having high potential technological relevance. The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to new aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  Experimental tools are
              now available to allow atomic level observation of elementary surface processes
              which when better understood allow advances in fundamental science and
              technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving the performance and stability of advanced
              devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
              designing and producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area.
***

