Title       : SGER: Research and Development of a Public Case-Based and Tool Kit Using a
               Validated Software Reuse Reference Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9812448

Award Number: 9812448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Rine drine@cs.gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nader Nada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project investigates effective public Case-Base System (CBS) tool-kits using
              a validated Software Reuse Reference Model (SRRM).  CBS-SRRM allows the
              software engineer to improve reuse practice by capitalizing on effective
              practice-based knowledge derived from different software development
              organizations' reuse practices. CBS-SRRM provides software engineers with a way
              to utilize lessons learned by other organizations. The tool-kit also promotes
              recurrence of good reuse practices. The research focuses on a more effective
              means for software development organizations to find alternative solutions to
              problems in successful practice of reuse. We demonstrate that developing a
              CBS-SRRM that will allow software developers to learn how organizations similar
              to theirs have successfully adopted, utilized and managed this technology can
              support improved reuse practices. The plan is to research, develop and make
              publicly available what we and our affiliates have learned through our evolving
              set of case studies, surveys, interviews and experimental results. This plan is
              carried out by researching and developing a publicly accessible reuse practices
              CBS for the software engineering community using lessons learned and reuse
              experiences from successful enterprises based upon a validated SRRM that
              incorporates important technical, organizational and cultural factors needed in
              adopting, utilizing and managing reuse technology.

