Title       : Multimodal Interaction with Biological Molecules in Virtual Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9812572

Award Number: 9812572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amitabh Varshney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Tonge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel P. Raleigh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A central problem of advanced computational science is making large data
sets
              and the results of large simulations understandable by scientists
              and
engineers. The best-known means of imparting this understanding
              is
visualization, which allows users to see the data. However, the
              complexity
and nature of some data makes it appropriate to represent using the
              other
senses. For example, shape can be determined by touch. This project
              studies
multisensory virtual environments for large--scale complex
              scientific
computing problems. To better focus the research efforts and
              validate the
results, it uses multimodal interaction with complex
              big-molecular datasets
as the driving application. It aims to devise
              techniques and tools for
meaningful interactions with very large biomolecular
              data sets in virtual
environments with visual, aural, and haptic (force)
              feedback. Most
biomolecular datasets consist of a few primitives (such as atom
              types, ammo
acid sidechains, and nucleic acid bases) that are combined to
              yield rich
mosaics of biological complexity. The researchers believe this is
              rich
enough to be representative of other scientific
              visualization
sub-disciplines and yet specialized enough to offer a
              well-defined research
target.

The research includes multimodal feedback
              using perception-dependent
multiresolution rendering on sequential and
              parallel architectures. The
proposed advances optimize the multimodal
              rendering processes using a set
of three characteristics common across most
              biomolecular datasets - limited
motif complexity, bounded accuracy, and
              variable level of perceptible
detail. Most scientific visualization datasets
              share at least two of these
characteristics and therefore advances here should
              further the cutting-edge
research in other areas of virtual-reality-assisted
              scientific computing.
Here, the researchers will use hierarchical pre-rendered
              representations of
common motifs to allow realism at interactive speeds in
              multimodal
contexts. They will also take advantage of processor support for
              variable
resolution integer arithmetic and the limited dynamic range and
              bounded
input accuracy of biomolecular data to transparently speed up
              multimodal
rendering by trading computational accuracy for speed. Finally,
              they will
take advantage of the fact that people's senses have thresholds of
              the
least perceptible stimuli, and that they typically perceive high details
              in
only a limited region, to explore techniques to address
              variable
level-of-detail renderings in an integrated and coherent framework
              across
multiple senses. The researchers will validate the efficacy of
              proposed
approaches on real-life datasets through a collaboration with two
              on-campus
biochemistry researchers working on protein folding and rational
              drug
design and other visiting scientists and scholars.



