Title       : Modeling and Control of Subsurface Damage During the Grinding of Intermetallic
               Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a9812967

Award Number: 9812967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248386             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Kurfess tom.kurfess@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Danyluk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9812967
Kurfess
	Intermetallic compounds (IMCs) are noted for their light
              weight, high strength, high melting point, and excellent oxidation resistance. 
              To realize the potential of these advanced materials several issues must be
              considered, including the development of secondary processes such as machining
              and precise process control for quality assurance as well as reliability and
              cost.  The  research has three major objectives: determining the influence of
              various grinding parameters on intermetallic compounds, developing a
              mechanistic model for damage formulation, and verification of the damage model
              via experimental methods.  To develop an empirical model relating grinding
              parameters and resulting plastic deformation in the material, a set of
              factorial experiments will be conducted on a highly instrumented grinder. 
              These data sets will be used to develop and verify the model.  The model
              development will be based on the understanding of the grinding process physics
              (including both the mechanical and thermal process characteristics) applied to
              IMCs.  Once the model has been developed and validated, a controller will be
              designed and implemented that manipulates the control parameters to achieve the
              desired results.  Furthermore, a higher-level controller for defining process
              parameter trajectories will be developed that also addresses economic
              considerations (e.g., machining time).
	Successful completion of this project
              will lead to a good understanding of the physics of grinding IMCs, a
              mechanistic model for damage formulation, and a valuable control strategy for
              achieving desired grinding results.  The collaboration with several industrial
              firms provides excellent synergy and sharing of institutional resources.  The
              project should impact especially on the aerospace, automotive and chemical
              sectors.

