Title       : Unified Theory of Topological and Geometric Problems in Mechanical Design and
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9812977

Award Number: 9812977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jami J. Shah jami.shah@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant will provide support for developing theoretical foundations for
              describing and solving gometric and topological problems in mechanical product
              design and manufacture.  A theory will be developed to encompass a taxonomy and
              morphology of generic classes of geometric and topological problems, their
              characterization, and their respective solvability conditions.  The theory will
              provide an understanding of the scope and limitations of generic solution
              techniques.  The unified characterization will contain representation of
              topological and geometric entities at multiple abstraction levels, a standard
              set of topological and geometric relations, and a minimum set of generic design
              tasks or issues.  High level problem definitions will be encoded in the form of
              generic geometry exemplars that will contain not only geometry templates, but
              also mechanisms to specify the design task or goal.  Methods for mapping high
              level problems to low level standard geometric tasks will also be
              investigated.
     If successful, this research will lead to a uniform
              treatment of geometric problems in diverse areas and will enhance integration
              between different parts of the product design process.  In the long run, the
              results of this project have the potential to extend the scope of CAD/CAM in
              automating design and manufacturing tasks both upstream (preliminary design)
              and downstream (manufacturing planning).  This research will also benefit the
              development of standards for exchange of parametric geometry data between
              different computer aided design systems used throughout the product development
              process, thus reducing development cost and the time to market.
