Title       : Collaborative Research: "Consumer Learning About Quality and its Role in
               Consumer Choice"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9812067

Award Number: 9812067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tulin Erdem erdem@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Erdem  Consumer Learning about Quality and its Role in Consumer Choice  This
              research program revolves around three different but related projects. The
              common theme is the analysis of consumer choice behavior in environments in
              which consumers are uncertain about product quality.  Understanding the impact
              of consumer uncertainty about product quality on consumer behavior has
              important consumer welfare, as well as managerial implications.  The first
              project examines the consumer choice process for high-tech durable goods, which
              are characterized by two or more technological alternatives (e.g.
              IBM/Compatible vs. Apple or cable service vs. satellite dish), a rapid pace of
              technological change and consumer learning about product attributes. We develop
              and estimate a model of consumer behavior in such an environment on data
              collected via surveys of consumers in the market for computers.  We model the
              process of consumers' active learning about alternatives. In our model,
              consumers have several methods of acquiring information and they have
              uncertainty about the accuracy of the various information sources. They decide
              in each period whether to obtain additional information, whether to buy at that
              time and if so, what to buy.  This project will shed light on several issues
              including the impact of the availability, cost and accuracy of different
              information sources on consumer welfare, as well as the impact of marketing
              strategies on consumer choice in dynamic high-tech markets. For example, our
              results could be used to help firms allocate their resources for conveying
              information to consumers more efficiently.   The second and third projects
              examine consumer choice in frequently purchased product categories where
              consumers are uncertain about product quality and learn about products through
              both consumption experience and advertising. In our model, both consumption
              experience and advertising provide consumers with direct but noisy information
              about product attributes. Within this context, the first project studies the
              impact of advertising on consumer price sensitivities and the implications of
              this for both consumer welfare and firm strategy. The third project studies
              markets in which consumers may use prices and advertising frequency as signals
              of product quality. In this project, we seek to answer questions about the
              impact of pricing and advertising strategy on firm's brand equity and consumer
              welfare in the long-run (e.g., if advertising conveys information, is it the
              advertising copy or the volume of advertising that conveys information to
              consumers about product quality).                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
