Title       : SGER: Operation Variables and Metrics for Evaluating/ Optimizing Group
               Creativity Techniques in Engineering Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9812646

Award Number: 9812646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jami J. Shah jami.shah@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This project will formulate a set of guidelines for conducting empirical
              studies to evaluate formal methods for idea generation in collaborative
              environments. In order to conduct good experiments on idea generation methods,
              a clear understanding of experiment variables, method variables, and data
              collection variables is needed. Also, a framework to analyze the data collected
              from such experiments is required. The research is divided into four major
              tasks: survey and evaluation of creative cognition models; identification of
              operation variables, metrics, and experiment design; development of a framework
              for analysis of design sketches; analysis and critique of previous experiments
              on progressive idea generation (C-Sketch, Method 635, and Gallery Method). This
              project will investigate the issue of scaling up appropriate cognitive models
              to study typical design problems which are far more complex than those used in
              psychological experiments. This study will attempt to understand the
              correlation between four sets of factors relevant to collaborative design: the
              individuals, the situation/environment, the outcome, and the process.  This
              research will also develop a methodology for analyzing design sketches for
              studying the cognitive processes, mental structures, and ideas generated by
              tracking the evolution of design concept at successive stages of development.  
                  Studies have shown that the early stages of conceptual design have a
              substantial impact on the efficacy of a product; development of effective
              design methods to support the generation of alternative design ideas is
              critical.  Along with that, designers must be convinced that the use of these
              methods has potential benefits.  Therefore, it is essential to collect and
              analyze data on the effectiveness of idea generation techniques.  The
              availability of experiment methodology and metrics for evaluating and/or
              optimizing creative design methods is an important step in this direction. If
              successful, future research will employ these guidelines to produce verifiable
              database of performance of formal creativity methods which may eventually lead
              to wider use of effective idea generation methods to explore alternative
              designs.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
