Title       : Correlation Analysis of Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9812858

Award Number: 9812858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tayfur Altiok altiok@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Melamed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812858
Altiok 
     This grant fluids a project to study tile performance
              effects of correlations (as proxies of temporal dependence) in manufacturing
              systems. The project will identify random components of manufacturing systems
              with appreciable correlations; will study their impact on performance
              statistics; and will develop modeling technologies to capture correlations
              whenever present in appreciable magnitudes. Potential random components include
              stochastic processes of customer demands, order load times, machine failures
              and down times  The project will employ a novel modeling methodology, called
              TES/QTES, which emphasizes explicit modeling of correlations in such stochastic
              processes. TES processes constittute a versatile class of continuous-space,
              discrete-time stochastic processes designed to capture empirical distributions
              and autocorreclations, simultaneously, while QTES is essentially a discretized
              variant of TES, suitable for analytical modeling. The methodology will be
              applied to various industries including pharmaceutical, food processing and
              microelectronics, to obtain analytical and/or numerical solutions for
              performance metrics.  It will farther be used ti explore the impact of
              correlations on various manufacturing performance measures and optimal
              operating policies.
     If successful, this research will produce a new
              correlation-oriented paradigm. correlation analysis, designed to impact both
              manufacturing research and practices. The research TES/QTES models promise to
              yield significantly more accurate analytical or simulation models of
              manufacturing systems and associated performance predictions in manufacturing
              systems. Improved predictions will faxcilitate more effective production
              planning, scheduling and inventory control. The practical aspects of the
              researched correlation analysis will be exercised in collaboration with
              industrial partners. From The educational viewpoint, correlation analysis will
              be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses on
              manufacturing-related theory and applications, including simulation, production
              control, inventory theory and performance analysis.

