Title       : Dissertation Research: Explaining Changes in Projectile Point Morphology: A Case
               Study from Ventura Cave, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9812062

Award Number: 9812062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4313               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Leonard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Leonard, Mr. Todd VanPool will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will travel to the Arizona State Museum and
              analyze a series of lithic projectile points which were recovered during the
              excavation of Ventana Cave, an archaeological site which is located in
              southwestern Arizona and excavated in the early 1940s. The site is important
              because of the large amount of material recovered - the excavator, Emil Haury,
              identified a total of 2,062 projectile points/knives - as well as its extended
              time span. With the exception of  a gap between 600 -300 years before the
              present, it shows evidence of continuous occupation over the last ca 10,000
              years. The long occupational history is probably a result of the presence of a
              small seep in the cave, produced by water flowing through a geological contact.
              It is the only known permanent water source for miles and was probably an
              important resource for both prehistoric and historic residents of this area. 
              Before the advent of metal, prehistoric peoples worldwide depended on stone
              tools to meet cutting, scraping, hunting and a variety of other needs and
              because stone is nearly indestructible, such objects and the byproducts of
              their manufacture constitute the most common class of object recovered at many
              archaeological sites. Therefore scientists devote a great deal of attention to
              their analysis. Because different cultural groups often made distinctive types
              of tools, design variation is often used as a marker to define such entities
              and `Clovis` and `Plainsview` projectile points are used to indicate the
              presence of `Clovis` or `Plainsview` peoples. While such an approach is valid,
              it ignores the fact that such point types served functional purposes and that
              the details of their form likely can be explained in functional terms. Mr.
              VanPool will examine the long and rich Ventana Cave point sequence from this
              perspective. He has developed, he believes, techniques which will allow him to
              separate function from style and he wishes both to test his approach and to
              learn how point function changes over time.   His methodology, if successful,
              can be generalized and will be useful for lithic analyses in many parts of the
              world. The site of Ventana Cave is itself important and this research will
              increase understanding of US prehistory. It will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
