Title       : Molecular Materials for Lightweight Lasers, and Novel Organic Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9812046

Award Number: 9812046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Wudl Wudl@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812046
Wudl

This project focuses on the design and development of molecules
              for lightweight organic/inorganic lasers, semiconductors, and metals.  The
              research will be carried out in three parts:  (a) preparation of new materials
              based on stable dipolar molecules, (b) fabrication of thin film devices and (c)
              determination of device characteristics.  The new molecules, and materials
              derived from them, belong  to a novel special zwitterionic class of non-Kekule
              (NK) systems.  These dipolar heteroacenes and poly(heteroacenes) will be
              functionalized to modify and improve various properties such as solubility,
              film-formation, luminescence for devices such as Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs)
              and  lasers, and extended intermolecular interactions related to materials
              properties that include conductivity and ferroelectricity.  The photophysics of
              the dyes will be evaluated,  and the solids will be examined using the latest
              developments in experimental condensed matter physics.
%%%
In addition to
              developing  new materials for lasers and other devices such as LEDs, the goal
              is to produce materials scientists for the twenty-first century who not only
              have a much broader skills base than the usual student in terms of their
              technical scientific and engineering training, but also who develop ancillary
              talents rarely acquired in graduate school.  These include:  (a) working
              effectively in interdisciplinary teams to solve problems and (b) appreciating
              first-hand the research priorities, objectives, and modus operandi inside and
              outside of academia.  The proposed research lends itself naturally to
              accomplishing these goals through the interdisciplinary interactions among
              physicists, chemists and engineers.
***

