Title       : Planning Activities: Shortgrass Steppe Ecological Research Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a9812395

Award Number: 9812395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ingrid C. Burke indy@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Lauenroth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Wasser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                          Abstract             Ecologists at Colorado State
              University have been    studying  the shortgrass steppe ecosystem of eastern
              Colorado    intensively for many years. The current strong focus on the   
              shortgrass steppe represents the continuing development of a    research
              tradition that began in the late 1930's.   The major    goal for the broad
              scientific community studying the    shortgrass steppe ecosystems of
              northeastern Colorado is to    understand the processes that account for the
              origin,    maintenance and sustainability of shortgrass steppe    ecosystems. 
              Much of this research is centered around the    Colorado State University (CSU)
              field station located on the    CPER. in northeastern Colorado.                
               The current CSU field station consists of the    headquarters area, a
              residence for the site manager and a    corral and pasture area of 53 ha. Three
              buildings are located    in the headquarters area: a dormitory, a
              storage/workshed    building, and an office/laboratory building. Essentially no
                 renovations or improvements have been made at the site since    it was built
              in the late 1960.                  The CSU field station is heavily utilized
              for research,    education, and public outreach. Eighteen research projects are
                 currently studying the shortgrass steppe and using the CSU    facilities at
              the CPER. Visiting scientists from 36    institutions nationally and
              internationally have conducted    research at this site in the last five years.
               Each year ten    to fifteen classes in use the site several times each year
              for    instruction.  In addition, classes from the University of    Wyoming
              utilize the field station for research.                The  product  of  the 
              planning  process  will  be  a    comprehensive  master site plan. This plan
              will consist  of  an    extensive  long-term  research  and  education  plan 
              for   the    facility, a governance structure for the facility., a  detailed   
              description    of    the    physical     structures,    detailed   
              institutional/interagency     relationships,     roles      and   
              responsibilities,  a  long  term  maintenance  plan   for   the    facility,
              and detailed architectural and engineering plans  for    the facility.
