Title       : FSML-All Terrain Vehicles for Sedgwick Reserve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9812223

Award Number: 9812223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Boucher v_bouche@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank W. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Omer J. Reichman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                               ABSTRACT              Sedgwick Reserve (SR) has
              about 160 km of ranch roads that    traverse almost 400    vertical meters.
              Many of the roads are inaccessible to    ,passenger cars and even 4-    wheel
              drive vehicles, especially during the rainy winter    months. Year-round access
              to many parts of the Reserve is    limited to alternative vehicles, such as
              all-terrain-vehicles    (ATV's), and foot traffic. Research opportunities at
              the    Reserve would be significantly enhanced by having ATV's    available to
              researchers.      Much of the area currently inaccessible by truck is the   
              topographically rugged northeastern corner of the Reserve.    Ecologically
              significant features of the area include several    small streams and
              tributaries of Figueroa Creek and vernal    pools. Additionally there are steep
              canyons with dense    riparian vegetation including Fremont cottonwood (Populus
                 fremontia) and dry ridges with scrub oak (Quercus    berberidifolia)
              chaparral which occur no where else on the    Reserve. These communities are
              not, without ATV's, readily    accessible to researchers and consequently are
              the least known    areas of the Reserve. A fertile area of investigation in
              this    part of the Reserve is the habitat connectivity of these    streams and
              riparian areas to the bordering Los Padres    National Forest Figueroa Mountain
              Recreation Area. With ATV    access, researchers could more easily investigate
              headwater    stream processes and the use of riparian habitat corridors by   
              wildlife.
