Title       : FSML-Upgrading the Small Boat and Diving Facilities at Moss Landing Marine
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a9812359

Award Number: 9812359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89999              (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Harvey harvey@mlml.calstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Prince  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
This project will underwrite improvements in the small boat and diving
              programs at Moss Landing Marine
Laboratories (MLML).  A Maine-style lobster
              vessel will  be converted into a vessel used for teaching and
research.  The
              conversion will include: installation of an "A" frame, winch and wire, and
              hydraulics for
launching and recovering scientific sampling gear (e.g. trawls,
              benthic sleds,plankton nets, benthic grabs, corers, CTD's camera sleds,side
              scan sonar fishes, etc.) An observation deck will be installed above the wheel
              house, requiring moving and installing the radar and antennas onto a new higher
              mast.  A bulkhead would be constructed aft of the wheel house.  One small boat
              will be purchased and outfitted with outboards, steering linkage, and
              electronics.  SCUBA air compressor will be purchased to replace a 23 year old
              compressor.

Moss Landing Marine Laboratories operates one of the most active
              educational and research facilities for
marine sciences in the U.S.  Of the
              approximately 100 graduates students in the marine science Master's 
program
              at any time, about 80 will use the small boats for class projects, class field
              trips, or research projects for their for their Master's degree.  Not only does
              the accessibility of small boats at MLML allow
students a great deal of field
              experience, many become trained and experienced with handling small boats and
              related sampling equipment.  In 1993, a survey by the American Academy of
              Underwater Sciences (AAUS)
reported MLML had the third most active scientific
              dive program in the U.S.  The dive equipment at MLML is
used for classes
              (Marine Science Diving and Subtidal Ecology)and for many of the Master's
              research projects.

The replacements and upgrades in the small boats and
              diving programs at MLML will greatly improve the 
facilities and equipment for
              undergraduate and graduate education and research in marine science at
              MLML.
Small boats will be used for offshore and estuarine course activities,
              research by visiting faculty, and use 
by neighboring researchers. 
              Improvements in the diving program would benefit the courses and
              research
research that require diving and visiting researchers that use the
              MLML facilities.
