Title       : American Chemical Society (ACS) Symposium on Semiconductive Polymers; Dallas,
               TX; March 29-April 2, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9812089

Award Number: 9812089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Galvin megalvin@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                9812089  Galvin    An ACS Symposium will be
              held March 29-April 2, 1998 on  semiconductive polymers covering several
              forefront research  topics; Ionically Conducting Polymers and Carbon Filled
              Polymers,  Conducting Polymers, Organic and Polymeric Materials for the 
              Fabrication of Thin Film Transistors, and Polymers for Light  Emitting Diodes.
              The goal of the symposium is to bring together  world leaders in the field of
              semiconductor polymers to discuss  the most recent developments. The symposium
              brings together  scientists who work on ionically and electronically conducting
               polymers with scientists who study polymers for thin film  transistors and
              LEDs to promote cross-fertilization and  accelerate the pace of scientific
              advancement and  commercialization. An equally important objective of the 
              symposium is to bring together industrial and academic scientists  in an effort
              to encourage interaction/collaboration. Support from  NSF will be used to
              partially compensate young scientists (junior  faculty, graduate students and
              postdoctoral fellows) for travel  and accommodation expenses. They will be
              active participants with  one-quarter of the presentations (talks and posters)
              being made  by students and postdoctoral fellows, and young faculty. The 
              conference is expected to provide an effective forum for  discussion of
              critical scientific issues in semiconductive  polymers. Along with the
              opportunity to assess the field and  future directions, it is expected that new
              ties will be  established between universities, research institutions, and 
              industry.  %%%   Semiconducting polymers have far reaching economic potential 
              since applications range from electroactive membranes and  electromagnetic
              shielding to the active element in transistors or  light emitting diodes (LEDs)
              for flat panel displays. An  evaluation of the progress and status of this
              field along with  current assessments of the most important developments will
              be of  great value to the understanding an d enhanced utilization of  these
              materials in applications beneficial to society.  ***
