Title       : Information Discovery and Communication with Meta-Documents over the World-Wide
               Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9812040

Award Number: 9812040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Furuta furuta@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank M. Shipman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates use of an additional layer of structure, called a
              meta-document, to organize decentralized network-accessible information, such
              as that found on the World-Wide Web. By developing meta-documents, documents
              whose components are themselves documents, discovered information can be placed
              into context and communicated to others. Consequently meta-documents hold
              promise of being useful in applications where information, created and
              maintained by others, needs to be transferred; educational applications at all
              levels have this characteristic. To make meta-documents effective, basic issues
              in information representation, presentation, personalization, structuring,
              location, and exploration are explored in this project. In addition, practical
              study is required of the means for authoring meta-documents and the means for
              keeping them in synchrony with the rapidly shifting contents of the Web. The
              resulting concepts have theoretical implications in understanding how to
              structure and communicate network-based digital information. They also have
              immediate practical application in producing materials that can be used in
              teaching and in providing overviews that will help the general public better
              identify relevant Web-based information on selected
              topics.
http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/walden/

