Title       : The Learning Factory: Implementing ABET 2000 A Hands-On Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9812928

Award Number: 9812928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest T. Smerdon                       
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lueny Morell lueny@ece.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose L. Zayas-Castro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge I. Velez-Arocho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              98-12928  Morell    University of Puerto Rico Mayag ez - The Learning Factory: 
              Implementing ABET 2000 A Hands-On Workshop    The Manufacturing Engineering
              Education Partnership (MEEP) has developed and implemented a new curriculum in
              design and manufacturing with integrated laboratory facilities in strong
              collaboration with industry.  This effort is called the Learning Factory
              Program, an outcomes-driven program that has been successfully
              institutionalized at Penn State University, University of Washington and the
              University of Puerto Rico at Mayag ez.  The purpose of this project is to
              extend and disseminate this program through the offering of four 1/2 to 1 day
              long workshops at national engineering education conferences.  The goal is to
              share the Learning Factory Program as a strategy to comply with ABET 2000
              Criteria.  Basically, this workshop will go through the following steps in
              education reform:  from the establishment of educational objectives to planning
              (resources, timetable, responsibilities) to curriculum development (courses,
              integrated laboratory facilities, industry collaboration), and finally to
              outcomes assessment (designing the assessment strategy, conducting assessment,
              design of tools, reporting and feedback).    The workshop is designed for 25-40
              participants.  The first part of the workshop will be dedicated to presenting a
              general overview of the Learning Factory Program and the process of developing
              an outcomes-based curriculum.  It also presents the Learning Factory Program as
              a strategy to comply with ABET 2000 Criteria.  The second part will be devoted
              to describing the curriculum, courses, integrated laboratory facilities and
              industry advisory board.  The third part will address assessment strategies to
              evaluate student learning outcomes and program goals.  The workshop
              presentation strategy will be as follows:  After a short presentation, teams of
              participants will break out to discuss the topic presented and come up with
              their ideas on how to adopt or adapt the sp ecific topic at their institutions.
               When reconvening, each team will share their ideas with the rest. 
              Participants will have the opportunity to work on their perception as to what
              are the stakeholders needs, develop a strategy to address those needs, and
              develop an assessment scheme.  These exercises will help them in their
              institution's developments to address ABET 2000.
