Title       : Jaguar: Java in Next-Generation Database Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a9812020

Award Number: 9812020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes E. Gehrke johannes@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Praveen Seshadri  (Principal Investigator former)
              Philippe Bonnet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thorsten von Eicken  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the Cornell Jaguar project is to exploit the features of Java in a
              database system. Java's portability and security are ideal for extensible
              database systems. However, several systems issues arise when a database server
              is integrated with a Java virtual machine. These issues are explored by
              extending the Predator database system with Java. The mode of research involves
              implementation and performance measurement. The topics explored include
              security for user-defined Java extensions, resource management (using the
              techniques developed in the Cornell J-Kernel project), scalability for highly
              concurrent workloads, and optimization of queries with Java extensions in a
              client-server environment. The results from this stage of the project provide a
              comprehensive understanding of how to efficiently support Java extensions in a
              database system. Can Java be used for traditional database server
              functionality? The next stage of the project addresses this question. The goal
              is to run queries partially at the server and partially at the client, thereby
              optimizing execution across slow networks. Java is an ideal choice to represent
              portable algorithms, and the project studies different server designs for
              portable query processing. However, the use of Java could reduce the overall
              server performance. An important result of this project is a qualitative and
              quantitative study of the tradeoffs between the different design choices.
              Research results will be disseminated through publications, and by
              instantiation in a full-fledged database system, Predator. The new technology
              developed has the potential to significantly influence the next-generation of
              database systems. 

http://www.cs.cornell.edu/Info/Projects/PREDATOR ; 
              http://www.cs.cornell.edu/jkernel/

