Title       : Optical Studies of Single Nerve Cells from Vertebrate Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9812301

Award Number: 9812301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495182             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dejan Zecevic zec@biomed.med.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                IBN 98-12301  ZECEVIC     The main task of functional neuronal networks is to
              process  information and that task depends critically on how exactly  signals
              are integrated by individual nerve cells that are often  anatomically and
              functionally complex. The principles of  information processing in single
              neurons can only be determined by  studying specific neuronal types in
              different experimental  preparations. Conventional studies of information
              processing in  individual neurons are limited to electrical recordings from one
               or two locations. However, regional electrical properties of  neurons and
              their processes are complex, dynamic and very  difficult to analyze in the
              absence of detailed measurements. To  achieve better spatial resolution it is
              necessary to turn from  direct electrical recording to optical measurements.
              Recent new  developments carried out on invertebrate neurons, now permit 
              monitoring membrane potential transients simultaneously at many  sites by a
              special type of optical recording with voltage-  sensitive dyes. It is of
              considerable interest to apply this  technique to dendrites of vertebrate CNS
              neurons in brain slices.       The long-term objective of this proposal is to
              advance our  knowledge about the logic of information processing in individual 
              neurons from the vertebrate brain using multiple site optical  measurements of
              membrane potential. The first specific task is to  apply voltage-sensitive dye
              recording methodology, as developed  for invertebrate neurons, to vertebrate
              neurons in a brain-slice  preparation. Apart from our preliminary experiments,
              there is no  previous experience in this field. To achieve this goal it is 
              planned to: a) integrate the patch-clamp technique that utilizes  infra-red
              (IR-DIC) video microscopy with the apparatus for fast  voltage-sensitive dye
              recordings based on a 464-element photodiode  array and b) optimize the
              intracellular staining protocol using  patch pipettes. The experiments in the
              next phase will focus on  hippocampal CA1  pyramidal nerve cells. The main goal
              is to  determine the functional significance of active propagation of  action
              potentials into the dendrites. A particular aspect of this  question will be
              examined, for which multisite optical recording  is uniquely well suited. It is
              important to test the hypothesis,  based on computer simulation and indirect
              experimental evidence,  that the dendritic excitability and dendritic action
              potential  amplitude can be selectively modulated in a limited region of the 
              neuron (particular dendritic branches). Such local changes in  excitability
              would functionally subdivide a neuron. The idea is to  monitor optically the
              main dendritic branches of a pyramidal  neuron under control and experimental
              conditions (local,  synaptically-evoked subthreshold depolarizations) that are 
              hypothesized to result in local and selective modifications of  dendritic
              excitability and action potential amplitude. The  experimental results will be
              analyzed and interpreted using a  biophysically realistic computer model.
              Results from these studies  will have important implications for synaptic
              plasticity and some  forms of associative learning.
