Title       : Development of NDE Technologies for Post Earthquake Damage Assessment of
               Jacketed Bridge Columns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2001   
File        : a9812585

Award Number: 9812585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Q. Feng mfeng@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  9812585  Feng  The enhanced structural performance of bridge columns
              retrofitted  by steel or fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) composite jackets has 
              been well demonstrated and a large number of highway bridge  columns have
              indeed been retrofitted with such jackets in the  United States and Japan. 
              However, seismic damage of the columns  covered by the jackets and thus made
              invisible can considerably  weaken the columns.  In order to solve this
              problem.  this  project will develop nondestructive evaluation (NDE)
              techniques,  particularly electromagnetic (EM) and ultrasonic imaging 
              technologies, and experimentally investigate their effectiveness  for assessing
              post-earthquake damage of reinforced concrete  columns wrapped with steel or
              FRP jackets.  Under consideration  are damages such as delamination cracks,
              debonding between  concrete and reinforcing rebars, delamination between
              concrete  columns and jackets.     The primary tasks of this research include
              (1) development of  prototype EM and ultrasonic imaging devices, (2) further 
              development of the image reconstruction algorithms for both EM  and ultrasonic
              devices, (3) verification of the EM and ultrasonic  imaging technologies by
              testing the prototypes on steel-and FRP-  jacketed bridge columns damaged to
              different levels in  laboratory, and (4) verification of the EM and ultrasonic
              imaging  technologies by field testing on steel- or FRP-jacketed bridge 
              columns.    The PI is currently directing an experimental testing program 
              funded by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), the  California Department
              of Transportation (Caltrans), and the  Society for the Advancement of material
              and Process Engineering  (SAMPE), where twenty-seven half-scale bridge columns
              wrapped  with different FRP jackets are tested and damaged under cyclic  loads
              in both single and double bending configurations.  This  program provides and
              excellent opportunity to verify the  effectiveness of the proposed technologies
              in detecting damage in  the columns and voi ds in the bonding interfaces, with
              no cost to  the proposed project for building and damaging these columns.    To
              facilitate closer collaboration and promote educational  benefit, graduate
              students will be selected to spend two summers  at PWRI to conduct joint
              experiments in Japan, while one junior  research engineer from PWRI will spend
              one summer at UCI to  participate in the field experiment involving Caltrans
              bridges.   This project will also expose undergraduate students to 
              interdisciplinary and collaborative research experience.    This is an award
              under the first round (FY'98) competition of the  CMS-INT initiative NSF 98-36
              "US-Japan Cooperative Research in  Urban Earthquake Disaster Mitigation".  ***
