Title       : Upgrading of Northern Arizona University Electron Microprobe Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9812392

Award Number: 9812392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Hoisch thomas.hoisch@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phil R. Geib  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon B. Haxel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Wittke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelley A. Hays-Gilpin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9812392
Hoisch
This grant provides support to upgrade the electron microprobe
              laboratory at Northern Arizona University.  The instrument, an ETEC Autoprobe
              dating from the 1970's, will be outfitted with modern detector electronics and
              a video optical system.  At present, the instrument is equipped with original
              ETEC preamplifiers, pulse-height analyzers, detector high-voltage power
              supplies, and rate meters.  All are at least 20 years old and have become
              unstable over the course of operation.  Newer components are not available
              because ETEC is no longer in business.  The old components will be replaced
              with modern off-the-shelf components and the electronic feed-throughs will be
              modified to accept these new components.  These upgrades will indefinitely
              extend the lifetime of the instrument, increase instrument stability, and allow
              for easy repair.  The existing light optical microscope will be supplemented
              with a video system consisting of a video camera, monitor, image-capture board,
              and PC. This upgrade will enhance teaching and training capabilities of the
              machine appreciably, allowing a number of people to simultaneously observe
              analytical operations.  The image-capture system will allow accurate real-time
              records of the locations of analyzed points to be generated.  The lab serves
              the northern Arizona and southern Nevada region and is used by faculty from the
              Departments of Anthropology and Geology at Northern Arizona University, the
              Department of Geology at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and researchers
              from the U.S. Geological Survey Flagstaff Field Office, and the Navajo Nation
              Archaeology Department.  The lab supports varied research in igneous and
              metamorphic petrology, archaeology, and anthropology.
***

