Title       : SGER: Consequences of Sexually Transmitted Bacteria in Natural Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9812306

Award Number: 9812306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Westneat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9198,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Westneat
9812306


The spread of disease is one potential outcome of
              switching mating partners. Such switching of partners occurs in many organisms,
              yet few data are available from natural populations of non-human animals on the
              transmission of pathogens or the consequences of being exposed. This project
              explores the prevalence, the frequency of transmission, and the possible
              consequences of bacteria in the semen of male red-winged blackbirds, a species
              in which females mate-switch frequently. Male and female blackbirds will be
              surveyed for bacteria, similarities between mates documented, and an experiment
              designed to identify sexual transmission performed. Reproductive success and
              survival of tested individuals will be tracked in the field, and bacterial
              isolates will be tested in the laboratory for functions potentially affecting
              host fitness.

The proposed work is the first to study the possible sexual
              transmission of disease in a natural population of birds. Several previously
              untested hypotheses about the importance of sexually-transmitted diseases will
              be evaluated. The results will be important in understanding the selective
              forces shaping reproductive behavior and the evolutionary relationships between
              disease-causing organisms and host behaviors. This work has broad implications
              for theories regarding the evolution of mating systems. In addition it may
              provide important information concerning disease transmission in natural
              populations with relevance for conservation of songbirds and other species.

