Title       : 1999 National Science Foundation Design and Manufacturing Grantees Conference;
               Los Angeles, CA; January 5-8, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9812407

Award Number: 9812407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223169             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stan Settles settles@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 9199      UNDISTRIBUTED PANEL/IPA FUNDS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                This award is to conduct the annual National Science Foundation Design and
              Manufacturing Grantees Conference. The conference will involve researchers from
              the Division of Design, Manufacture and Industrial Innovation, the Division of
              Engineering Education and Centers, the Division of Electrical and Communication
              Systems and the Mechanics and Materials Program in the Division of Civil and
              Mechanical Structures, located within the Directorate for Engineering, the
              Division of Information, Robotics and Intelligent Systems, located within the
              Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering and
              manufacturing related projects in the Division of Materials Research, located
              within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.  The conference
              ensures that the individual researchers are informed about the ongoing
              activities of their colleagues. An elimination of duplication of their efforts
              may be achieved and a degree of cooperation may result from this activity. An
              overall improvement of efficiency of the research activity could be expected.
              In addition, the conference program organization allows for ample time to
              discuss manufacturing research in detail with the collective research community
              at the meeting, with feedback to and input from the National Science
              Foundation. Finally personal contacts between the grantees and program.
              directors in the Divisions should contribute to clarifying many current issues
              in their work. The aims of the conference are to enhance communication between
              researchers, encourage joint research, promote synergism, and develop networks
              for technical interchange. Attendees to the conference gain an early access to
              the information disseminated.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
