Title       : Invitational Workshop on Distributed Information, Computation, and Process
               Management for Scientific and Engineering Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9812601

Award Number: 9812601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42285              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas M. Patrikalakis nmp@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a workshop on Distributed Information, Computation, and
              Process Management for Scientific and Engineering Environments, held in
              Herndon, VA on May 15-16, 1998. The workshop organizer is Professor Nicholas M.
              Patrikalakis from MIT. Workshop participants are researchers in the field of
              computer science and domain specialists from the sciences and engineering
              disciplines. Advances in the research on complex physical and man-made systems,
              especially those exhibiting interacting dynamic processes and disparate spatial
              and temporal scales, generate new requirements for information and
              computational environments and infrastructure. Towards the goal of satisfying
              these requirements, the primary topics of the workshop include the application
              of digital library technology for scientific simulation; the design and
              implementation of cross-domain simulation integration; metadata models and
              search/retrieval mechanisms for scientific software; networking issues for
              transparent access and sharing of data, including automatic generalized data
              translation and remote software invocation; and emerging standards for
              distributed simulations. The goal of the workshop is to stimulate research
              activities in fundamental technologies that will enable easy access to
              distributed computational, data and various information resources by scientists
              and researchers in diverse fields. The workshop will produce an advisory
              document outlining open problems and proposed avenues of research in
              distributed simulation, analysis, and information systems. The report will be
              widely disseminated and also available on-line. The application of further
              research efforts along these lines will help to increase the availability,
              effectiveness, and utilization of large-scale, cross-disciplinary distributed
              scientific systems, and facilitate research activities.    
              http://deslab.mit.edu/DesignLab/dicpm/
