Title       : SGER: Cassette for Archaeal Genetic Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9812485

Award Number: 9812485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40243              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto J. Macario   (Principal Investigator current)
              Everly Conway de Macario  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1158      BIOMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9812485  
Macario    
The mechanisms that regulate heat-shock (stress) genes
              in the various groups of organisms belonging to the phylogenetic domain archaea
              have been elucidated. While stress genes in eubacteria and eukaryotes have not
              been studied for decades, those in archaea are only now attracting interest. 
              It has become clear that study of archaeal stress genes, and their regulatory
              mechanisms, will provide crucial information for understanding the evolution of
              the transcriptional machinery involved in the expression of these genes, which
              are likely to have played a decisive role in positive selection over time, and
              are definitely keys to the survival of present-day cells.     The specific
              objective is to construct and test a modular cassette with a reporter gene to
              study functions of the promoter region for the hsp70 (dnaK) heat-shock (stress)
              gene in the methanogenic archaeon M. mazei S-6.  The long-term goal is to
              develop a multi-purpose system applicable to the analysis of the regulatory
              mechanisms of other archaeal heat-shock genes, like hsp23 (grpE) and hsp40
              (dnaJ).     There are virtually no means at the present time to perform in vivo
              analyses of promoter regions and transcription factors for stress-inducible
              genes in methanogenic archaea.  This project will provide a genetic system that
              will make these functional analyses possible.  This research will create tools
              for examining the mechanisms by which gene expression is increased by exposure
              to high temperature in archaebacteria.  Archaebacteria are fundamentally
              different from the other two main kinds of organisms, eubacteria and
              eukaryotes, and tend to live in unusual environments.  Expected practical
              spin-offs of this research are the generation of: a) an expression system in an
              archaeal host (i.e., M. mazei S-6) for large-scale production of foreign,
              recombinant proteins; and b) tools for insertion of useful genes in the M.
              mazei genome that will broaden the array of substrates this organism can
              metabolize, and thus multiply its applications in waste bioconversion and
              bioremediation.

