Title       : California Census Research Data Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9812174

Award Number: 9812174
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262500             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Joseph Hotz hotz@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Mare  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9812174  Hotz    This is a collaborative proposal from UC Berkeley and UCLA to
              establish the California Census Research Data Center ("CCRDC" or "California
              CRDC") in partnership with the U.S. Bureau of the Census. The CCRDC consists of
              two secure sites or laboratories, one at UCLA and the other at UC Berkeley.
              There is a substantial community of social scientists located on the West Coast
              who have either developed or would like to develop research projects that would
              make use of microdata from the Census Bureau's economic surveys of business
              establishments and firms or from its demographic surveys of households and
              individuals. By establishing this Research Data Center (RDC), the locational
              disadvantage currently confronting a large and distinguished group of social
              science researchers on the West Coast will be reduced. By reducing the costs of
              conducting research, we project that a large number of important and high
              quality research projects utilizing micro-level data from Census surveys will
              be stimulated on a wide range of important basic research and policy-relevant
              issues. Moreover, by establishing a partnership with the California CRDC, the
              Census Bureau will have the opportunity to exploit the size and diversity of
              California and to capitalize on existing efforts by the state to develop other
              data sources from administrative records. These administrative data have the
              potential, when linked with Census data, to open up unique and path-breaking
              lines of research.    The two laboratories, one at UCLA and one at UC Berkeley,
              will be developed and operated under one unified Center. The Center will have a
              common governance structure, Executive Director, and Review Board that will
              work with the Census Bureau to provide fair and objective access to West Coast
              researchers while at the same time protecting the confidentiality of the
              underlying microdata. In particular, the principal and co-principal
              investigators, an Executive Director, and the Review Board for the CCRDC will
              work to instill the  "culture of confidentiality" at both laboratories. Over
              its first three years, UCLA, UC Berkeley, and the University of California's
              California Policy Seminar will fund the CCRDC. Funding also is requested from
              the National Science Foundation over this same 3-year period to help defray
              some of the Center's costs. Commitments from these sources will enable the
              Center to support two Faculty Research Coordinators, an Executive Director, and
              a Census Bureau employee at each laboratory and to create a reliable computing
              and security environment. With this staff and infrastructure, it should be
              possible for the Center to develop a sufficient portfolio of funded research
              projects, paying reasonable user fees for the laboratories, to be financially
              self-sufficient by the end of a three to five year period.
