Title       : NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences "Combinatorial
               Optimization:Packing and Covering" 5/18/99- 5/22/99
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1998   
File        : a9812849

Award Number: 9812849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Lee jlee@ms.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl W. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Jacobson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristina Vuskovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Combinatorial optimization involves the efficient choice of an optimal element
              from a large, implicitly-described set.  Instances of such problems occur in
              many important applied domains (e.g., airline-crew scheduling, manufacturing
              logistics, VLSI-circuit design, routing, and experimental design).  Many such
              problems can be formulated as integer-programming packing or covering problems.
               Indeed, such formulations have been the most successful means of attacking
              many of these problems.  Useful algorithmic and structural insights, which
              often have direct impact on our ability to solve practical instances of these
              problems, are achieved through the theories of integral polyhedra, graphs,
              hypergraphs, matroids and clutters.  In particular, decomposition methods play
              a central role.  Our project is a five-day conference, held at the University
              of Kentucky, devoted to this topic.  The main activity of this conference is a
              series of ten lectures by Dr. Gerard Cornuejols of Carnegie Mellon University. 
              The lectures will serve to introduce mathematicians (established researchers in
              discrete mathematics and in other areas, postdoctoral fellows and graduate
              students) to current research in packing and covering.  This conference is
              particularly timely since the field has seen rapid development in the last
              several years, in terms of both theory and application.
