Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Organization on the Pajarito Plateau, New
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9812356

Award Number: 9812356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Crown pcrown@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Patricia Crown, MS Marit Munson will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. Prehistoric rock art  (images which are either
              painted or engraved on rock faces) is common in many parts of the U.S.
              Southwest and MS Munson will conduct a systematic survey of sites in the
              Pajarito Plateau region  of New Mexico. Her focus will be on the Frijoles
              Canyon region which formed a boundary between distinct historic Hopi groups and
              she will conduct a systematic survey to note the position and content of all
              individual occurrences as well as larger panels. Based on ethnographic
              documentation as well as study of Hopi art from known religious contexts, she
              will concentrate her attention on icons which have either probable religious
              significance or which are indicative of warfare and conflict. She will plot
              these in relation to this prehistoric boundary.  Archaeological evidence
              indicates that in late prehistoric times Hopi groups formed large village
              aggregations and likely placed significant strain on available resources.
              Although villages shared a common cultural heritage and religion, it is not
              clear either how they interacted or the extent to which clear boundary
              differences existed. While on the one hand, it is likely that a common set of
              religious beliefs may have limited conflict, evidence of prehistoric warfare is
              also evident. MS Munson will examine this question through the study of rock
              art. Rock art, as well as clothing style and the ceramics prehistoric people
              used served as markers of identity and denoted individual affiliation as well
              as group territory. Based on worldwide ethnographic comparison, MS Munson
              believes that through the analysis of rock art imagery at the boundary between
              two major groups, it is possible to reconstruct the social interactions between
              them. The research will apply this approach.  The work is important for several
              reasons. It will produce a data base of interest to many archaeologists. it
              will develop a new methodology for the study of prehistoric imagery and it will
              assist in training a promising young scientist.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
