Title       : FSML:Telecommunication Links for the Santa Cruz Island Reserve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a9812224

Award Number: 9812224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57104              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyndal L. Laughrin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leal A. Mertes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sally J. Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT           The Santa Cruz Island Reserve
              (SCIR) on one of California's  Channel Islands, is operated by the University
              of California,  Santa Barbara (UCSB). The reserve is one of the most used sites
               in the University of California's Natural Reserve System (NRS).  SCIR supports
              a wide variety of year-round field research  projects in habitats as diverse as
              marine subtidal and intertidal  environments, fresh-water streams, coastal
              grasslands, sage  scrub, chaparral,  and oak and coniferous woodlands.  This 
              project will provide for efficient and effective communications  connections
              for the new database center at SCIR.  The center is  housed in a donated
              building that was recently moved to the site,  renovated, and equipped.     
              The project will provide new opportunities for field scientists  to enter,
              process, and analyze data while in the field, thereby  guiding research
              efforts. The proposed telecommunications link  will allow visiting scientists
              to communicate with staff and  colleagues and to transmit data from the field
              station to their  home institutions. The proposed project will provide the 
              capability to store and move large data files, such as remote  sensing images,
              between mainland and  island sites. There is substantial demand for this
              database  development, management, and availability, which will support 
              research and teaching projects, and increase research  productivity, at the
              field station. These data sets will be  available to users throughout the world
              via the Internet. UC has  already demonstrated substantial commitment to this
              project by  acquiring and renovating a building at SCIR, by equipping it with 
              GIS hardware and software,  and by supporting database development.
