Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Photonic Band Gap Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a9812322

Award Number: 9812322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34340              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Tuttle gtuttle@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kai Ming Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5940,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for the support of a collaborative research project
              between Dr. Gary Tuttle, Associate Professor, Department of Electrical
              Engineering and Computer Science, Dr. Kai-Ming Ho, Professor, Department of
              Physics, both at Iowa State University, in Ames, and Dr. Ekmel Ozbay, Associate
              Professor of Physics at Bilkent University in Ankara, Turkey.  The two teams
              plan to conduct experimental and theoretical research in the area of photonic
              band gap materials.  Using a layer-by-layer photonic band gap structure (which
              was invented and experimentally demonstrated at Iowa State) as a basis, they
              propose to work on three different topics related to photonic crystals:
              resonant cavity-enhanced (RCE) detectors, metallic photonic crystals at
              millimeter and infrared wavelengths, and fabrication of three dimensional
              structures at infrared wave scale.  Scope: The collaboration of the two
              research groups in the US and Turkey is expected to lead to the development of
              new experimental and theoretical tools which will be used to understand the
              characteristics of these new materials.  Such understanding will help in the
              design of photonic crystals and in developing new applications in
              millimeter-wave, infrared, and visible wavelengths such as very-sensitive
              detectors, millimeter-wave antennas, and thresholdless semiconductor lasers. 
              The outcome of this collaboration is expected to be scientifically and
              technically beneficial to both countries.  This project is funded jointly by
              the Division of International Programs and the Division of Electrical and
              Communication Systems.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
