Title       : Built-In Diagnostics for Structural Health Monitoring: An Active Sensing
               Technique for Civil Infrastructures Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9812574

Award Number: 9812574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fu-Kuo Chang fkchang@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                    9812574  Chang  A joint investigation between U.S. and Japanese
              investigators is  conducted to develop built-in diagnostic techniques for the 
              monitoring of the integrity of civil infrastructures.  On the  U.S. side, this
              investigation will focus on the development of an  active sensing diagnostic
              technique for identifying anomalies in  critical areas of structures.  On the
              Japanese side, a passive  sensing technique with distributed sensors for
              monitoring the  global response of the structures and for locating the critical
               areas where anomalies might be present.    This research will involve the
              development of both the hardware  and software for the system.  The hardware
              development includes  the design and fabrication of the smart rebar for steel- 
              reinforced concrete structures.  The smart rebar will be made of  composite
              materials with a built-in network of sensors and  actuators.  Piezoelectric
              materials will be selected as both  sensors and actuators.  A built-in actuator
              would generate  desired diagnostic signals which are sensitive to a particular 
              type of anomaly or damage, and the neighboring sensors would  record the
              transmission and reflection of the signals.  The  difference in sensor
              measurements taken before and after the  introduction of an anomaly in the
              region will then be processed  to identify the presence of the anomaly.    The
              software will be developed to interpret the sensor  measurements.  The major
              focus of the development of the software  will concentrate on diagnostic signal
              generation by built-in  transducers, signal processing, and signal
              interpretation, thus  serving as the brain of the diagnostic technique.    Upon
              completion of the study, a prototype of a built-in active  sensing system will
              be developed.  Appropriate experiments will  be conducted for verifying the
              proposed techniques.  ***
