Title       : FSML: Glasshouse/Mesocosm Facilities at Hancock Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9812387

Award Number: 9812387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136400             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Spencer bill.spencer@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard H. Whiteman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan P. Hendricks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy C. Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      Main Street
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                                            
                                         Hancock Biological Station (HBS) of Murray State
              University will  provide for the construction of a glasshouse/mesocosm
              facility.  The facilities will be used to conduct terrestrial and aquatic 
              research/teaching where parameters including light intensity,  temperature,
              daylength, water velocity, nutrient supply, humidity  etc. can be controlled.
              The facilities will be equipped with  mesocosms for aquatic, wetland and stream
              research, and equipment  to provide for control of environmental conditions. 
              It is  expected that individual researchers will provide project-  specific
              research equipment. Acquisition of the proposed  facilities will greatly
              enhance the HBS physical plant and  provide the infrastructure to better serve
              the regional and  national scientific community. Researchers outside of Murray 
              State University have indicated a need for the proposed  facilities.
              Acquisition of the proposed facilities will allow  expansion of future research
              projects to include additional  collaborations among regional, national and at
              least one  international scientist.
