Title       : Electron Transport in Correlated Low-Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9812422

Award Number: 9812422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Phillips dimer@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812422  Phillips  This is a theoretical grant funded jointly by the Divisions 
              of Materials Research and Chemistry.  The research focuses  on three topics:
              the unusual phase transition in the dilute  two-dimensional electron gas;
              transport in electrides; and,  disorder in the Kondo effect.    When electrons
              are confined to move in a plane, localization  as well as electron correlations
              are enhanced.  This grant  focuses on three distinct physical realizations of
              spatially  confined electron systems in which the transport properties  are
              fundamentally linked to localization, electron  interaction, or an interplay
              between the two.  In the first  system, the focus is on the recent experiments
              of Kravchenko  and colleagues which provide convincing evidence for the 
              existence of a conducting state in a dilute 2D electron gas.  These experiments
              are surprising as it had been previously  thought that disorder precludes the
              presence of metallic  conduction in 2D.  In this work, the possibility that the
               experimentally-observed transition corresponds to the  melting of a Wigner
              crystal is explored.  We propose that  when a Wigner crystal melts, the melted
              liquid state  superconducts.  A series of analytical and numerical  approaches
              are discussed to test this proposal.    In the second problem, we focus on the
              interplay between  magnetism and disorder in the electride conductor K 
              +(cryptand 2.2.2 )e -.  Electrides are a class of organic  conductors in which
              the anion is an electron.  The key  features that lead to the complexity of the
              transport and  magnetic proerties of this system are the presence of spin 
              singlet electron pairs localized in cavities without the  concomitant spin gap,
              but instead a surprising charge gap.  We argue that a model with long range
              magnetic interactions  can explain the transport properties of this system.   
              Finally, experiments by Giordano and co-workers show that in  thin metallic
              films, weak-localization physics can couple to  Kondo spin-flip scattering.  A
              scaling an alysis as well as a  calculation of the magnetoresistance will be
              done as  extensions of previous work on the feedback effect played by 
              non-magnetic scattering on the Kondo effect.  %%%  This is a theoretical grant
              funded jointly by the Divisions  of Materials Research and Chemistry.  The
              research focuses  on three topics: the unusual phase transition in the dilute 
              two-dimensional electron gas; transport in electrides; and,  disorder in the
              Kondo effect.  All three problems have in  common the competition between
              electron interactions and the  confinement of electrons to one-and
              two-dimensional systems.  ***
