Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sociolinguistic Variation and Language Change in
               San Basilio de Palenque (Colombia)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9812864

Award Number: 9812864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12379              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gillian Sankoff gillian@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9812864
SANKOFF
The origins and evolution of Caribbean Spanish are the subject
              of continuing scholarly debate, the most controversial aspect of which centers
              on the role of prior African and creole languages. This project investigates
              language use in the only community in which a Spanish Creole language
              (Palenquero) is known to have survived in the Americas: San Basilio de Palenque
              (Colombia). For this reason, San Basilio is key to the investigation of the
              role of Creole languages in the history of Caribbean Spanish. Since its
              founding in the late 1600's by cimarrones (Spanish "run away African slaves"),
              the community of San Basilio has been bilingual in both Palenquero and Kateyano
              ('Castillian'). Today, a rapidly diminishing number of inhabitants continue to
              speak Palenquero which is related to the Afro-Portuguese creole language
              attested to in the Spanish Caribbean as early as the XVI century. This
              investigation has two main foci. First, combining ethnographic and
              sociolinguistic techniques, it will construct a sociolinguistic profile of San
              Basilio documenting the current status of bilingualism and language usage (Who
              speaks what to whom and why?) to assess the role these social factors have in
              language maintenance/abandonment and change. Second, using quantitative
              sociolinguistic techniques, this dissertation will investigate three linguistic
              variables across the two languages: the alternation of expressed subject
              pronouns with zero-subjects; the variation between s, h, and 0 (e.g. tu
              tiene0/tieneh/tienes 'you have'); and the variable prenasalization of initial
              stops (e.g. do vs. ndo 'two'). This approach will be useful in: (a) revealing
              the synchronic and diachronic linguistic relationship between these two speech
              varieties; and (b) documenting 
speech of a representative cross section of
              residents of San Basilio. In order to ameliorate the effects of the observer's
              paradox, the sociolinguistic profile and the collection of the data will be
              accomplished primarily through participant-observation and the subsequent
              recording of speech at the principal sites of recurrent linguistic interaction.
              The project contributes to the literature by the combination of ethnographic
              and sociolinguistic techniques of observation and data collection and the
              modern sociolinguistic methodology of analysis of linguistic variables to the
              study of this unique albeit rapidly disappearing bilingual Afro- Hispanic
              community.

