Title       : Planning Meeting for Creation of a Geotechnical Data Management Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9812885

Award Number: 9812885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Bardet bardet@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: CMS-9812885  Jean-Pierre Bardet, USC    The research projects in
              geotechnical engineering sponsored by  many  Federal and State agencies and
              organizations generate a large  amount of  Field and laboratory data concerning
              the properties of the soil at  a site.  The data and results of these projects
              are usually released and  distributed  As hard-copy reports, but without the
              accompanying digital data  from field  and laboratory measurements. The digital
              data, drawings,  photographs, and  videos generated in these projects are
              generally stored by the  principal  investigators and, unfortunately, are not
              systematically  distributed to  other researchers and practitioners. In the era
              of Internet  communications,  the traditional hardcopy reports only partially
              communicate the  data; the  absence of the accompanying digital data impedes
              the verification  and  applicability of research results, limits the return on
              research  investments from sponsoring organizations and agencies, and delays 
              progress  and breakthroughs in geotechnical engineering.  The overall objective
              of this project is the creation of a  Geotechnical  Data Management Center
              (GDMC) which collects the digital and  graphical data  generated by researchers
              in geotechnical engineering, and  distributes this  data by means of the
              Internet. The GDMC will be established at the  University of Southern
              California, and will link the servers from  other  participating institutions,
              and those of Internet distribution  systems in  engineering seismology.
              Examples would be those of the California  Division  of Mines and Geology, and
              of the US Geological Survey, and  geotechnical  databases such as that for the
              National Geotechnical  Experimentation Sites.  The GDMC's main function is to
              catalyze the use of the Internet in  geotechnical engineering, and to
              coordinate individual efforts.  The GDMC  data will be primarily of a
              geotechnical nature - e.g., shear wave  velocity  profiles, the results from
              cone penetration and standard  penetr ation tests,  centrifuge test results,
              and occasional strong motion recordings.  The immediate objective of this
              project is to organize a small  meeting to  discuss and plan for the creation
              and operation of the GDMC. The  main  topics are: (1) the concept of a small
              oversight committee for the  GDMC,  and (2) the planning meeting to discuss the
              oversight committee,  its  charter, and operation.  It is expected that the
              creation of the Geotechnical Data  Management  Center will greatly increase the
              availability of critical data to  researchers and users, leading to more rapid
              developments in  earthquake  hazard mitigation.
