Title       : A Unified Approach to Predicting Long Term Performance of Asphalt-Aggregate
               Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a9812741

Award Number: 9812741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Richard Kim kim@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy H. Borden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yasuyuki Horie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,1444,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              98-12741
PI - Y. Richard Kim, Roy H. Borden, and Yasuyuki Horie North Carolina
              State University
"A Unified Approach to Predicting Long Term Performance of
              Asphalt-Aggregate Mixtures"


The principal objective of the proposed
              research is to develop test methods and models for predicting long term
              performance of asphalt concrete that can account for viscoelasticity, damage,
              volumetric/deviatoric coupling, temperature, and aging. The objective will be
              accomplished by applying the extended elastic-viscoelastic correspondence
              principle and the continuum damage theory for describing damage evolution. The
              experimental results from axisymmetric triaxial tests will be used in
              determining the multiaxial viscoelastic material functions and finding an
              explicit form of the constitutive model that will serve as the basis of the
              performance prediction models. In support of the continuum damage modeling,
              discrete element modeling will be performed using DM2 code with an objective of
              establishing a methodology for modeling asphalt concrete behavior on the basis
              of composition, microstructure, and interfacial properties at the particle
              level.

The constitutive model will be incorporated into the ABAQUS finite
              element code, and used to predict the response and performance of laboratory
              pavements loaded by the Model Mobile Load Simulator. Nondestructive surface
              wave tests along with dispersion analysis and inversion using Artificial Neural
              Networks will be performed to determine the change in the modulus of asphalt
              concrete due to fatigue damage growth. Physical measurements of the change in
              the asphalt concrete layer thickness will be used to measure permanent
              deformation growth. The measurements will be used to verify the constitutive
              model and the finite element analysis. Finally, the mixture and performance
              data obtained from WesTrack pavement sections will be used to validate the
              performance prediction models.



