Title       : Middle Tennessee Environmental Research Consortium Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9812947

Award Number: 9812947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Hercules hercules@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1504,9156,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)   project is
              co-supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program   and the Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities.  This workshop is   designed to bring together
              participants from both academic and industrial   institutions for the formation
              of a regional environmental research   consortium.  Representatives from five
              colleges and universities (Fisk   University, Middle Tennessee State
              Universisty, Tennessee State   University, Tennessee Technological University,
              and Vanderbilt   University) and local industry (including Eckenfelder
              Engineering and   DuPont) will learn about similar consortia which have been
              successful in   stimulating collaborative research efforts.   `Action Groups`
              will be   established to provide focus in the areas of water pollution, air  
              pollution, and health effects and public policy.  A framework for  
              collaboration between the academic institutions (including both   predominately
              undergraduate institutions and HBCUs) and local industries   is seen as having
              advantageous outcomes for the Middle Tennessee region.    These sorts of
              partnerships are ideally suited for participation in the   NSF-GOALI program.  
               The nature of environmental research dictates that multidisciplinary  
              approaches must be utilized.  The workshop dedicated to the establishment   of
              a Middle Tennessee Environmental Research Consortium brings together  
              researchers from different academic institutions and industrial interests  
              having a wide variety of backgrounds.  The establishment of `Action   Groups`
              focused on topical areas of interest will provide a framework   which should
              encourage meaningful collaboration of benefit to the   institutions, companies,
              and the people of this region.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
