Title       : FSML- Enhancing Data Management at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9812388

Award Number: 9812388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Taber D. Allison taber@earthnet.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Inouye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) is an  independent, nonprofit
              field station with no institutional  affiliation, which provides facilities for
              researchers who  wish to study high-altitude biology in a field setting.  This
              project will assist in purchasing PC workstations,  network capability,
              peripherals, and software to enhance  the Lab's data management system (DMS).  
               The RMBL has developed a preliminary plan for data  management that
              establishes policies and guidelines for  use and access of the RMBL DMS.  An
              enhanced DMS will  provide 1) for the security, access, maintenance, and 
              documentation for key data sets maintained by RMBL (e.g.,  weather records,
              land management, species inventories,  research activities, and maps of
              facilities), 2) a  convenient means for scientists and students to enter, 
              document access, and archive data sets as part of a  library of databases for
              RMBL, 3) a geographic information  system (GIS) facility as a means for
              students and  researchers to analyze and model spatially related  phenomena at
              RMBL, 4) a facility for training students in  data management techniques, and
              5) an organized platform  for the integration of published RMBL research,
              enhancing  its value for providing scientific information to  relevant agencies
              in the region and to the lay community.    The RMBL DMS will be implemented in
              phases, and priority  will be given to enhancing computing capability and 
              accessibility for students and visiting scientists to RMBL  data resources. 
              RMBL has established a data management  policy, made preliminary choices of
              hardware and software,  and hired a half-time data manager who will begin 
              developing data catalogs.  During the time period of this  proposal RMBL will
              install an LAN with server that  includes the RMBL administrative offices, the
              library, and  the student computer facility in Barclay Classroom  Building. 
              Initial access to the network by RMBL  investigators will be via public access
              computers on the  LAN, or via phone connec tion to the Internet and the RMBL 
              homepage from their laboratory offices.  The Lab also will  construct data
              catalogs for placement on the RMBL home  page, develop RMBL GIS data layers,
              and purchase  appropriate hardware to enhance GIS capability.
