Title       : Discrete and Continuous Nonconvex Optimization with Applications to Production,
               Distribution, and Design Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9812047

Award Number: 9812047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215582             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanif D. Sherali hanifs@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812047
Sherali
     This grant provides funding for the development and study
              of a new methodology, the Reformulation-Linearization/Convexification Technique
              (RLT), for generating tight relaxations that can be used to construct exact
              solution methods as well as to design powerful heuristic procedures for large
              classes of discrete combinatorial and continuous nonconvex programming
              problems. For linear mixed-integer 0-1 problems, specialized RLT relaxations
              that are enhanced by conditional logic implications will be developed and
              embedded within a dynamic Lagrangian Relaxation constraint generation scheme.
              In the context of continuous nonconvex programs, new theoretically convergent
              and computationally effective global optimization RLT approaches will be
              developed to solve a wide class of factorable nonlinear programs. Extensions
              and specializations for minimax problems that arise in situations dealing with
              multiple criteria and equity issues, and for general integer/discrete problems
              will also be explored.  In order to effectively cope with the size and
              structure of the relaxations that are typically generated by RLT, various
              Lagrangian dual, aggregation, penalty function, trust region, and
              conjugate/deflected subgradient methods will be investigated. These ideas and
              methods will be applied to design novel approaches to solve a variety of
              location-allocation problems, telecommunication and pipe-network design
              problems, machine scheduling problems, and air traffic control management
              problems.
     If successful, the results of this research will lead to the
              development of a new comprehensive technology that unifies many important
              concepts and offers insights into problem structures and modeling strategies.
              Operations Research analysts and practitioners will be able to use this
              methodology to construct tight model representations, generate strong valid
              inequalities, and design effective procedures for solving hard, discrete and
              continuous, nonconvex problems that arise often in practice. The research canl
              contribute toward the design of various computational tools that may be
              incorporated in public domain software for solving such classes of
              problems.



