Title       : FSML- Enhancing Data Management and Telecommunications at the Harvard Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9812263

Award Number: 9812263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102090             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
              Emery R. Boose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Lent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                     Over the last ten years the Harvard
              Forest has developed an  integrated and cross-disciplinary research and
              educational program  involving researchers and students from across the
              northeastern  U.S. that focuses on the response of forest ecosystems to 
              disturbance and stress resulting from natural and anthropogenic  processes.
              This program is structured around five approaches: (1)  reconstructAve studies,
              (2) long-term measurement and observation,  (3) experimental manipulations, (4)
              integration of results within  our research group and collaboratively with
              other research groups,  and (5) application of results to policy issues in
              natural  resource management, conservation biology, and human health and 
              environment. A ten-year plan for the renovation and construction  of additional
              laboratories, office space, archival facilities, and  housing to accommodate
              growing numbers of visiting scientists and  students has just been completed.
              Critical areas for further  development of the facility are data management and
               teleeommumcations. A development plan has been created to address  these
              areas. This project will (1) upgrade Internet connectivity  at the Harvard
              Forest, (2.) set up high performance file servers  with large disk capacity,
              and (3) upgrade the GIS Laboratory. The  second phase will extend full network
              connectivity to two  buildings recently renovated for visitor and student
              housing, and  to continue upgrades to the computers in the main facility. The 
              improvements supported by this project will have a profound impact  on visiting
              scientists, students, and staff, as well as virtual  visitors, through improved
              access to the Internet, improved local  connectivity, continued development of
              Harvard Forest resources on  the Web, and a state-of-the-art PC-based GIS
              Laboratory. The  larger research community will benefit from increased 
              opportunities for collaboration and advances in data management  that will
              result from these improvements.
