Title       : FSML:Expansion and Enhancement of Analytical Facilities at the Shannon Point
               Marine Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9812342

Award Number: 9812342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Sulkin sulkin@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Western Washington University's Shannon Point Marine Center
(SPMC) is
              strategically located in the northern Puget Sound basin, providing
direct
              access from the mainland to a wide variety of marine and estuarine
habitats
              that support a rich and diverse biota.  The location and facilities
              provide
distinctive opportunities for process-oriented research on
              productivity of coastal
watersheds and wetlands, nutrient cycling and
              regeneration, microbial ecology, and
benthic metabolism and on life history
              phenomena of local fish, invertebrate,
and marine plant species.  SPMC is
              actively involved in both undergraduate and 
Master's of Science academic
              programs including serving as a site for upper
 division courses and
              supporting extensive undergraduate and graduate research.                      
                            Students come from both the home institution and from colleges
              and universities from
 around the country.  Programs for undergraduates
              include Research Experiences
 for Undergraduates, the Minorities in Marine
              Science Undergraduate Program and
 the Science Education and Research
              Undergraduate program.  To promote research and
Training, SPMC has developed a
              database accessible to visitors and remote 
investigators.  In cooperation
              with the nearby Padilla Bay National Estuarine
Research Reserve, SPMC has
              identified a number of model study sites that can support
long-term research
              in the region, particularly with respect to seagrass communities
that are
              unusually extensive for west coast estuaries.  In order to provide
              additional
focus to investigations of these communities that can both provide
              the basis for
productive collaborative research and address local and regional
              management
concerns, SPMC is developing an appropriate field and analytical
              facilities base.
With the addition of two new research vessels SPMC is
              well-equipped to pursue
on-site field investigations.  Because of greatly
              increased research and training
activity in recent years, however, analytical
              laboratory space has become a severely
limiting factor.  In order to pursue
              studies of geochemical and biochemical
processes and to accommodate the
              interests of visiting investigators, SPMC
will renovate and properly furnish
              existing laboratory space for use as an
additional analytical laboratory, thus
              doubling available space for this purpose.
SPMC will also purchase new
              analytical and support instrumentation not presently
available that will
              enhance the facilities capacity for research. 



