Title       : Reliable Data Sharing in Wide Area Gigabit Networked Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9812532

Award Number: 9812532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panos K. Chrysanthis panos@cs.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sujata Banerjee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project's goal is to study the impact of the new capabilities of high-speed
              networks on the design and performance of data management protocols. In
              particular, the focus is on high-speed wide-area networks (WANs) where the
              propagation latency is the dominant communication cost, the migration of large
              amounts of data is not an issue, and efficient multicasting and guarantees on
              network Quality of Service (QoS) parameters are available. In this project,
              existing concurrency control, commit and recovery protocols are being evaluated
              with respect to performance scalability under the new network assumptions.
              Further, new protocols are being developed that utilize the huge bandwidth and
              minimize the number of sequential phases of messages exploiting the
              multicasting capability and the provision of QoS guarantees such as bounded
              end-to-end packet delay and packet loss. At the same time, because of the need
              to scale to thousands of clients and servers, not all of which may be
              operational at any given time, the new WAN data management protocols are
              designed to achieve higher site autonomy in a cooperative manner, reducing
              global synchronization and supporting disconnected operations. The various
              protocols are empirically evaluated using computer simulation under different
              scenarios. The results of this research are expected to provide a better
              insight into the synergy between database and network technologies. This, in
              turn, will facilitate the deployment of future high performance WAN data server
              systems which are part of the necessary infrastructure that will support
              important nation- and world-wide applications such as electronic commerce and
              other web-based applications.
              

http://www.cs.pitt.edu/admt/projects/wands.html

