Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Histologic and Macroscopic Assessment of
               Physical Activity in Human Skeletal Remains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1999  
File        : a9812658

Award Number: 9812658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5931               (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel D. Stout stouts@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research project will test a new method for extrapolating physical
              activity levels, or loading, from the skeletal remains of extinct human
              populations. The novel method that the investigators will test is based on
              quantifying preserved microscopic evidence of bone remodeling in the femoral
              cortex.  As loading is not the only factor to affect remodeling, systemic
              factors will be quantified and standardized by using measurements on the rib, a
              non-weight bearing element.  

The analyses will utilize archaeological
              samples from a site on the Peruvian coast.  The skeletal remains here can be
              assigned to one of three time periods; the first two being from hunter-gatherer
              horizons, the third a more sedentary maritime -based economy.  Previous studies
              have demonstrated that the latter group evidenced less bone loading, thus
              providing a known control.

The results of this research have the potential
              to provide unique information on behavioral differences among past populations.
              This histological method provides a practical tool for deducing activity levels
              from fragmentary archaeological material.  This is particularly important for
              in many cases remains are too fragmentary to allow current investigative
              techniques.  

Understanding physical activity level differences between
              prehistoric populations (which exhibit low incidence of osteoporotic fracture)
              and modern industrialized populations (among which bone loss and skeletal
              fragility represent major public health concerns) would contribute
              significantly to our current understanding of the biological and cultural
              factors underlying of age-associated bone loss. 


