Title       : Integrative Biology and Adaptation of Antarctic Marine Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a9812707

Award Number: 9812707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $753648             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donal T. Manahan manahan@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Manahan
This project is an international, advanced-level, graduate training
              course that will be organized and taught in Antarctica for one month during the
              period of austral summer.  The goals for the course are to introduce students
              to the diversity of biological organisms in Antarctic polar regions and to
              study unique aspects of biology that permit life in such extreme environments.
              Long-standing questions in evolution and ecology (such as cold adaptation and
              food limitation) concerning the biology of Antarctic organisms will be examined
              through physiological experiments with organisms, studies of isolated cells and
              tissues, experiments on protein structure and function, and molecular analysis
              of genetics systems.  Lectures will emphasize physiological, biochemical and
              molecular biological approaches to understanding the ecology and biological
              adaptations of Antarctic organisms. Student research projects will follow these
              interwoven themes. The students will gain a rigorous understanding of the
              power, but also the limitations of physiological, biochemical and molecular
              biological methods are they are currently being used to answer research
              questions  in environmental science and biological adaptation. The course will
              be held in the Crary Science and Engineering Center, located at McMurdo
              Station, Antarctica. This modern research facility provides state of the art
              laboratory facilities within a short distance from the marine and freshwater
              environments where biological observations and collections of material will be
              made. The course will be taught as four modules: Biological Diversity of
              Antarctic Organisms: Evolution and Molecular Phylogeny; Ultraviolet Radiation:
              Effects on Antarctic Organisms;I nvertebrates: Physiology, Energy Metabolism
              and Development; and Fish: Biochemical Adapations. The course, which will
              attract an extremely competitive group of young scientists, will introduce new
              researchers to Antarctica, and will teach students to use modern research
              methods to study the mechanisms that are unique to biology in Antarctica.

