Title       : Ultrafast Spectroscopic Studies of Forster Energy Transfer in Semiconducting
               Polymer Blends: The Route to High Gain Materials for Low Threshold Polymer
               Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9812852

Award Number: 9812852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Heeger ajh@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812852
Heeger

This project deals with the properties of semiconducting
              polymers used as laser materials.  The goal of this research is to find ways
              and means to improve their performance to make them competitive with
              conventional GaInN light emitting diodes.  Attempts made so far to make
              efficient diode lasers via direct electrical pumping by injecting electrons and
              holes  from electrodes or by placing the polymer lasers monolithically onto a
              blue-emitting InGaN LED or laser which would be used to optically pump the
              polymer laser have not been successful owing to the fact that the lasing
              thresholds of the polymers are higher than the output of an InGaN LED or of the
              excitation level that can be achieved in polymer LEDs.  To deal with these
              problems small amounts of a guest polymer will be blended in a host polymer in
              such a way that the Forster energy transfer  will occur from the host to the
              guest emitter.  The specific goal is to demonstrate and develop conjugated
              polymer blends as high gain/low loss laser materials and to optimize the
              Forster energy transfer  from host to guest.  Ultrafast time-resolved
              spectroscopy will be used to perform the measurements.  This project offers
              excellent opportunities for the training of graduate students and post doctoral
              research associates in a field of growing technological importance. 
              
%%%
This research deals with fundamental aspects of the energy transfer in
              polymeric materials to render them suitable as efficient lasers.  The  research
              involves graduate students and post doctoral research associates, whose
              training in a growing technological field prepares them for employment in
              forefront scientific and technical areas in the 21st Century.     
***

