Title       : Collaborative Research: Accessing Brain Collection Information and Images Via
               Internet, CD-ROM, and CentralizedLocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a9812712

Award Number: 9812712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace I. Welker welker@neurophys.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  To understand brain function, we need to understand brain  structure.  The
              evolution of mammals has led to many differences  in brain anatomy, but we know
              very little how those differences  correlate to the wide diversity of animal
              behavior.  This  collaborative project is to consolidate and make more
              accessible  for research and education two major collections that form a 
              unique, extensive, remarkably preserved assembly of comparative  mammalian
              brain specimens.  Together they contain more than 275  sectioned and stained
              brains, including over a half million  microscope slides, representing over 150
              species, from 50 Families  in 17 different Orders of Mammalia.  Many specimens
              are  irreplaceable, from rare or endangered species, and so can provide 
              critically unique data for questions about biodiversity.  The  collections are
              being brought to a national museum facility in  Washington DC to join
              complementary extensive human brain  collections, and so establish a single
              site for storage, curation,  and research on comparative mammalian brain
              neuroanatomy.  An  electronic/website also is being developed, including
              several  selected images, which researchers could access worldwide for  data,
              or use to evaluate whether to make a research visit to the  site itself to
              examine the original material.     The impact of this project is high.  First,
              it safely preserves  for future research an irreplaceable resource that also
              represents  a scientific investment of more than 50 years of exacting work by 
              dozens of people.  Second, it promotes multidisciplinary research  on
              comparative neuroscience, behavior, and systematics to  understand the
              diversity in the most complex organ known, adding  computational expertise for
              technological development of digital  imaging and multidimensional databases. 
              Third, it provides a  working base as well as a model for sharing complex
              morphological  data with other collections, such as those on non-mammalian 
              vertebrate brains.  Fourth, the project will have educati onal as  well as
              research impact by providing easy website access to  information about the
              vertebrate brain in the context of  biodiversity.
