Title       : Support Research on Nitrogen Flux at the Estuary-Ocean Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9812095

Award Number: 9812095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert P. Psuty psuty@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qizhong Guo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Norbert Psuty will purchase a S-4
              current meter which measures water flow, recording both current velocity and
              water depth. He will also acquire a newly-developed highly accurate in situ
              nutrient analyzer which uses a proven wet chemistry colorimetric technique to
              determine water nitrate concentration by measuring the light absorbence of a
              colored dye produced by chemical reaction. These instruments will be employed
              to determine nitrogen fluxes on a long-term continuous basis at Barnegat Inlet,
              the boundary between Barnegat Bay, New Jersey, and the Atlantic Ocean. These
              data will allow the construction of a spatial-temporal pattern of variability
              and the reasons for variability in measured nitrogen fluxes.  Eutrophication of
              estuaries is a common water quality problem associated with the continuing
              growth of population in the UC coastal zone. Nitrogen is a significant
              contributor to the problem and is among the targets of many regional water
              quality plans. However, one of the major uncertainties in studying nitrogen in
              estuaries is the flux of this nutrient through the ocean-estuary boundary.
              Nitrogen may enter an estuary from ocean sources such as sewage treatment
              discharges, atmospheric deposition, and bottom sediment regeneration. Although
              nitrogen from land sources may be discharged from the estuary to the ocean, a
              large proportion may re-enter on the following flood tide. To quantify estuary
              nitrogen budgets more accurately it is necessary to gain greater understanding
              of ocean estuary interactions and Dr. Psuty's research is directed at this
              goal. The instrumentation will be used by the Geography Department from Rutgers
              University and thus serve to further undergraduate and graduate education.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
