Title       : Learning and Using Combinatorial Structure in Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1999  
File        : a9812169

Award Number: 9812169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Johnson mj@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Statistical language models are of considerable scientific importance, where
              they provide insight into the importance of various information sources for
              language understanding, and they have significant technological applications
              such as speech recognition and machine translation.  To date most statistical
              language models have concentrated on simple phrase-structure and lexical
              relationships.  This research investigates probabilistic models capable of
              describing richer combinatorial structures also found in human languages.  The
              goal of this research is to understand how humans learn a language and use it
              to communicate.  Because these linguistic processes seem to be inherently
              computational in nature---they crucially involve the transformation and
              manipulation of information-conveying representations---this research focuses
              on developing explicit computational models.  Besides the primary scientific
              goal of understanding the human language learning and processing mechanisms,
              the research also has important technological applications in areas such as
              automatic speech recognition, information extraction, summarization and
              indexing of on-line texts, translation of texts from one language to another by
              computer, etc.  This research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and
              Statistics Program and the Statistics and Probability Program under the
              Mid-Career Methodological Opportunities Fellowship Announcement.
