Title       : Accelerated Testing of Durability of Composite Materials and Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9812758

Award Number: 9812758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Tsai stsai@structure.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Christensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1037,1444,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The main focus of the program will be upon polymeric  composite materials. The
              program is comprehensive, ranging  from basic research to technology
              applications for industry.  The technical foundation of the work is that of the
              time-  temperature superposition methodology for polymers. With  this
              methodology, elevated temperature states can be used to  accelerate time flow
              events. When properly viewed on  logarithmic scales the acceleration effect is
              nothing less  than dramatic. The method has been available and widely used  for
              many years to characterize nondestructive properties  such as relaxation
              functions. In vitally important work of  very recent times, the method has been
              proven to apply to  the time based irreversible properties controlling failure 
              in polymeric based materials. This breakthrough work and  approach will be
              carefully exploited through evaluation and  expansion in the present program.
              The basic research  component of this program will involve developing a theory 
              of crack kinetics. Inherent flaws in bulk polymers and at  interfaces
              progresses through growth stages under load,  ultimately becoming of critical
              size to cause failure. This  avenue will be explored in great detail, along
              with full  statistical aspects of the problem. The work will be posed  in the
              temperature dependent state in order to incorporate  the time-temperature shift
              methodology. Common empirical  formulations of damage accumulation, such as
              Miner's `law`,  will be evaluated.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
