Title       : GOALI: Structural Studies of Orientational Development in Polymers using
               Real-Time Non-Invasive Spectroscopic Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9812088

Award Number: 9812088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320001             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Rabolt rabolt@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. Bruce Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9146,9165,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9812088  Rabolt    This GOALI award between the University of Delaware and
              DuPont, co-funded  by the Division of Materials Research and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary  Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences, is  focused on non-invasive analysis of polymers during actual
              processing.  Vibrational spectroscopy has the potential to act as a
              non-invasive probe  which is sensitive to chemical, conformational, crystal and
              morphological  structure as well as molecular orientation.  Both infrared
              spectroscopy and  Raman scattering will be utilized to examine polymeric films
              and fibers  because these spectroscopic probes are sensitive to the development
              of  backbone and side chain orientation and unlike x-ray diffraction do not 
              require a coherent stacking of crystalline regions in order to provide 
              structural information.  As a spectroscopic technique, Raman scattering is 
              non-invasive, capable of differentiating between conformers, and can  provide
              information on chain orientation when the directional nature of  polarized
              Raman scattering is utilized. An additional advantage of Raman  scattering is
              the ease of sampling.  Since it is a scattering technique,  spectra can be
              obtained on fiber bundles as well as individual filaments.  If instead, studies
              of thin films are of interest, then infrared (IR)  absorption spectroscopy is
              the choice since the absorption cross section is  5-6 orders of magnitude
              greater than the scattering cross section for the  same normal mode and the
              flat film geometry is ideally suited for IR  studies.  Hence both IR and Raman
              studies will be conducted in the "real-  time" domain as structure and
              orientation develop in poly(ethylene  terephthalate) (PET), poly(butylene
              terephthalate) (PBT) and poly(ethylene  napthalate) (PEN) during deformation
              and/or heating.  %%%  The use of polymeric materials is extremely widespread in
              our lives today.  The value that these materials provide to the end user is
              directly related  to the various properties, e.g.,  elasticity, toughness, and
              strength, that  they exhibit.  Infrared spectroscopy and Raman scattering are
              important  analytical techniques for the non-destructive evaluation of the
              development  of orientation and order in polymeric materials.  Traditionally
              studies are  done either before or after a polymer is processed into its final
              form  (e.g., soda bottle) but this fails to provide an insight into the
              evolution  of structural development as it happens.  The proposed approach
              outlined  here will allow for the real-time measurement of local order and 
              orientation as materials are processed.  The application of these 
              spectroscopic techniques to polymers will provide important information on 
              structure/property relationships which develop during processing and will 
              allow us to design new manufacturing protocols to optimize polymer 
              performance.  ***
