Title       : Learning Sensorimotor Control of Balance and Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9812591

Award Number: 9812591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $558982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Spong m-spong@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald F. DeJong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl S. Rosengren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seth Hutchinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramavarapu S. Sreenivas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1339,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9812591
Spong
The goal of this project is to investigate new computational
              methods for learning sensorimotor control in bipedal locomotion.  The
              overarching theme of the project is the integration of cross-fertilization of
              ideas from engineering, psychology, and kinesiology. The PI's will utilize
              techniques from control theory and artificial intelligence to improve their
              understanding of the dynamics and control of human movement and the mechanisms
              by which humans learn sensorimotor control, while at the same time utilize
              studies of human movement to aid the development of improved learning and
              control techniques for multi-degree-of-freedom mechanical systems.  Further
              applications of their computational methods might include more dextrous and
              useful robots and more effective diagnostic and physical therapy approaches for
              disabled humans, as well as better balance training and falls prevention
              programs for elderly and individuals with balance deficits.

They have
              assembled a team of researchers with expertise in robotics, nonlinear and
              hybrid control theory, discrete event dynamical systems, machine learning and
              artificial intelligence, computer vision, developmental psychology and
              perceptual-motor coordination to explore these research issues from both the
              robotic and the human side and to integrate concepts from these diverse
              disciplines into a coherent theory of learning control in
              multi-degree-of-freedom anthroopmorphic systems.

They will study the
              problems of postural control, balance, gain initiation, and gait transition. 
              The goal will be to develop models of the feedback control and learning
              mechanisms involved first in the control of balance and then in locomotion. 
              The models will be developed using data generated from human movement studies
              and will be based on recent techniques of hybrid control  theory, such as
              supervisory control and logic-based switching control.  Machine learning
              techniques of artificial intelligence will be used to learn switching control
              strategies from observed data.  The novelty of the research lies in:

- The
              integration of human movement studies with analytical studies based on the most
              recent concepts of nonlinear dynamics and control theory, hybrid control
              theory, and discrete event systems theory.

- The pre-eminent role attached
              to sensing for balance control and control of walking.

- The use of machine
              learning methods of artificial intelligence to learn hybrid and switching
              control strategies.

- The combination of experimental and analytical
              research.  
***  

