Title       : Exploration of Disordered Quadrupolar Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9812657

Award Number: 9812657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil S. Sullivan sullivan@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5913,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9812657 
              Sullivan    This  small  research  grant expedites collaboration  between  an 
              experimental  nuclear magnetic resonance group in Florida  and  a  theorist, 
              V.  B.  Kokshenev, at UFMG  in  Brazil.  The  research  involves theoretical
              models for the formation of quadrupolar  and  orientational  glasses  in 
              molecular solids.  Examples  of  such  systems    are    ortho-para-hydrogen,  
               nitrogen/argon,     and  methane/krypton solid mixtures.  The new ideas
              introduced by  the  Brazilian  collaborator  have the  potential  of  being 
              able  to  distinguish  between  different scenarios for  quadrupolar  glass 
              freezing.  The  approach will be tested using  combined  NMR  and  calorimetric
               techniques at the Univ. of Florida.  This  research  program  is
              interdisciplinary in nature and involves one or  more  graduate  students, who
              receive excellent training in preparation  for careers in industry, government
              laboratories or academia.  %%%  This  small  research  grant expedites
              collaboration  between  an  experimental  nuclear magnetic resonance group in
              Florida  and  a  theorist,  V.  B.  Kokshenev, at UFMG  in  Brazil.  The 
              research  involves  advanced  experimental techniques of  nuclear  magnetic 
              resonance (NMR), which allows the magnetic moment of atoms to  be  studied 
              within a solid sample. The experimental and  theoretical  research  probes  the
              interaction of different  magnetic  moments  within  a  sample, and possible
              transitions which  may  occur  in  their   collective  behavior.The  research 
              involves  theoretical  models for the formation of quadrupolar and
              orientational glasses  in  molecular  solids. Examples of such systems  are 
              ortho-para-  hydrogen,  nitrogen/argon,  and methane/krypton  solid  mixtures. 
              The  new ideas introduced by the Brazilian collaborator have  the  potential  
              of  being  able  to  distinguish  between   different  scenarios  for
              quadrupolar glass freezing. The approach  will  be   tested   experimentally 
              using  combined  NMR  and   calorimetric  techniques  at  the  Univ. of
              Florida. This research  program  is  interdisciplinary  in nature and involves
              one  or  more  graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent training  in 
              preparation  for  careers in industry, government laboratories or academia. 
              ***
