Title       : An Integrated System for Digital Image Acquisition, Image Processing, and CD-Rom
               Publishing in Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9812157

Award Number: 9812157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28988              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Killick killick@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Kuhn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. David Killick and the University
              of Arizona will purchase a CD-ROM system which will permit primary research
              data to be recorded and distributed inexpensively to other scientists. These
              CD-ROM `publications` will allow large amounts of visual information to be
              shared as high resolution pictures in a form which can be inspected,
              manipulated and analyzed. In many areas of archaeology, such visual material
              forms an essential research component but traditional publishing costs make it
              impractical to present more than a very limited amount.  The integrated system
              will permit digital image acquisition, processing and archiving, linked to a
              system for assembling digital images, text and other graphics (such as AUTOCAD
              maps) in a multimedia editing system. In its initial phase, the system will be
              used for three main areas: 1. Archaeological metallurgy. To reconstruct
              prehistoric metallurgical processes both finished artifacts as well as
              manufacturing byproducts such as slag must be examined in detail.  Microscopic
              thin sections and polished blocks of such samples will be recorded and
              annotated with text, tables of chemical analyses and other references aids. 2.
              Dr. Barbara Mills has examined ceramic thin sections to reconstruct prehistoric
              Southwestern Native American social organization. Ceramic thin sections mounted
              on glass slides as well as photographic images of whole vessels will be placed
              in a CD-ROM data base. 3. Dr. Steven Kuhn analyzes stone tools from both Europe
              and the Near East. On the basis of images available through CD-ROM it will be
              possible to conduct extensive attribute analyses.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
