Title       : Complex Robert-Bonamy Calculations of Pressure-Induced Shifts and
               Pressure-Broadened Halfwidths of Atmospheric Asymmetric Rotor Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9812540

Award Number: 9812540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Gamache Robert_Gamache@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the development of a theoretical framework to calculate
              pressure--broadened halfwidths and pressure-induced line shifts for trace gases
              in the terrestrial atmosphere. The halfwidth is the major source of error
              reducing remote sensing data and in line-by-line models used to calculate
              radiative forcing from greenhouse gases. Recent work also shows that the
              inclusion of the line shift in profile retrievals reduces the error in the
              procedure. To address these problems, data is needed for thousands of
              ro-vibrational transitions. Hence a theoretical model is needed that is
              computationally efficient and capable of determining these parameters
              accurately.
	The complex Robert-Bonamy (CRB) formalism is the basis of the
              theoretical approach. The calculations use realistic molecular dynamics, all
              relevant terms in the interaction potential, and no cutoff procedure. The
              effects of explicit velocity averaging on the halfwidth and line shift will be
              studied. The intermolecular potential and the dependence of the halfwidth and
              line shift on the parameters describing this potential will be investigated.
              The potentials will be optimized by nonlinear least-squares fits to
              experimental and theoretical data. Initial calculations will be done for
              species for which there are experimental measurements for several vibrational
              bands to compare with. These are water and ozone perturbed by molecular
              nitrogen. The theory will also be extended to consider self-broadening and
              shifting of these species and other developments of the wavefunctions. The
              vibrational state, rotational state, and temperature dependence of these
              collision-induced parameters will be investigated.
	This project is supported
              jointly by the Atmospheric Chemistry and the Experimental Physical Chemistry
              Programs.


