Title       : A Personal Contructs Theory Based Method to Uncover CriticalSuccess Factors for
               IT Planning in the Firm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9812093

Award Number: 9812093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17908              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Peffers peffers@crab.ruters.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9135,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this planning study is to develop and test a theory-based
              method for uncovering critical success factors (CSF) in organizations and for
              using CSF to plan information technology (IT) investments and projects. CSF are
              the small number of performance objectives on which the success of the
              organization depends. Hitherto methods for eliciting CSF have been informal,
              resulting in CSF that may have been biased or incomplete. Personal constructs
              theory (PCT), applied in the marketing research and knowledge acquisition
              fields in the form of an interviewing and analysis technique called
              'laddering,' is adapted to develop a complete and unbiased set of CSF.  In this
              planning project, the PCT literature relevant to  laddering is reviewed and a
              prototype  laddering procedure is developed for application to data gathering
              and analysis of organizational CSFs.  The result of this project is a
              detailed-plan for a field study, involving data collection and analysis, using
              PCT and the traditional CSF methodology as a control to determine whether PCT
              produces better results than the traditional CSF methodology.  The results of
              the ensuing study will have important implications for firms. If firms can
              explicitly direct IT investment resources toward projects that support firm
              CSF, they may be able to optimize the beneficial effects of such investments
              for the firm and for society. http://crab.rutgers.edu/~peffers/
