Title       : Simulation Uncertainty in Multidisciplinary Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9812857

Award Number: 9812857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416844             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Renaud renaud.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Batill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    This grant provides funding for the development of a decision based design
              framework for the design of complex engineering systems such as automobiles,
              aircraft or consumer products.  The design of these engineering systems
              involves extensive use of computer simulation design tools.  Each computer
              simulation model is an abstraction of reality and has some uncertainty
              associated with its performance predictions.  This research will investigate
              how these uncertainties propagate through a multidisciplinary system comprised
              of many discipline-specific simulation tools.  A goal of this research is to be
              able to quantify these propagated uncertainties for use in a decision-based
              design framework.  This investigation will evaluate techniques available from
              experimental data analysis for estimating the worst case propagated uncertainty
              in complex engineering systems and investigate the utility of performing Monte
              Carlo simulations on response surface approximations of system performance for
              quantifying the distributions of the propagated uncertainties.  Having
              quantified propagated uncertainties in complex systems, the second phase of
              this research effort will be devoted to the implementation of a decision-based
              design framework.  An optimization algorithm based on a trust region managed
              augmented Lagrangian approach for concurrent subspace design/optimization will
              be used to drive the decision-based design framework.  This optimization will
              be based on artificial neural network response surface approximations of the
              system performance.  The optimizer will maximize the expected utility of the
              net revenue for the total life cycle cost of the product subject to stochastic
              performance constraints.       It is anticipated that the results of this
              research will lead to improved product performances as well as reduced product
              development times at reduced cost and risk.  The development of a
              decision-based design framework will demonstrate that designers can effectively
              manage both the uncertainty and risk associated with the simulation based
              design of new products.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
