Title       : Fast Isosurface Extraction with Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9812818

Award Number: 9812818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles H. Koelbel                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Sikorski sikorski@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a preliminary study of Quasi-Monte Carlo methods as
              applied to fast isosurface extraction.  This study is different from general
              isosurface extracting methods that work on the whole data set.  The PI's
              methods are designed to utilize only a subset of the original large
              three-dimensional data set that is generated by Quasi-Monte Carlo techniques. 
              The isosurface is generated on this subset as an approximation to the
              isosurface generated from the whole data set.  The PI proposes to initially
              study the Hammersley, Halton and Hyperbolic Cross points as the Quasi-Monte
              Carlo points in the implementation.

Preliminary tests show that the QMC
              techniques enjoy a linear speedup with the number of QMC points.  For large
              data sets, the PI usually can reduce the data size remarkably and still get a
              good representation of the original isosurface.  The advantage of these
              techniques becomes more prominent when the data size gets larger.  Dr. Sikorski
              believes that the QMC points will generally generate visually better and
              smoother isosurfaces.  These isosurfaces will represent the overall shape of
              the original isosurfaces better than isosurfaces based on a regular subset of
              the original data. The preprocessing cost of the QMC isosurface extraction may
              be high. This is however a one-time process.  After it is completed, the
              post-isosurface extraction is very efficient.  

The success of the project
              will be measured by applying their techniques in computational fluid dynamics
              (CFD) as well as in combustion engineering application under the ASCI
              (Accelerated Strategic Computing Initiative) project.  By working with ASCI
              scientists at the University of Utah Dr. Sikorski will investigate
              visualization of the flows around various container structures in the
              simulation of accidental fires and explosions.

