Title       : FSML-Research and Facilities Planning for the St. Croix Watershed Research
               Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  2000    
File        : a9812367

Award Number: 9812367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Lawrenz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel R. Engstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Almendinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Museum of MN
	      120 West Kellogg Boulevard
	      Saint Paul, MN  551021208    651/221-4720

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                   The St. Croix Watershed Research Station
              (SCWRS) is the biological  field station of the Science Museum of Minnesota
              (SMM). The  facilities of the SCWRS are located along the St. Croix River and 
              within the St. Croix National Scenic Riverway at the boundary  between
              Minnesota and Wisconsin, 48 km northeast of St. Paul, MN.  The SCWRS provides
              opportunities to conduct research on a large  midcontinental river system and
              associated habitats. Through its  parent facility, the SCWRS provides a
              powerful public education  outlet for field science.    The  SCWRS  was
              established in 1989 and has greatly  expanded  its  physical facilities,
              staffing,  and  research activity in the intervening nine years.  An  initial 
              strategic  planning  effort was conducted in 1992.  The  resulting  plan 
              guided  the development of a modern 6200 ft Research  Center  and  a 
              year-round housing facility for visiting scientists,  both  completed  in 1995.
              The SCWRS has expanded its permanent  staffing  complement  from three to nine
              positions, including five  research  positions.  The  scientific staff were
              specifically  recruited  to  create   a  core  research  program  focusing  on 
              landscape-level  problems  in  land-water interaction. The current  research 
              staff  have   expertise  and  training  in  aquatic  biology,  limnology, 
              hydrology, soil science, chemistry, and GIS management. This  base  of 
              scientific expertise complements a visiting researcher program  that focuses on
              ecology and biology.    The SCWRS has entered a phase of accelerated program
              growth, which  will increase its ability to make significant contributions to 
              national and international field research. The original facilities  and
              research plan is over five years old, and a new vision is  needed to carry the
              SCWRS into the future. Planned program  initiatives coupled with facilities
              changes and equipment  procurement will be needed if SCWRS is to meet its full
              potential  as a regional and national field faci lity. The SCWRS has now 
              reached a critical point of accelerated development that will set  the future
              of long-term use and development at the site.    This project will support a
              planning effort that will set a new  SCWRS research and facilities trajectory
              for the future. Funds  would be used to support the development and
              implementation of a  facilitated planning workshop. The final product will be a
              new  research and facilities plan that will guide facilities  development,
              sting, and research of the SCWRS for the next ten  years and provide a
              long-range vision for research and program  development.
