Title       : Workshop on Evolution and Development; May 10-13, 1998; Washington, DC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9812711

Award Number: 9812711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24114              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Kaufman kaufman@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Evolution was a central and guiding principal in the early days of what is
              regarded as the modern biological sciences. However as investigations in
              biology became ever more reductionist in their approach this focus was, to a
              large extent, lost. Indeed in the early part of this century the fields of
              development and genetics, the two underlying forces of evolution, went their
              separate ways and evolutionary considerations in these two fields were largely
              ignored.  Recent advances in both genetics and developmental biology have
              produced a renewed interest in evolution because researchers now have at hand
              the necessary tools to ask and more importantly answer critical questions.
              Scientists now have a firm picture of the molecular structure of eukaryotic
              genes and how they are regulated. Moreover, the burgeoning field of
              Developmental Genetics has provided real insights into the way in which genes
              control the ontogenic process. But perhaps the most significant finding of the
              last 10 to 15 years is that the genes utilized to regulate development are very
              highly conserved across a very wide phylogenetic spectrum.  Thus scientists
              have been driven to a new perspective of the evolutionary process and must ask
              "How is it that the same underlying molecular machinery can result in such a
              broad spectrum of morphologies".  On the face of it this question appears
              rather daunting, however as noted above the tools are available to actually
              gain real insights into the underlying mechanism of morphological change, and
              it is this possibility that provides the rationale for the proposed workshop on
              "Evolution and Development." It is proposed that "experts in the field" be
              brought together and have them present what is ongoing in their laboratories.
              This should help to define the current status of the field scientifically. The
              second task of the workshop will be to try to gain some insight into where
              research is or should be heading. While it is always difficult to predict the
              future it is hoped that the selected group of scientists will be able to
              provide their views in this area and that a consensus can be achieved. 
