Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development of Upper-Limb Myoelectric
               Prosthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9812802

Award Number: 9812802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aly A. Farag   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9812802
Farag

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Aly Farag, Associate Professor School of Engineering at the
              University of Louisville in Kentucky and a team headed by Dr. Ahmed El-Bialy,
              Associate Professor in the Department of Systems and Biomedical Engineering at
              Cairo University, Egypt.  The two sides plan to develop a below-elbow
              myoelectric prosthesis that will be simple and inexpensive to suit the markets
              in developing countries.  Studies will cover surveys and estimates of the
              existing market and unit costs in Egypt for the currently available and
              imported devices, study of the available devices to use as a base to
              individually redesign and implement each of its components, study and design of
              software to simulate the various parameters of operations such as gripping and
              wrist rotation, and finally testing the new devices and software in actual
              cases. 

Scope:  This award will allow collaboration between Egyptian and US
              scientists who have significant complementary technical background and
              expertise to carry out the proposed project.  Dr. Farag is experienced in 3-D
              model building in computer vision and in simulation.  Dr. El-Bialy and his team
              are well experienced in several areas of biomedical and biomechanical systems. 
              They are also familiar with the conditions of users in developing world
              countries and able to provide the resources needed for the field testing of the
              final products.  The project may provide new designs and the software that can
              be used effectively to greatly improve the lives of amputees with the resources
              available in developing countries. This proposal meets the INT objective of
              increasing US-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both sides.   This
              project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities. 


