Title       : Automatic Recognition and Location of Civil Infrastructure Objects from Image
               Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9812783

Award Number: 9812783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129339             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rongxing (Ron) Li li.282@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9812783

Developments in information technology are necessary to support civil
              infrastructure systems that are large, complex, distributed, dynamic systems
              including communications, roads, bridges, and distribution of water, gas and
              electricity.  One of the most important data sources for such systems is
              updated spatial locations, physical conditions, and other attributes.  These
              data describe dynamic status changes of objects caused by, for example, usage
              and deterioration of materials, repair and relocation, climate conditions,
              accidents, natural hazards, and other unexpected events.  The new technology of
              mobile mapping systems integrates GPS receivers, INS (inertial navigation
              system) and stereo CCD (coupled charges device) cameras on a mobile platform
              for rapid high quality spatial data acquisition.  Infrastructure objects
              appearing in a georeferenced mobile mapping images can be measured on a
              computer screen and their 3-D ground locations are calculated from measured 2-D
              image coordinates using a photogrammetric model.  


Such a technology is
              extremely efficient, but it demands a high level of automation and intelligence
              in data processing for object recognition and location.  In this research:  1)
              a neural network model will be developed to simulate an operator's vision and
              measurement capability and to automate the procedure of recognition and
              location of objects; 2) the relationship between known infrastructure objects,
              their image features, and neural network characteristics will be studied for
              developing networks capable of recognizing complex objects; and 3) spatial
              civil infrastructure information  databases will be generated automatically
              from the image sequences.  Knowledge algorithms will be developed first for
              transportation systems, and then will be extended to other civil infrastructure
              objects.


This research will result in significant progress in spatial
              information generation to support information technology-based civil
              infrastructure planning, design, construction, maintenance and repair and
              management.  It will demonstrate an innovative integration of space technology
              and image processing for civil infrastructure applications. The spatial
              information databases generated can also be input to a GIS where infrastructure
              information can be integrated with other information, such as transportation
              networks, geological models, environmental layers, and others to support
              complex interdisciplinary decision making processes.
****




