Title       : Dissertation Research: Intergroup Aggression in Wild Chimpanzees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9812781

Award Number: 9812781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc D. Hauser hauser@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) typically behave aggressively towards
members of
              other groups; such aggression occasionally includes lethal
attacks. Among
              mammals, such coordinated lethal aggression has been
reported for a limited
              number of other species, including humans and
several social carnivores. Most
              hypotheses attempting to explain this
limited distribution have focused on
              benefits gained from resource
competition, whereas the lethal raiding
              hypothesis focuses on the costs of
aggression, which are predicted to be low
              for species with social bonds
and variable party size. It has proven difficult
              to choose among these
hypotheses, largely because the events of interest occur
              rarely and are
difficult to observe systematically. This study will be the
              first to test
these hypotheses using field experiments in addition to
              naturalistic
observations. Playback experiments and behavioral observations
              will be
conducted in Kibale National Park, Uganda. In each experiment, the
              long
distance call of an unfamiliar male will be played from a
              concealed
speaker, and the subjects' responses recorded. Playbacks will be
              conducted
to parties of varying size and composition at the core and periphery
              of
the community's range. Behavioral sampling will test whether
              chimpanzees
modify grouping and vocal behavior in border areas. Because
              any
outnumbered individuals would risk attack, the lethal raiding
              hypothesis
predicts that near borders, chimpanzees will travel in larger
              parties when
possible, and when in small parties will avoid giving long
              distance calls.
Resource competition models do not predict a consistent
              increase in party
size or call suppression at borders, because risk of attack
              depends on
abundance and distribution of resources, which vary considerably
              over
time. Data also will be collected on ranging behavior, including
              the
frequency of border visits and patrols, and the rate of encounters
              and
vocal exchanges between groups. As the first experimental study
              of
intergroup aggression in chimpanzees, this study will provide an
              important
contribution to understanding the evolution of a behavior pattern
              which
profoundly affects the lives of several species, including our own.


