Title       : Agenda Effects on Group Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9410288

Award Number: 9410288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reid Hastie reid.hastie@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410288  Hastie                              ABSTRACT            A program of
              empirical research on agenda effects  in small decision making groups will be
              conducted.  The   experimental variations involve the sequencing   and grouping
              of decision alternatives into subsets to  structure the decision process into
              "Open" (all alternatives   considered simultaneously), "Tournament"
              (alternatives   pitted against one another in sequence with the ultimate  
              choice determined by the final "winner"), "Optional   Stopping" (accept-reject
              decisions for a sequence of   alternatives considered one at a time), and other
              agenda   structures.  Individual preferences will be manipulated  in two ways: 
              (a) induced preference manipulations by   making individual monetary payoffs
              contingent on the   group choice and (b) attitudinal manipulations whereby  
              choice options are made more or less attractive by   varying their attributes
              and measuring individual   preferences.  Individual and group choices,
              information   pooling during discussion, individual judgments of the   group
              choice, reports of individual decision strategies,   and other dependent
              measures will be assessed to   describe the choice process.            The
              decisions reached by committees, juries, and  other important small groups are
              affected, sometimes   dramatically, by the manner in which the group  
              structures its decision process.  The present research   studies small groups
              attempting to solve practical,  political, and legal problems.  Specifically,
              we study the   effects on group decisions of variations in the order of  
              consideration and the pattern of direct comparisons of   decision alternatives;
              we call these variations   manipulations of the group "agenda."  A second  
              experimental variable, the distribution of information   across group members
              at the start of discussion, is also   studied in most of the experiments
              because it also has   been shown to have large, subtle effects on group 
              decision processes and outcomes.  ***
