Title       : Genetic Analysis of Pattern Formation During Neurogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9410212

Award Number: 9410212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John T. Edwards                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilary M. Ellis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9410212  Ellis    Development of multicellular organisms requires individual 
              cells, or groups of cells, to adopt fates that differ from  their neighbors. 
              These highly reproducible cell fate  decisions must be executed in a spatially
              and temporally  specific manner.  The goal of this work is to understand, at  a
              molecular and cellular level, how cell fate decisions are  regulated during
              development.  Several consistent themes  emerge from the study of cell fate
              decisions in both  vertebrates and invertebrates:  Cell fates are often arrived
               at by a process of gradual or sequential restriction of  developmental
              potential.  This restriction of potential is  due to specific gene expression
              or activity.  Cell-cell  communication is a critical component of developmental
               decisions in all organisms in which the process can be  studied.  Finally,
              proteins identified by genetic analysis  of simple organisms as being critical
              for specific events in  development often play similar roles in higher
              organisms.  Development of insect sensory organs requires that cells  make a
              spatially specific choice between two alternative  fates, epidermoblast or
              sensory organ precursor.  This study  will use genetic, cellular and molecular
              approaches to  determine the role of a specific gene in this cell fate  choice.
               In mutants lacking normal gene function,  inappropriate cell fate choices are
              made resulting in the  presence of extra sensory organs.  Thus, this gene must
              be  an important component of the mechanisms that regulate  formation of
              sensory organ precursors.   This work will  provide fundamental information
              about gene regulation and  cell-cell communication.
