Title       : On Function Classes with Restricted Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1996     
File        : a9410713

Award Number: 9410713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah E. Mocas sara@cs.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Computational complexity theory, examines combinatorial problems  and
              classifies them based on the computational resource needed to  solve them.  One
              of the most important and commonly studied  resources is the time needed to 
              solve a particular problem.  Nondeterministic computation can be viewed as a 
              process of  guessing an answer to a problem and then checking to see if the 
              guess is correct.  Many problems that have deterministic solution  that require
               exponential time to compute also have  nondeterministic solutions that can be 
              computed in a reasonable  amount of time.  In general, problems in complexity 
              theory have  been stated as questions concerning set membership.  An 
              alternative is to consider the more general case of partial  functions.  The 
              advantage of considering functions as opposed to  set membership question is 
              that a function value can be an  instance of a solution to a problem, whereas,
              a  corresponding set  membership question just states the existence of an
              instance.  Although work has been done on the study of function classes to 
              date these  classes have not been examined as closely.  This work examines the 
              structure and relationship of both deterministic  and nondeterministic function
               classes, primarily focusing on  classes which are in the polynomial-time and 
              exponential-time  hierarchies, specifically considering these classes under 
              certain  models which use restricted resources.  The resources considered 
              include bounding the length of the function value to less  than the computation
               time and limiting the access of the  computation to additional information
              that  may be provided by an  oracle set.  Further, through the study of
              function  classes one  can draw insight into the structure of corresponding
              classes of  sets.  Probabilistic models for function classes are also studied
              to  determine an appropriate description of interactive  proof systems in this 
              environment.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
