Title       : Interdecadal Variability in the Stratosphere: Its Relationship to QBO, Solar
               Activity, and Biennial Variability in the Troposphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9410277

Award Number: 9410277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick F. Callaghan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Murry L. Salby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Atmospheric Sys & Analysis
	      1400 W. 122nd Ave
	      Westminster, CO  80234    303/452-3453

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9410277  Salby, Murry  Atmospheric Systems and Analysis  Title:
              Interdecadal Variability in the Stratosphere: Its  Relationship to QBO, Solar
              Activity, and Biennial Variability in  the Troposphere    Correlations between
              North Polar temperature and equatorial wind in  the stratosphere exhibit
              interannual variations that on the  surface, appear to be related to the
              11-year cycle of sunspot  activity.  Resembling variability in North Pole
              temperature when  data are stratified according to the phase of the QBO, the
              polar-  tropical correlation suggests a physical connection to interannual 
              variability of solar activity.    Signatures of interannual variability in
              actual records of  stratospheric behavior will be studied to establish the
              physical  significance of interdecadal signatures and their relationship  to 
              solar activity.  The same investigation will be performed on  monthly-mean
              records of temperature and motion.  The sampling will  then be systematically
              degraded and stratified according to the  phase of the QBO to determine how
              much of the interdecadal  signatures in polar temperature and in correlation
              with the tropics  follows from actual solar variability and how much follows
              from  aliasing by the QBO.    Preliminary analysis indicates that biennial
              variability, which is  also present in the polar stratosphere, figures
              importantly in  producing the interdecadal variation of tropical-polar
              correlation.   As large as quasi-biennial variability in the polar
              stratosphere,  biennial variability represents an important component of 
              interannual variability and therefore is important in its own  right.  Biennial
              variations will be diagnosed first in the  stratosphere in global records of
              temperature and motion.  Once  understood in the circulation, the biennial
              variation will be  examined in ozone.  Biennial variability will then be traced
              back  to the troposphere, where it will be diagnosed in analyses of  motion and
              cloud cover.  This investigation will be explored in the  zon al-mean
              properties.   Eventually, biennial variability will be  explored in the
              zonally-asymmetric wave field, which in the  Eliassen-Palm flux, will be
              diagnosed as an agent for communicating  biennial variations from tropical
              convection in the troposphere to  the extratropical stratosphere.    This
              research is important because it seeks to add knowledge about  a controversial
              topic in sun-climate relationship.
