Title       : Whole-animal Physiological Performance: Natural Selection and Phenotypic
               Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9410693

Award Number: 9410693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221731             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack P. Hayes jhayes@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9410693  Hayes    The physiological functions of animals (e.g., their ability 
              to produce heat in cold environments or sprint away from  predators)are widely
              thought to impact their ecology and  evolution. Despite this widespread belief,
              differences among  individual animals of the same species rarely have been 
              shown to affect their survival and reproduction.  Data on  whether individual
              differences in physiology affect survival  and reproduction are essential to
              understanding the  evolution of organismal function (i.e., physiological traits
               of organisms). Hence, the effects of whole animal  physiological performance
              on survival and reproduction will  be studied in a high altitude (3800m)
              population of deer  mice (Peromyscus maniculatus). These mice are particularly 
              suitable for study because their physiology is well known  and because the
              extreme cold and low oxygen availability  they experience at high altitude
              makes it likely that  natural selection on their physiological running
              performance  occurs. Survival, reproduction, ability to produce heat in  the
              cold, and sprint running performance of individual mice  will be measured. 
              Because physiological functions may vary  substantially with the environment
              encountered (i.e., are  plastic or flexible), it is usually unclear whether 
              physiological differences among individual animals are  genetic or
              environmental in nature. Previous studies  indicate that differences in the
              heat producing capacity of  high- and low- altitude deer mice are genetically
              based.  However, the effects of the developmental environment on the  ability
              of deer mice to respond to subsequent environmental  change are poorly
              understood. This information is critical  to understanding the relative
              importance of genetic versus  environmental effects in coping with
              environmental change.  The effects of developmental environments will be
              studied by  comparing physiological performance of siblings raised at  high
              versus low altitude. Ultimately, the proposed research  will lea d to a better
              understanding of the relative  importance of genetic variation versus
              physiological  plasticity in coping with environmental stressors, will  provide
              insight into developmental constraints on mammalian  lung function, and will
              elucidate whether the broadly held  belief that individual variation in
              physiological  performance has ecological and evolutionary significance is 
              valid.  ***
