Title       : Hormonal Control of Sex Differences in Brain and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9410758

Award Number: 9410758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest J. Nordeen ernie@bcs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha C. Bohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy W. Nordeen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Many  areas  within  the vertebrate nervous  system  exhibit  sex 
              differences in neuron number dependent on the actions of  gonadal  steroid
              hormones early in development. The goal of this study  is  to  understand  the
              cellular and molecular mechanisms  regulating  neuron  number in general and is
              a key step in established  where  the  hormones  act  in the developing nervous
               system.  In  zebra  finches,  areas of the brain controlling song behavior
              have  more  neurons  in adult males (who sing) than in adult females (who  do 
              not sing).  These differences are established by estradiol, which  acts  during
              a sensitive developmental period to masculinize  the  song  control  centers
              and instill the capacity for  male-typical  song. This is a study to identify,
              in the zebra finch brain  song  system,  cell  populations  mediating
              estradiol's  regulation  of  neuron number in two regions of the brain that
              control song,  the  high   vocal  center  (HVc)  and  the  robust  nucleus   of
                the  archistriatum    (RA)   during   sexual   differentiation.    The 
              investigators  have  an interesting hypothesis  that  cells  with  estrogen
              receptors migrate into the HVc from surrounding areas of  the brain and plan
              experiments to test this hypothesis. The other  new idea to be tested is that
              estradiol stimulates glial cells (a  type  of  support cell in the brain) and
              that these  glial  cells  have an effect on the proliferation or survival of
              neurons in the  song centers.
