Title       : Linguistics Training for Signed Language Interpreters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9410597

Award Number: 9410597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis P. Wilcox pwilcox@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan L. Bybee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherman E. Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9410597  Wilcox                                 ABSTRACT         The
              investigation of signed languages is not only crucial to the  understanding of
              the world's visual/gestural languages, but it is  essential to the
              understanding of the biological foundations of human  language. The linguistic
              exploration of signed languages has acquired  considerable interest in recent
              years. Yet it is uncommon to witness  large numbers of deaf linguists and deaf
              graduate students attending  or presenting at major linguistics conferences.
              The main reason for  this discrepancy is the extreme difficulty of accessing
              linguistic  material of almost any nature through signed language interpreters
              who  are unable to accurately render the conceptual content of the message.    
                The goal of the organizers of the Linguistic Society of America's  1995
              Linguistic Institute is to ensure full accessibility to the  exchange of ideas
              and the linguistic "cultural" milieu-both inside and  outside of the
              classroom-which are a significant part of the  linguist's professional
              development. This project is intended to  provide linguistic training to
              seasoned American Sign Language  interpreters who will be employed during the
              Institute.            Two graduate linguistics students will work 10 months to
              prepare  a manual to be used for teaching purposes. A group of distinguished 
              deaf language consultants, hearing linguists, and expert interpreters  will
              gather for three days to prepare a structured lexicon of  introductory
              linguistic concepts and ASL usage related to linguistic  terminology. The
              manual will eventually be edited for the development  of a videotape to be
              produced by Sign Media, Inc. The dissemination of  this videotape will provide
              experienced interpreters, as well as  students in interpreter education
              programs across the nation, broader  access to accurate interpretations of a
              core lexicon for the complex  linguistic sciences.        The lexicon and the
              videotape will form the basis for training  interpreters from a cross the
              nation who will be employed to interpret  at the Institute, thus providing the
              national deaf clientele that the  Institute plans to attract with interpreters
              who possess broader  expertise than the typical local referral center may be
              able to  provide. An additional long term benefit will be the expansion of the 
              pool of interpreters competent to interpret linguistics lectures. The 
              provision of the resulting videotape will have significant impact on  the study
              of ASL by native users across the country. Ultimately, the  goal of this
              proposal is to set a precedent for other sciences to open  their doors to deaf
              scientists by providing adequately trained  interpreters.    ***
