Title       : RIA: Designing and Implementing a Distributed Meeting Scheduler
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1996    
File        : a9410180

Award Number: 9410180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Sen sandip@kolkata.mcs.utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Routine, time-consuming, and repetitive information processing  tasks
              performed by employees in organizations can be potentially  automated. 
              Possible benefits from automation include relieving  employees to concentrate
              on relatively fruitful and productive  jobs, and in improving the quality of
              work by eliminating human  errors that are inadvertently introduced due to the
              tedious nature  of work.         A candidate task for automation is that of
              scheduling meetings  between individuals.  Though past efforts have produced
              necessary  techniques for building distributed agents that can schedule 
              meetings on behalf of associated users, much work remains to be  done in
              encoding user goals and constraints before a useful system  can be implemented.
               The proposed research will produce an  efficient implemented system that
              effectively schedules meetings  without compromising user preferences and
              constraints.  This will  fill a void in the currently available calendar
              management  software.         This research will involve developing a language
              and inference  procedure to specify and reason about user preferences, building
               models of agents from limited information, and developing  negotiation
              mechanisms to coordinate partially cooperative agents.   A unique contribution
              of this research lies in developing  intelligent agents that are adaptive to
              the environmental demands  and the needs of associated users at the same time. 
              These  techniques will be a significant contribution to the evolving field  of
              Distributed Artificial Intelligence, and can be gainfully  applied in fields
              like Cooperative Information Systems and Computer  Supported Cooperative Work.
