Title       : Regulation of GTP-Induced Depolarizations in Paramecium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9410756

Award Number: 9410756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd M. Hennessey thennes@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,9178,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9410756  Hennessey    Paramecium is an excellent system for studying sensory
              transduction mechanisms in eukaryotic  cells because behavioral mutants can be
              selected to genetically dissect a sensory transduction  pathway.  Also,
              swimming behavior can be used as a convenient bioassay to estimate the effects 
              of drugs, antibodies, and mutations on the electrophysiological properties of
              the cell.  In  Paramecium, attractants generally cause hyperpolarization and
              fast forward swimming while  repellents depolarize and can cause backward
              swimming.  External GTP is a repellent at  concentrations as low as 0.01
              micromolar.  It elicits novel repetitive somatic (body)  depolarizations which
              cause bouts of backward swimming.  Adaptation occurs within 1 minute,  causing
              a return to normal swimming.  This research is designed to test the hypothesis
              that  external GTP is recognized by a body plasma membrane purinergic receptor
              to activate a novel  somatic calcium conductance.  This triggers repetitive
              somatic plateau depolarizations.  if  receptor-operated channels are involved,
              there may be second messenger involvement in either  their activation,
              deactivation, or adaptation.  The objectives are to: 1) Identify and
              characterize  the ion channels or transporters responsible for GTP-induce
              somatic depolarizations and describe  the ion dependence, pharmacology,
              kinetics, and possible second messenger involvements.   Established
              intracellular current injection and voltage clamp procedures will be used.  The
              second  messengers cAMP, cGMP and calcium will be assayed during exposure to
              GTP; 2) Use  behavioral bioassays to screen drugs and mutations for effects on
              responses to external GTP.   New behavioral mutants will be selected by
              behavioral selection techniques and characterized;  and 3) Use microinjection
              "curing" of behavioral mutants to identify the altered gene products  of
              mutants.  The goal is to understand the biochemical and electrophysiological
              mechanisms  involved in GTP-induced responses and sensory a daptation in
              Paramecium.  This will contribute  to a better understanding of purinergic
              responses and chemosensory transduction mechanisms in  eukaryotic cells.  %%% 
              Living cells can sense and respond to chemicals in their environment.  The
              first indication of  such a cellular response is usually a change in the
              electrical properties of the cell membrane. The  goal of this research is to
              understand how single cells sense chemicals and respond to them.  The 
              free-swimming, single-celled organism, Paramecium provides an excellent
              opportunity to study  the molecular bases of these responses.  Paramecium can
              be grown in large numbers in solutions  resembling pond water; the electrical
              properties of its membrane can be studied using techniques  of
              electrophysiology; and its genetics are well understood and mutants can be
              generated that  affect the organism's swimming behavior.  Swimming behavior can
              be used as a convenient assay  for changes in its chemical sensing machinery. 
              One chemical that Paramecium can sense very  well at very low concentrations is
              an organic molecule, GTP.  External GTP is a powerful  repellent for these
              cells.  They swim away from it at concentrations as low as 10.0 nanomolar.  
              Many types of behavioral mutants will be generated that do not respond to GTP,
              and the details  of their biochemical and physiological defects will be
              characterized.  In this way the important  components of the cellular GTP
              sensation pathway will be identified.  The results of this research  will
              provide important insights into how cells sense chemicals in their environment
              and respond  to them.  ***
