Title       : The Political Economy of Banda, Ghana, 1700-1925
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1995      
File        : a9410726

Award Number: 9410726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184165             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann B. Stahl ASTAHL@BINGHAMTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410726  Stahl, Anne    With National Science Foundation support Dr. Ann Stahl
              and her  colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological and 
              ethnographic research in the Banda region in west central Ghana.  The history
              and prehistory of the Banda peoples can be clearly  traced back to the 17th
              Century AD. Oral tradition and written  documents indicate four distinct forms
              of political organization  over that period. From an essentially independent
              base, they were  first conquered and incorporated into the Ashante Kingdom. In
              the  19th century they became part of the British empire and subject  to
              indirect British rule. Finally they were incorporated into  independent Ghana.
              Dr. Stahl wishes to examine how the social,  political and economic
              organization changed across these periods  and will employ ethnographic and
              archaeological, as well as  archival data in her research. She will focus on
              the timing and  impact of New World crops on subsistence ecology; the changing 
              uses over time of wild and domestic fauna; changes in ceramic  production to
              address the impact of external exchange networks on  craft specialization; and
              document the role of exchange in the  local economy. To achieve these goals she
              will conduct extensive  interview with Banda people and observe present day
              manufacturing  and subsistence practices. She will also excavate a series of 
              known sites with span this time period and are direct historical  antecedents
              of the present day Banda village in which she will  work.    This research is
              important for several reasons. First, it will  provide data of interest to many
              Africanist archaeologists.  Secondly, it will constitute a basic contribution
              to world  systems theory. Social scientists have come to realize that small 
              scale, third world societies have long and complex histories.  Through
              examination of specific cases it is possible to gain  insight into processes of
              adaptation and change and to elucidate  the mechanisms which societies employ
              to survive in a changing   world. The project includes several students and
              will contribute  directly to their scientific training.
