Title       : Dissertation Research: Contributions of Charophycean Algae & Sphagnum Moss to
               Long-term Carbon Storage in Boreal Peatlands. Dissolved Organic Carbon Uptake &
               Carbon...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9410843

Award Number: 9410843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford N. Dahm                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda E. Graham lkgraham@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee W. Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Graham  Boreal peatlands are a recognized site of carbon accumulation.  Recent
              data suggests the occurrence of two potential mechanisms for carbon retention
              that have not previously been quantitatively assessed, namely, the uptake and
              utilization of dissolved organic carbon (in the form of sugars), and production
              of degradation-resistant cell wall polyphenolics by charophytes and Sphagnum
              moss.  The first of these processes removes liable forms of fixed carbon from
              the environment, while the second generates relatively long-term storage forms
              of carbon.  Both processes interfere with the ability of bacteria to convert
              fixed carbon back to CO2, and thus contribute to peatland carbon accumulation. 
              Cultured charophytes and Sphagnum will be used for cloning and sequencing of
              sugar transport genes, and for gene expression studies.  Field data for
              charophyte diversity and biomass will be correlated with field measurements of
              pH, DOC, DIC, and bacterial biovolumes, and with species-specific abilities to
              load sugars and generate polyphenolic wall compounds measured with the use of
              laboratory cultures.  Assessments of Sphagnum production of resistant wall
              materials and utilization of DOC by protonematal stages will also be made.  The
              goal of the project is to improve estimates for the amount of carbon
              sequestered in peatlands.
