Title       : Acquisition and Transfer of Automatic Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9410406

Award Number: 9410406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon D. Logan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The proposed research will examine the role of attention in   acquiring
              automatic skills and transferring them within and between   tasks.  The main
              theoretical focus will be on developing a theory that   explains how acts of
              attention during training encode traces into memory   to build up a
              task-relevant knowledge base, and how acts of attention at   transfer retrieve
              traces from memory to support automatic performance.   The theory will build on
              existing theories of attention and   automaticity, extending and generalizing
              them.  The main empirical focus   will be on visual search, which is a dominant
              paradigm in research on   attention and automaticity that has important
              practical implications   (e.g., for driving, navigation, and supervisory
              control).  Experiments   will address how automatic skills acquired during
              training on visual   search transfer to and from other tasks (counting and
              categorization)   performed on displays similar to and different from the ones
              experienced   during training.   The proposed research is significant
              theoretically and  practically.  The ability to perform automatically is a
              major factor   underlying skilled performance and it is important to understand
              it   better.  The proposed research will increase our understanding by  
              distinguishing between competing theories of automatization and   integrating
              previously unrelated theories of automatization, attention,   and
              categorization.  The experimental and theoretical results on   transfer will
              have important implications for education and industrial   training, providing
              a principled way to determine whether experience   gained in one setting (e.g.,
              the classroom) will generalize to another   (e.g., the workplace) and a
              principled way to design training programs   and select training examples to
              maximize generalization and optimize   skilled performance.
