Title       : Nitric Oxide and CaM Kinase in Synaptic Plasticity and Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9410131

Award Number: 9410131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236534             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail B. Peterson peter004@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Chapman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Elucidating the biological basis of learning and memory is a  goal critical to
              our understanding of both brain and  behavior.  Whether the ultimate goal of
              such research is the  development of artificial systems with brain-like 
              capabilities, or gaining insight into the diseased brain,  this basic knowledge
              is indespensible.  The most popular and  successful model of learning-related
              plasticity in the  mammalian brain is called long-term potentiation (LTP).  We 
              have learned a great deal about the cellular and molecular  mechanisms of LTP
              induction, but are still in the dark as to  whether LTP (or something like it)
              is really responsible for  learning and memory.  One consistent finding across 
              laboratories and procedures is that the calcium  concentration within neurons
              activated by high-frequency  stimulation must be elevated for LTP to occur.  We
              are  therefore focusing our research efforts on two calcium  dependent enzymes
              which could be critical for learning and  memory; nitric oxide synthase (NOS)
              and calcium/calmodulin  dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII).  Specifically,
              since  these enzymes are both activated by the same signal, but  perform very
              different functions, we are exploring the  hypothesis that NO and CaMKII act
              synergistically within  neurons during LTP.  Using pharmacological and 
              electrophysiological techniques in living brain slices taken  from mice which
              carry targeted mutations to the gene that  produces a CaMKII, we are examining
              the conditions under  which inhibitors of NOS impair LTP in two brain regions 
              strongly associated with learning and memory.  The studies  are elucidating not
              only the interaction of the two enzymes,  but the generality of their function
              in different brain  regions, and their role in a simple form of learning.  In 
              doing so, we will be able to focus on those cellular and  molecular processes
              that are most important for mammalian  learning and memory.
