Title       : Excitations in Molecular Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9410709

Award Number: 9410709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raoul Kopelman kopelman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Kopelman  The novel methods of near-field-optics (NFO) present an opportunity 
              for spatial superresolution in optical and spectroscopic  measurements. Visible
              light imaging and probing of single molecules  has become a reality. The recent
              work is utilized towards the  following aims: 1) Characterization of
              interfacial domains in  molecular nanostructures, using ultra-fast near-field
              optical  imaging and nanospectroscopy as well as tip-to-single-molecule  energy
              transfer (Forster-Dexter) and spin-orbit coupling (Kasha),  ultimately
              measuring individual molecule matrix elements. 2)  Development and study of
              ordered single supermolecule light and  energy antenna and their utilization as
              scanning optical probes, to  be used towards the above aims. 3) An experimental
              study of the  enigmatic light-matter interactions in the near-field-optics 
              domain, with applications to the above nano-domain and single  molecule
              studies. 4) Utilization of our molecularly engineered,  optically active and
              photostable, ordered supermolecule for the  production of a new, higher
              efficiency light emitting diode (LED).   %%%  We have recently developed new
              optical nano-probes and nano-imaging  techniques. These are particularly
              appropriate for mesoscopic or  submicroscopic optical studies. The proposed
              research is  committed  to both the further development of these techniques and
              to their  utilization for the study of basic problems: excitations at 
              interfaces and nanostructures, molecular aggregates and even single  molecules.
              The techniques combine time-resolved spectroscopy,  near-field optical
              microscopy, scanning force microscopy and  nanofabrication. The goals are to
              solve some long-standing basic  problems of excitation dynamics as well as some
              newly emerging  questions on the interaction of light and matter in the near
              field  and on kinetic processes involving nanosystems and single  molecules.
              Ultimately, these studies are of major interest to  biology, medicine,
              chemistry and materials science.
