Title       : A Development Environment for Active Database Systems: Testing and Analysis of
               Active Database Rules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1997       
File        : a9410993

Award Number: 9410993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan D. Urban s.urban@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne W. Dietrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Active database systems transform passive database processing into active
              environments by using rules  as alerters and triggers. This research is
              investigating two complementary aspects of active database  development
              environments: the analysis of rules for termination and confluence properties
              and the  run-time testing and debugging of active rules. The research is
              addressed in the context of an active,  deductive, and object-oriented
              database. The rule analysis process is a static approach, applying 
              termination/confluence analysis techniques from conditional term rewriting to
              identify rule problems  before execution. The run-time environment is a dynamic
              approach allowing users to step through the  rule triggering process, observing
              rule behavior and testing different rule triggering sequences. The  execution
              model includes a propagation algorithm for monitoring changes to derived data.
              The  integration of rule analysis with rule generation and transaction
              development to support specification  and analysis of rules prior to rule
              execution is also being investigated. The significance of this  work is found i
              n the integration of active, deductive, and object-oriented concepts as well as
              the  supportive environment provided to address the correctness and
              predictability of active rules in the  development of complex database
              applications.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
