Title       : Monitoring Dangers in an Uncertain World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1999   
File        : a9410749

Award Number: 9410749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131572             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michal Tamuz sph0357@utsph.sph.uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-5847

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is a study of how organizations collect information about and learn
              from near accidents, events which under slightly different circumstances could
              have resulted in an accident.  Organizations monitor these potential dangers to
              learn how to cope with dangers, i.e., low probability, high negative
              consequence events.  In this research, a comparison is made to how near
              accident monitoring systems operate in the medical device, nuclear power, space
              shuttle, and air transportation industries.  Specifically, the research is
              based on an analysis of interviews with key participants in a variety of safety
              information systems, and reports generated within previous studies in the air
              transportation industry.  The proposed research draws on and seeks to
              contribute to the study of risk management, information processing, and
              organizational learning.  Additionally, it has broader implications for
              organizational management of other areas of risky events, such as the extreme
              weather events that may become more frequent or unpredictable under global
              environmental change.    The purpose of the projects is to identify factors
              which constrain (or enhance) the organizational capacity to collect information
              about and learn from near accidents (or near disasters).  The focus is on three
              main research questions: 1) How does the organization of safety information
              systems affect the volume (e.g., reliability) and contents (e.g., validity) of
              information collected and the organizational capacity to learn from near
              accident information? 2) To what extent do attention-related factors affect the
              volume of near accident reporting over time? and 3) How do organizations learn
              from near accidents?    Specific research questions are developed for each of
              these main research questions. To illustrate, the first research question
              includes a discussion of the definition and interpretation of near accidents in
              which the dimensions of vulnerability vs. robustness, learning vs. controlling
              behavior, and ambiguous vs. clearly -defined definitions are considered.  The
              research will help address such policy questions as:  If an organization
              collects information for purposes of controlling behavior, does it lessen the
              amount of near accident reporting and increase the self-interested bias that
              distorts accounts of potential dangers?
