Title       : Longitudinal Study of Social Referencing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9410573

Award Number: 9410573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tedra A. Walden tedra.walden@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9410573  Walden                              ABSTRACT    Past research has
              revealed that infants are likely to reference  the emotional and instrumental
              behavior of caregivers and other  significant persons and to be influenced by
              their behavior. This  phenomenon of social referencing will be examined in two 
              overlapping short-term longitudinal studies which will follow the  individual
              development of social referencing during the period of  initial establishment
              during infancy (cohort 1) and during the  subsequent development later in the
              toddler period (cohort 2);   the studies overlap at the 12- and 18-month
              assessments.  Each  study includes four occasions of observation and at each 
              occasion, each parent-child dyad is exposed to at least three  different
              stimulus events that permit social referencing to  occur.  This design allows
              for examination of individual  consistency in behavior across stimulus events
              at a single point  in development and stability in behavior across development.
               In  order to link the development of social referencing to other  related
              developmental milestones, measures of physical  development, communication
              development, and social development  are obtained and links with social
              referencing are examined.         People who are faced with situations of
              uncertainty, in  which they don't know what to do, are influenced by other 
              persons' interpretations of the situation.  Recent research has  provided
              evidence that even young infants, when confronted with  uncertainty, engage in
              social referencing of others.  When  infants encounter situations that seem
              potentially threatening,  they often check their parents' emotional reactions
              before  deciding how to behave.  The process of using the emotional 
              expressions of other people to make sense of ambiguous situations  is called
              social referencing. This important strategy for  interpreting new or mystifying
              events and figuring out how to  respond to them is an important process by
              which children and  adults are socialized int o thinking and feeling in ways
              that are  consensually accepted in a society. This project focuses on the  very
              early development of social referencing in infants.  Two  overlapping
              short-term longitudinal studies will follow the  individual development of
              social referencing during the period of  initial establishment during infancy
              and during the subsequent  development later in the toddler period.  The
              research design  allows for examination of individual consistency in social 
              referencing behavior across stimulus events at a single point in  development
              and stability in behavior across development.  In  order to link the
              development of social referencing to other  related developmental milestones,
              its associations with physical  development, communication development, and
              social development  will be examined. This study will provide information about
              the  early development of one important process of social influence by  which
              young children are socialized to adopt the behavior and the  affect of those in
              their environment.  ***
