Title       : Primary Events in Nerve Growth Factor Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9410433

Award Number: 9410433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247360             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary E. Landreth gel2@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nerve growth factor (NGF) acts to direct the survival and  differentiation of
              specific populations of neurons in the  periphery and in the central nervous
              system.  The cellular  mechanisms by which NGF elicits changes in these neurons
              has  not been resolved.  This proposal is focused on defining the  specific
              biochemical steps by which the binding of NGF at  the cell surface is
              transduced, ultimately resulting in  changes in gene expression and cellular
              morphology.  In the  previous grant period we have identified several enzymes 
              which participate in a signal transduction pathway, termed  the MAP kinase
              cascade.  NGF stimulates the serial  activation of the protein kinases which
              comprise this  pathway and mediate the transmission of signals from the 
              membrane into the nucleus.  This application is directed  toward understanding
              how the most proximal member of this  cascade, B-raf, is activated and how the
              cell can  selectively employ this molecule to regulate the flow of  information
              to the interior of the cell.  A second aim of  this proposal is to investigate
              the mechanism through which  B-raf activates the next member of the cascade,
              MEK.  MEK is  phosphorylated and activated by B-raf, however, how this is 
              achieved is unclear and it is of particular interest from a  mechanistic
              viewpoint.  MEK in turn activates the MAP  kinases and we propose to
              investigate the biological  consequences of their action by inhibiting their
              actions by  introduction of mutant MAP kinase molecules into NGF  sensitive
              cells.  The mutant MAP kinases act to block the  activation of the normal
              enzymes, allowing dissection of  their biochemical targets and identification
              of cellular  processes which they critically regulate.
