Title       : The Dynamics of Rural Industrialization: Comparative Studies of the
               Re-Organization of Work
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9410580

Award Number: 9410580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78867              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gillian P. Hart hart@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9410580  HART       Although emerging patterns of rural industrialization are 
              part of an integrated set of global processes, characterized in  part by
              capital mobility and the declining power of labor unions,  these processes are
              experienced in different ways in different  settings. The purpose of this study
              is to investigate the  processes of agrarian reform and rural industrialization
              in South  Africa and Malaysia to identify the commonalities and divergent 
              paths of local, rural economies set within an integrating global  system.  This
              research rests on a framework in which the  particular form and trajectory of
              rural transformation (in terms  of sectoral and distributional change) hinge on
              local power  structures, institutional arrangements, and types of resource 
              access and use. These factors are examined within the specific  context of
              macro-economic and macro-political structures and  processes.  Ethnographic,
              longitudinal, and comparative analysis  methods will be used to apply this
              framework to the conditions  and dynamics of rural change in the two settings. 
              Both South  Africa and Malaysia have experienced initial state development 
              efforts and, more recently, unplanned industrial decentralization  into
              selected rural areas, yet the circumstances, mechanisms,  outcomes, and
              implications for the distribution of power and  development vary substantially
              between them.       This study will make two levels of contributions.  At a 
              practical level it will help to inform policy debates in South  Africa. 
              Questions of rural industrialization in South Africa  assume particular
              significance in light of World Bank-led  discussions of agrarian reform and
              economic development in the  new South African political regime.  At a more
              theoretical and  methodological level, the proposed study will contribute to 
              bridging the gap between "first world" and "third world"  literature and
              debates on the socio-spatial reorganization of  work.
