Title       : Molecular Basis of Ion Channel Gating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9410788

Award Number: 9410788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171005             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Cafiso cafiso@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Approximately half the proteins that are present in living  systems are
              associated with biological membranes, and these  proteins preform some of the
              most interesting and important  functions in the cell.  The proposed work is
              directed at  studying membrane proteins called ion-channels which  facilitate
              signaling in nerve cells.  In order to understand  how the nervous system
              operates, information on the  molecular structures of ion-channels will be
              required, and  it will be necessary to characterize the specific changes in 
              these structures that control nerve cell activity.  At the  present time there
              is not a single ion channel from the  nervous system that is characterized at
              the molecular level.  In general , there is a lack of molecular information on 
              membrane proteins because efficient experimental techniques  to study these
              types of proteins have not been developed.    This proposal will develop new
              methodologies to examine  membrane protein structure.  One approach will use a 
              technique called mass-spectrometry, and it will be combined  with traditional
              chemical labeling techniques to determine  how proteins are structured in
              biological membranes.  Dramatic improvements in mass spectrometry in the past
              few  years have made it a very powerful and ideal technique to  investigate
              proteins.  A second approach will place  molecular probes called spin-labels at
              specific sites in  membrane proteins to provide information on structure and 
              changes in structure.  These techniques will be applied to  an ion-channel
              called the acetylcholine receptor.  The  acetylcholine receptor is a membrane
              ion channel that  functions at the neuromuscular junction, and it is typical 
              in size and complexity to many other ion channels in the  nervous system.
