Title       : Engineering Deployment Teaching Initiative: Mechanical System Design for
               Reliability -- Technology Deployment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1994    
File        : a9410680

Award Number: 9410680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sankaran Mahadevan sankaran.mahadevan@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Cruse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,9195,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9410680  Mahadevan       There is a real need for design engineers to be able to
              link   the design decision making process with product reliability in a   way
              that supports quantitative evaluation, more effective use of   experiments, and
              engineering specifications on production processes   and variables.  It is also
              important that design tools be easy to   integrate in the design process.  The
              deployment strategy makes   effective use of industry in the definition and
              evaluation of the   deployed technology. It also uses computer networks,
              workshops, and   conferences for rapid dissemination of the technology to  
              universities and industry.  The educational materials to be   developed include
              a full description of the methodology,   presentation material in the form of
              view graphs, simplified   working models for spreadsheet calculations, a
              computer program   with several options for probabilistic design analysis, and
              example   problems.       This effort will deploy a ready technology of 
              computationally-based tools for reliability-based design analysis  to the
              mechanical design communities in industry through an  educational
              infrastructure.  The developed technology has been  found to be  generic for
              mechanical systems reliability and has  been shown to be  directly usable in
              the design process without  extensive knowledge  of statistics and probability
              methods.  It  enables the designer to  compute design uncertainties such as the
               probability of failure for  any sensible design limit condition and  to
              combine a number of such  design limit conditions into a  generalized estimate
              of system  reliability.  At every step, the  designer is given direct feedback 
              on the critical drivers of  product unreliability and design  confidence
              levels, facilitation  re-design for enhanced reliability.
