Title       : Thyroid Hormone Effects on the Peripheral Olfactory System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9410637

Award Number: 9410637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112689             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Roberts roberts@uoneuro.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry T. Takahashi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  Roberts, William M.  IBN 94-10637    The ability to recognize familiar
              locations by their sights, sounds and smells is a common phenomenon.  In
              salmon, who migrate great distances from fresh water streams to vast salt-water
              oceans, and ultimately, back to their home streams to reproduce, the ability to
              identify their home streams is crucial to species survival.  But how is it that
              these fish recognize their home environments?  One possible mechanism is the
              incorporation of familiar smells into memory which occurs during the parr smolt
              in salmon.  During smolting, a physical transformation takes place as does a
              maturation of olfactory memory.  Additionally, smolting is accompanied by a
              marked increase in thyroid hormone levels.  Drs. Roberts and Takahashi will
              examine the role of thyroid hormones in the development of olfactory memory. 
              Olfactory receptor cells born at the time of the parr smolt will be chemically
              marked and the effect of exogenous thyroid hormone treatment to enhance their
              survival will be determined.  Moreover, structural changes in the olfactory
              bulb of the brain at smolting and modulation of those changes by thyroid
              hormones will be assessed.  In addition to examination of the structural
              changes occurring in the brain at the time of smolting, functional changes in
              the sensitivity of the olfactory receptor cells to odorants will be examined. 
              These studies have the potential to provide a breakthrough in understanding the
              physical basis of memory.  Further, migration of salmon is of considerable
              commercial interest.  This research has the potential to allow man to devise 
              methods for guiding salmon to their birthplaces following novel pathways that
              may enhance the survival of the species.
