Title       : Semiconductor Quantum Electron-Wave Optoelectronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9410720

Award Number: 9410720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas K. Gaylord tgaylord@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elias N. Glytsis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence C. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip N. First  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory N. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9410720  Gaylord  Mid-infrared and far-infrared sources are needed for eye-safe
              wireless optical networks, remote sensing,   medical treatment, and numerous
              other  applications.  This project investigates the modeling, fabrication, and
              testing of a new class of semiconductor optoelectronic sources directed at this
              need.  These devices are based on quantum-mechanical electron-wave  propagation
              effects.  The quantitative analogies between electromagnetic  propagation in
              dielectrics and ballistic electron transport in semiconductors, as developed
              with previous support, are being used to design nanostructure infrared
              emitters, detectors, and modulators.  The optical transitions in these new
              devices use classically-free quasibound energy levels.  In these energy states,
              an electron is free (unbound) classically.  However, due to their
              quantum-mechanical wave nature, optical interference effects produce spatial
              confinement in Fabry-Perot  type states.  Using these quasibound states,  the
              design, fabrication and testing of the first room-temperature semiconductor
              mid-infrared semiconductor laser is being  attempted.  Procedures are being
              developed that allow the energy positions and lifetimes of the quasibound
              states to be specified so that the wavelength of the laser can be chosen
              arbitrarily.  In addition to optical methods for evaluating these devices, a
              series of independent measurements of electron transport through these
              nanostructures is being performed using the methods of ballistic electron
              emission  microscopy/spectroscopy (a type of scanning tunneling microscopy). 
              This allows separate independent testing of the electronic characteristics of
              the designed structures.
