Title       : RIA: Multiuser Detectors and Equalizers for Present and Future Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9410227

Award Number: 9410227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas E. Fuja                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra Duel-Hallen sasha@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              North State University  Alexandra Duel-Hallen  RIA: Multiuser Detectors and
              Equalizers for Present and Future  Wireless Networks    The objective of this
              research is to increase the capacity of  wireless communications systems by
              providing simple and reliable  detection algorithms.  The research is a
              multi-pronged effort in  the area of detection for wireless communication
              networks.  The  first direction addresses multiuser receivers for Code-Division
               Multiple Access (CDMA) systems.  These low complexity adaptive  multiuser
              detectors for CDMA systems are expected to operate  reliably in the presence of
              strong interferers.  Incorporation of  the proposed receivers into CDMA systems
              should lead to significant  capacity improvements for the future generation of
              wireless  networks.  The second direction is diversity reception for  multipath
              fading channels.  The methods studied are expected to  alleviate the
              shortcomings of the existing frequency diversity  receivers and improve the
              reliability of wireless communications by  resolving multipath present in the
              mobile environment.  The focus  of the third component of the research is
              adaptive equalization for  present digital mobile radio systems.  The thrust
              will be to find  receivers that are less complex and more reliable than those 
              currently sued.  The final direction is the investigation of  capacity
              improvement of packet radio or local area networks using  joint demodulation.
