Title       : Adaptive Strategies During the Paleolithic-Neolithic Transition in China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9410923

Award Number: 9410923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43353              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Elston elston@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Madsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Bettinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intermountain Research
	      PO Drawer A
	      Silver City, NV  894280190    702/246-5800

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Elston and  his
              collaborators will conduct one season of archaeological  survey in the Pigeon
              Mountain Basin, Ningxia Hui Autonomous  Region, Peoples Republic of China. This
              region is characterized  by a dry desertic environment quite similar in
              apparent ecology  to areas within the United States Great Basin. The team will 
              conduct systematic survey of several square kilometers, record  and map sites,
              make extensive surface collections and conduct  limited test excavations in a
              sample of spring mounds as well as  other likely localities. They will use
              these data to begin a  reconstruction of the culture history of the region and
              to  examine the changing pattern of human adaptation in relation to 
              environmental features. In particular they will focus on water  utilization.   
               Preliminary evidence indicates that the Pigeon Mountain Basin was  inhabited
              by hunter and gatherer groups at the end of the last  Ice Age and that at some
              later time a transition to agriculture  occurred. The team will examine changes
              in cultural adaptation  over this transition. Because one major goal of the
              research is  to compare adaptive patterns in desertic China and the Western 
              U.S., a Chinese archaeologist will also travel to the U.S. and  conduct field
              research in the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in  Oregon and analyze the
              materials collected.    The goal of this work is to understand how humans at a
              relatively  simple level of technological development adapt to extreme 
              environmental conditions. A great deal of work has been conducted  in the
              Western U.S. and the culture history of this area is  reasonably well known.
              From these data archaeologists have  attempted to draw broad ranging
              conclusions about human  adaptation, but without at least one more case for
              comparison, it  is impossible to know whether conclusions from one region can
              be  generalized. The work planned by Dr. Elston and his colleagues  will help
              to answer this question. The research is als o important  because it will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists  and because it will strengthen
              scientific ties between the PRC  and the U.S.
