Title       : WGIDPO: Gaining Confidence in Math: Instructional Technology for Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1999  
File        : a9714757

Award Number: 9714757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $638448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole R. Beal cbeal@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus Schultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematics is a critical filter for girls' participation in  science and
              engineering careers, yet many girls dislike and  avoid math, and are therefore
              underprepared for college  science majors and graduate programs.  The goal of
              this  project is to increase girls' interest in math and their  confidence in
              their ability to learn math, through the power  of intelligent computer
              instructional technology.  In  collaboration with  teacher partners (classroom
              teachers,  and math and computer specialists) the awardee has developed  a
              computer tutor, WhaleWatch, for teaching fractions to  elementary school girls
              and boys.  Preliminary experiments  indicate that girls who work with
              WhaleWatch show enhanced  math self concept and also place a higher value on
              the  AnimalWatch, to include a) 20 hours of mathematics  activities and
              biology; b) extensive graphics and  visualization tools for instruction; and c)
              enhanced  instruction and help features that are individually tailored  to each
              student's progress.  The impact of AnimalWatch on  girls' math self concept,
              their beliefs in the value of  learning math, and their emotions and
              attributions about  math performance will be evaluated in fifth grade
              classrooms  in collaborating school districts, to identify the learning 
              conditions that are most beneficial for girls.  The effects  of AnimalWatch on
              teachers' expectations about female  students will also be evaluated.  To
              effect systemic change  in math instruction, teachers will be provided with and
               trained in the use of AnimalWatch, which will be distributed  via CD-ROM.
