Title       : Construction of Multi-Purpose Housing at Mount Desert Island Biological
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9714056

Award Number: 9714056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207286             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Evans   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara B. Kent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory (MDIBL) will  construct a
              multi-use housing facility.  MDIBL provides  access for visiting Investigators
              to marine species for the  purpose of investigating mechanisms of basic
              processes such  as osmoregulation, cell division, reproduction and the 
              function of vertebrate organs like the kidney, heart and  brain; and offers
              educational programs for students ranging  from high school to postdoctoral. 
              The Laboratory hosts  Investigators and students from the U.S., Canada and
              Europe  who are actively recruited through a variety of fellowship  programs. 
              The ability of MDIBL to accommodate these diverse  groups is currently limited
              by the quality and quantity of  available housing, in particular housing for
              Investigators  seeking short stays at the Lab and for students during our  peak
              season.  The long-term goal of the proposed activity is  to create a set of at
              least four housing units designed to  be utilized by students, Investigators or
              teacher/student  groups at different times of the year.    The current
              application seeks support for the first of these  units.  The site proposed for
              these units was chosen on the  basis of a comprehensive site-planning process
              undertaken by  MDIBL in collaboration with professional planner and offers 
              privacy and accessibility while minimizing development  costs.  The design of
              the units was chosen to maximize  flexibility of current and future use,
              economy of  construction and harmony with the surrounding land and  community. 
              The unit will be insulated and heated to provide  much needed accommodations in
              the colder months.  The  housing unit will benefit both students and
              Investigators by  providing summer student housing which is safer and more 
              accommodating and allow MDIBL to house visiting  Investigators who come for
              short stays to collect samples or  attend conferences or short courses.
