Title       : A Mass Balance Framework for Assessing Flows of Environmental Pollutants:
               Application to Lead as a Case Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9714162

Award Number: 9714162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429396             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cliff I. Davidson cliff@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lester B. Lave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis C. McMichael  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Urban populations are exposed to a variety of environmental pollutants.  To
              develop strategies for minimizing exposure, it is necessary to understand the
              processes by which pollutants are transported from their sources to eventual
              sinks.  This project will improve our understanding of the key processes
              involved and will develop tools for assessing pollutant flows, focusing on the
              element lead in the Los Angeles Basin.  There are three general goals.  First,
              processes involving emissions of lead, as well as deposition and resuspension
              of lead-containing particles, will be identified.  This will be achieved by
              gathering existing information on airborne lead concentrations over several
              years and by conducting measurements of lead characteristic on achived filters.
               Results of current research investigating deposition and resuspension of
              particles from surfaces will be applied.  Second, an improved mass balance
              model will be developed that can be used to identify key source categories and
              sinks of lead.  Possible control strategies for reducing airborne
              concentrations of lead will be identified.  This part of the project will make
              use of existing mass balance models, which will be modified and evaluated based
              on sensitivity analyses and use of engineering approximations.  Third, the
              project will include determination of the net benefits of each of several
              control strategies based on knowledge of lead sources and sinks, estimated
              reductions in human exposure, and costs of abatement.  Overall, the results of
              this project will help our understanding of factors influencing human exposure
              to environmental pollutants and will assist in developing control strategies to
              reduce exposure.
