Title       : Ultrafast Dynamics of Molecular Solids Under High Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9714886

Award Number: 9714886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Chronister eric.chronister@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program   of
              the Chemistry Division, Chronister will combine high-pressure diamond   anvil
              techniques and ultrafast nonlinear coherent spectroscopic methods   as a
              high-resolution probe of molecular solids.  Infrared and visible   photon echo
              experiments will be conducted on mixed molecular solids and   amorphous glasses
              in order to elucidate the dynamical processes taking   place in condensed
              phases.  The proposed experiments will examine   electronic and vibronic
              dynamics in inhomogeneously broadened solids as a   function of temperature and
              density and will be used to refine theories   of optical and vibrational
              dephasing in amorphous and mixed crystalline   solids.    High pressure applied
              to materials provides a way of altering the   interactions between molecules in
              a solid in a continuously controlled   manner.  This allows for the systematic
              study of the attractive and   repulsive forces that exist on an atomic level. 
              Chronister will measure   the behavior of solids under high pressure and low
              temperature   conditions.  The information gathered is difficult to obtain
              because the   pressures involved are extremely high and temperatures are very
              low.    However, these data will ultimately aid our understanding of the
              dynamic   interactions between species in solid solution and their host
              materials.    The sorts of studies undertaken here also reveal much about the
              behavior   of materials under extreme conditions.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
