Title       : LExEn: Characterization of the Upper Pressure Limits for Microbial Life
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9714292

Award Number: 9714292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80628              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Bartlett dbartlett@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1075,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Bartlett  9714292  Many regions of the solar system where life is postulated
              to exist, such as the oceans of Europa, are characterized by pressures far
              greater than those experienced at Earth's surface. Because pressure exerts a
              fundamental influence on the properties and distribution of life, the effects
              of high pressure on living systems needs to be understood. Unfortunately,
              despite the isolation of high pressure-loving (barophilic) microbes from
              certain deep-sea environments, relatively little data exists on the nature of
              barophily or the pressure boundaries within which life may exist.  The
              mechanisms and limits of growth at high pressure are being investigated by
              using a collection of bacteria of differing high pressure growth abilities, and
              by isolating and characterizing additional barophiles from the environment
              capable of growing at unprecedented. pressures.  Mutants derived from two
              genetically manipulatable bacteria, barotolerant Escherichia coli, and
              moderately barophilic Photobacterium species strain SS9, will be obtained
              following a series of stepwise high pressure selection regimes under various
              culture conditions. Genes associated with high pressure growth will be
              identified and characterized.  In addition, increased high pressure growth
              ability will be selectively evolved in the extreme barophile Shewanella species
              strain PT99, and "hyper" barophiles will be selected for, using sediments
              freshly obtained from a high pressure location within the Japan Trench. The
              phylotypes of those isolated microorganisms displaying greatest high pressure
              growth capability will be ascertained following 16S rDNA sequencing.
