Title       : WGIDPO: Gender-Equity in Science, Engineering and Mathematics Education: Making
               Connections for 3rd to 5th Grade Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a9714751

Award Number: 9714751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $838139             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara C. Dwight dwight@mscd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Loats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charlotte Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristina M. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Metropolitan St Col Denver
	      P.O. Box 173362
	      Denver, CO  80217    303/556-3484

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Girls' interest and confidence toward science, engineering  and mathematics
              (SEM) decline substantially as they advance  through school.  This change,
              followed by declining SEM  participation, reflects multiple factors such as
              gender bias  in classroom instruction styles and curriculum content,  strong
              stereotypes regarding acceptable roles for women, the  perception of SEM as a
              masculine realm, and girls'  difficulty appreciating the relevance of SEM. 
              This problem  is especially acute in some socioeconomic groups.    This project
              brings together a consortium of institutions  and programs (Metropolitan State
              College of Denver, The  Optoelectronic Systems Computing Center; CU-Boulder, 
              Educational Equity Center, Girls' Inc., and Denver CONNECT)  to affect girls
              and their teachers in three diverse, urban  school districts (including the
              Denver Public Schools with  over 66,000 students).  Interventions focus on
              grades 3 to  5, the years during which girls' comfort with SEM begins to 
              decline.  Programs address curriculum, professional  development, preservice
              instruction, and outreach and  enrichment activities.  Collectively, these
              efforts will  influence the entire educational milieu including girls,  their
              families, and their teachers.  The project will  permanently establish a
              process of curriculum, pedagogical  and attitudinal change focusing on gender
              equity and how  mathematics and science are taught at the elementary school 
              level.
