Title       : Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center (ATEEC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9714425

Award Number: 9714425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen J. Kabat Lensch ekabat@eiccd.cc.ia.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Dickinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hazardous materials Traini
	      ATEEC
	      Bettendorf, IA  527226804    563/441-4090

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The vision of the Advanced Technology Environmental Education center (ATEEC) is
              to create a national network of community colleges, supported through public
              and private partnerships, that prepares and maintains an environmental
              technology workforce to address industry's needs and to promote the transfer of
              secondary students to higher education.     Through an ATEEC National workshop,
              environmental technology has been defined as "a career field that utilizes the
              principles of science, engineering, communication, and economics to protect and
              enhance safety, health, and natural resources."  The environmental technology
              field encompasses an array of professions, i.e., pollution prevention, water
              and wastewater treatment, energy and conservation, and many others.  The
              interdisciplinary nature of environmental technology programs includes math,
              science, sociology, political science, technology, economics, and more.  This
              field is an excellent mechanism to reach ALL students and particularly those
              who may feel threatened by the study of math or science.  It is imperative that
              ALL students receive core instruction enabling them to become competent in
              math, science, and technical skills as they prepare for environmental
              technology careers.      ATEEC was designed to address the need to build a
              strong environmental technology education infrastructure which assists the
              nation's community colleges in the development of quality environmental
              technology education programs.  To achieve this, the Center's mission which
              incorporates three goals, is to advance environmental technology education
              through curriculum development, professional development, and program
              improvement in the nation's community colleges and secondary schools.    To
              build the environmental technology education infrastructure, ATEEC has utilized
              the strengths of its partners, the Hazardous Materials Training and Research
              Institute (HMTRI), the Partnership for Environmental Technology Education
              (PETE), and the University of Northern Iowa's (U NI) Center for Environmental
              and Energy Education.  To date, more than 40 activities have been completed
              successfully which substantiate ATEEC as a national focal point to lead efforts
              in environmental technology education program development and improvement.   
              The foundation for the activities which will carry ATEEC through 2000 is based
              upon the planning efforts of the National Visiting Committee, ATEEC partners,
              and the Center's director.  The activities address needs articulated by
              education, business and industry representatives.  The team-approach to
              strategic planning ensures partner buy-in and responsibility for delivery of
              high quality programs and services for which ATEEC has established a national
              reputation.    ATEEC is continuing its original mission as it progresses toward
              2000.  Firmly established as a "national" Center, ATEEC continues to strengthen
              the necessary infrastructure to support and complement environmental technology
              education in secondary schools, community colleges and four-year colleges. 
              ATEEC enables these institutions to cooperatively build quality environmental
              technology programs which embrace a defined knowledge base emphasizing strong
              math, science, and technology skills.  ATEEC is an incubator in the truest
              sense which enables the creation of new programs and the continuous improvement
              of existing programs.
