Title       : Third International Workshop on Ordered Intermetallic Alloys and Composites;
               Hangzhou, China; April 5-10, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1998   
File        : a9714853

Award Number: 9714853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Sass sls7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9714853  Sass    The objective of this international workshop is a provide a 
              forum for material scientists, and engineers from various  countries to
              participate in an in-depth discussion of recent  advances and critical issues
              for the structural use of  ordered intermetallic alloys and composites.  The
              structural  uses of intermetallic alloys suffer a major drawback: most  are
              brittle at ambient temperatures.  This poor ductility  and toughness restricts
              the use of intermetallics as  critical components in industrial systems.  For
              the past 10  years, substantial efforts have been devoted to this class  of
              structural materials, and, as a result, significant  progress has been made in
              improving the tensile ductility  and fracture resistance of nickel, iron, and
              titanium  aluminides.  The objective of this workshop is a provide a  forum for
              experts from various countries to discuss (1)  fundamental variables
              controlling deformation and fracture  of ordered intermetallics at ambient and
              elevated  temperatures; (2) the design of ductile intermetallic alloys  for
              structural uses; (3) further improvements in low-  temperature toughness and
              high-temperature strength by a  composite approach; and (4) the processing of
              intermetallic  alloys and composites by both conventional and innovative 
              methods.  This international workshop is co-organized by  Prof. Dongliang Lin
              (host) from Shanghai Jiao Tong  University, Dr. C. T. Liu from Oak Ridge
              National  Laboratory, and Prof. Stephen L. Sass from Cornell  University.  It
              is held in Hangzhou, China, from April 5-10,  1998.  Participation in this
              workshop is by invitation only.  The proceedings of this workshop is
              tentatively planned to  be published in the Journal of Materials Science and 
              Technology.  It is expected to have 25-30 scientists from  outside China and
              25-30 scientists from China.  %%%  Ordered intermetallics based on aluminides
              and silicides  possess many attractive properties for high-temperature 
              structural use.  In general, these intermetallic s show  excellent strength at
              elevated temperatures. Many  intermetallic alloys exhibit an increase in
              strength with  temperature rather than a decrease as in conventional 
              materials.  Aluminides and silicides are extremely resistant  to oxidation and
              corrosion at elevated temperatures in  hostile environments.  In addition,
              these intermetallic  alloys have a density lower than that of steels and 
              superalloys by as much as 40%, thus making the  intermetallics ideal for
              fabricating moving parts in  advanced heat engines, gas turbines and other
              energy  conversion systems.  ***
