Title       : CEDAR: Imaging Science Component of the MISETA Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9714771

Award Number: 9714771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Mendillo mendillo@buasta.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators continue studying the coupled thermosphere/ionosphere system
              at the equator under a program referred to as MISETA (Multi-Instrumented
              Studies of Equatorial Thermosphere Aeronomy).  MISETA involves coordinated
              measurements by a variety of instruments at Jicamarca, Ancon, and Arequipa in
              Peru.  These instruments provide data on the neutral and ionized atmosphere,
              including vertical and zonal ion drifts, electron densities, ion, electron and
              neutral temperatures, zonal, meridional and vertical neutral winds, spread-F
              and scintillation activity.  The investigators examine and characterize solar
              variations in the equatorial thermospheric winds and temperatures, and how
              these variations relate to developing scintillation activity and spread-F.  The
              all-sky imaging data characterizes developing depletions and F-region
              structures as conditions become more dynamic with the higher solar fluxes. 
              They also observe developing zonal wind and temperature asymmetry with
              anti-correlated F-region gradients as the increasing plasma density couples
              into the zonal motions introduced by gravity wave oscillations, resulting in
              conversion of gravity wave energy into a localized region of heating.  The
              researchers are coordinating observations with the Jicamarca Radio Observatory
              to observe the gravity wave effects in horizontal and vertical ion drifts. 
              MISETA is a collaborative effort involving scientists at Clemson University,
              Boston College, and Boston University.
