Title       : Red Mud Minimization by Iron Removal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9714594

Award Number: 9714594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Schlesinger mes@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9714594 Schlesinger The objective of this research is to demonstrate the use of
              partial reduction as a means of removing the iron from "red mud", produced in
              the purification of aluminum using the Bayer process.  Red mud contains high
              ferric-oxide, resulting in its name, as well as significant percentages of
              alumina, soda, silica, lime and titania, and might prove a valuable source of
              these materials.  Currently red mud is disposed of at sea or in shallow lagoons
              along ocean shores or river banks.  Because of the less-hazardous nature of red
              mud, little research attention has been given to reducing the volume of
              disposed material or the recovery of its constituents. Several characteristics
              of red mud make the development of an economically viable treatment process
              difficult, e.g. the moisture content, the extremely fine particle size and the
              refractory nature of most of its constituents.  One of the most challenging
              aspects lies in finding a way of separating the iron it contains (in the form
              of hematite).  Several techniques have been attempted, but they have been
              unsuccessful because of their high energy requirements and because they produce
              a slag which is difficult to process further.  This research is aimed at
              reducing the hematite to magetite or wustite, which are ferromagnetic and can
              be recovered by low-gradient magnetic separation processes.  This would require
              lower furnace temperatures, reducing energy costs and minimizing interaction
              among the other constituents in the mud.  The research program will focus on
              bench-scale reduction experiments varying the type of mud, reduction
              temperature and the choice and amount of reducing agent; quantitative process
              mineralogy techniques will be used to assess the degree of reduction achieved
              and to generate a characterization profile of U.S. red muds.  A second focus
              involves demonstrating the use of low-gradient magnetic separation in
              recovering iron from the partially reduced materials.  Recent advances in
              magnetic separation have shown promise in iron recovery from other fine-grained
              process wastes and their integration into a red mud treatment process will help
              create a viable alternative to present disposal and recovery techniques. 
              
***

