Title       : The Preparation and Study of Novel Ligand Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1999  
File        : a9714998

Award Number: 9714998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph P. Thummel Thummel@UH.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,  
              Professor Randolph P. Thummel, of the Department of Chemistry at the  
              University of Houston, investigates the preparation and properties of   novel
              ligand systems.  Professor Thummel explores the stereochemical   consequences
              of unsymmetrical substitution within bidentate ligands,   focusing on the
              steric and electronic effects of such substitution in the   formation of facial
              and meridional diastereomers of tris(bipyridyl)   complexes of ruthenium(II). 
              Through the synthesis of a series of ligands   related to
              9-(di-2'-pyridyl)methylenefluorene, designed to undergo   rotation about the
              central pi bond following photoinduced metal-to-ligand   charge transfer and
              thereby present a barrier to internal return to the   ground state, Professor
              Thummel is investigating the generation of   long-lived photoexcited states. 
              Related ligands permit assessment of the   impact of ligand oxidation state on
              electronic communication between two   bound metal ions, while complexes of
              pyrene-based ligands offer the   possibility to observe room temperature
              emission.  The physical and chemical properties of metal ions may be altered  
              dramatically by capturing them within a molecular structure designed to  
              impact chosen properties.  Professor Randolph P. Thummel, of the   Department
              of Chemistry at the University of Houston, is supported by the   Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his investigations of   the synthesis and
              study of molecules designed to affect the chemical   processes resulting from
              the interaction of their metal complexes with   light.  Such photoprocesses
              lead to the transfer of an electron from the   metal to the supporting
              molecular structure, and by designing this   structure to undergo a significant
              change in geometry upon such electron   transfer, Professor Thummel attempts to
              stabilize the photoinduced   `excited state.`  Related studies permit
              assessment of the effect on the   electronic communication between two metal
              ions of a change in the nature   of a molecular grouping which bridges them. 
              These studies address   fundamental issues regarding photoinduced electron
              transfer and are   directly related to the harvesting of energy from sunlight. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
