Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Phase Transitions in the Early Universe, Award in
               Indian Rupees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a9714627

Award Number: 9714627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pijushpani Bhattacharjee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst of Astrophys
	      
	      Bangalore, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714627  Bhattacharjee   Description:  This is a U.S.-India research
              collaboration entitled  Phase Transitions in the Early Universe and Probes of
              Large Scale  Distribution of Matter in the Universe.  This project will build
              on   a joint program in theoretical astrophysics developed in 1987 thru  1992
              between the University of Chicago and the Tata Institute of  Fundamental
              Research (TIFR).  The current project is under the  direction of David Schramm,
              University of Chicago and Pijushpani  Bhattacharjee, Indian Institute of
              Astrophysics (IIA), Bangalore.     These nodel institutions will serve as
              organizational centers rather  than sole research venues for the participants. 
              The research will  build on the earlier effort which in the beginning had a
              natural  focus on the Supernovae, and later on the role of the quark-hadron 
              phase transition in the early universe and ultra high energy cosmic  ray
              interactions.  The current objectives will be to work out  cosmological and
              astrophysical implications of phase transitions in  the early universe,
              particularly the implications of topological  defects and electroweak
              baryogenesis; and to study the phase space  distribution of dark matter in the
              Galaxy and the phenomenon of  gravitational lensing as a probe of large-scale
              distribution of dark  matter in the universe.    Scope:  This collaboration is
              an outgrowth of a joint research  program among several of the most
              distinguished astrophysicists in  the US and India.  The output was most
              impressive including the   pioneering work by the Indian PI.  This award will
              support several  short-term visits by Indian coPIs and postdocs, as well as
              visits to  India by the US PI.  In addition to the advances in fundamental 
              knowledge expected from the research, the exchange of ideas with  Indian
              leaders of cosmology will be valuable for the US scientific  community.      
              ***
