Title       : Improvement in QPF of Landfalling Atlantic Hurricanes Using Remote Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9714361

Award Number: 9714361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Smith ESmith@metsat.met.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714361
Smith
	The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
              activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve
              the delivery of weather services to the nation.  Under this Program, the
              National Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration (NOAA), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
              and the Office of Naval Research are jointly evaluating and supporting research
              of high priority to the USWRP.  One of the primary goals of the USWRP is to
              perform the research necessary to improve track and intensity forecasts of
              hurricanes.
	This research effort is a collaboration between Dr. Smith and
              Professor Gregory Tripoli of the University of Wisconsin.  Dr. Smith is an
              expert in the use and interpretation of satellite information and Dr. Tripoli's
              expertise is in the realm of mesoscale numerical modeling.  This research
              focuses on better understanding of the characteristics of Atlantic hurricanes
              and the improvement in the prediction of their track, intensity and rainfall. 
              The research includes the assimilation of time-sequenced satellite moisture and
              wind products into a cloud resolving version of the University of Wisconsin
              Nonhydrostatic Modeling System.  Since satellite observations can identify
              meso-beta scale structures, particularly in the moisture and wind fields, which
              in turn modulate the meso-beta-scale precipitation structures of the model
              forecasts, by beginning forecasts over the open ocean where conventional data
              voids are greatest, the Principal Investigators expect to achieve better skill
              in determining the timing and position of landfall. 
Vertically resolved
              moisture profiles produced by the operational satellite sounder retrieval
              system at the University of Wisconsin Cooperative Institute for Meteorological
              Satellite Studies (CIMSS), along with vertically resolved cloud-tracked and
              water vapor winds also produced at CIMSS will be nudged and blended into model
              forecasts for hurricane cases from the 1998 and 1999 hurricane season.  The
              1995 hurricane Opal event will be studied prior to the 1998/1999 season in
              preparation for near real-time modeling experiments during the two full
              seasons. 
The research will seek improvements to both prediction of
              track-intensity factors, and quantitative precipitation forecasting (QPF)
              during entire storm life cycles.  To determine the impact of the data
              assimilation, and to assess and validate the improvements in QPF both before
              and after landfall, passive microwave measurements from Special Sensor
              Microwave Imagery and combined passive microwave-precipitation radar
              measurements from the upcoming Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission will be used
              with physically-based precipitation profile retrieval algorithms operated at
              Florida State University under the direction of Professor Smith. 
	Successful
              completion of this research will potentially lead to techniques for improved
              use of advanced data from satellites for forecasting of hurricanes.
***

