Title       : Lagrangian Studies of Stratospheric Transport Barriers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9714384

Award Number: 9714384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169029             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janusz Eluszkiewicz eluszkiewicz@aer.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm K. Ko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Atmos & Environ Res Inc
	      131 Hartwell Avenue
	      Lexington, MA  02421    781/761-2288

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9714384  Eluszkiewicz       The principal investigator seeks to understand
              the physical processes responsible for transport of trace species in the
              stratosphere across internal barriers such as the tropopause and the boundary
              between the tropics and extratropics. The transport rates across these
              boundaries are important in determining the budgets of key constituent gases,
              including stratospheric water vapor and lower stratospheric and tropospheric
              ozone, and play a crucial role in the assessment of the chemical and climatic
              impact of trace gases emitted to the atmosphere, for example by supersonic and
              subsonic aircraft. Despite its recognized importance, progress in understanding
              this transport has been impeded by the fact that the relevant spatial scales
              are often smaller than can be resolved by spacecraft observations or computed
              using Eulerian advection schemes.    Under this project the PI will simulate
              the global effects of both large and small scale transport using a specially
              developed Lagrangian trajectory package incorporated into the Geophysical Fluid
              Dynamics Laboratory SKYHI general circulation model (GCM). The Lagrangian
              technique will be used to explore the following:    ( The difference in the
              trace gas distributions computed using Eulerian and Lagrangian approaches and
              the impact of these differences on the mean age of stratospheric air as
              computed in a GCM  ( The nature of stratosphere-troposphere exchange in the
              extratropics and the seasonal patterns as revealed by the mass fluxes across
              the tropopause simulated in the model.      Insights gained from this research
              will be useful in the general development of trajectory techniques for other
              GCMs and/or assimilation models. In particular, this research will study the
              sensitivity to the choice of vertical coordinate and to the sampling frequency
              of the wind data used in the trajectory calculations, including the option of
              performing the calculations on-line, i.e., on each integration time step of the
              wind-generating model.  These studies will thus contribute to a better
              understanding of the Lagrangian approach both as a three-dimensional
              high-resolution advection scheme and as a visualization tool.
