Title       : Enhancement of Research and Training Facilities at the Oak Lake Field Station,
               South Dakota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9714092

Award Number: 9714092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nels H. Troelstrup   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Oak Lake Field Station (South Dakota) State  University) is a 570 acre
              facility located in the  prairie pothole region of the Northern Glaciated
              Plains.  This station provides a unique setting to support long-  term research
              and instruction for topics on northern  prairie ecosystems.  Unusual soil
              types, glaciated land  forms and naive prairie vegetation together with field 
              station facilities provide opportunities The Oak Lake  Field Station has
              experienced continued growth of programs  and utilization (3,700) user-days per
              year and growing)  over its brief eight year history.  Facility and equipment 
              challenges have been generated from increased research and  instructional
              emphases in prairie ecology, limnological  studies of prairie potholes and
              assessment of hands-on,,  inquiry-based environmental  education materials. 
              These  challenges demonstrate a need to establish a research and  instructional
              science agenda and strategic management plan  to support future use of the
              site.    The objectives of this planning effort are to (1) define a  science
              agenda (research and instruction)for the Oak Lake  Field Station, (2) identify
              facility and equipment needs  to support expanded scientific efforts, (3)
              establish  collaborative working relationships with programs at other 
              biological field stations, (4) establish communication  with other field
              stations for the exchange of research  data and instructional materials and (5)
              develop a  strategic plan and cost estimates for proposed changes  in the 
              facility to be used in subsequent funding requests  for field station programs.
               These objectives  will be addressed through a combination of interactive 
              workshops and intensive design efforts over a two year  period.  Information
              developed from these planning efforts  will be used to develop support for
              station renovations  and guide management for the next 510 years.  The final 
              product of this two year effort will be a strategic  management plan to support
              objectives defined within a new  science  agenda.    This planning effort will
              enhance the capabilities of the  Oak Lake Field Station to support regional and
              national  science efforts in prairie ecosystems. These capabilities  will be
              evident from enhanced facilities (housing), field  laboratory, supporting
              equipment) and implementation  of collaborative research and instructional
              programs  within the next few years.  Field station directors and  faculty at
              other institutions will become aware of  environments and facilities at the Oak
              Lake Field Station.  This increased awareness will enhance interbiome research 
              and learning activities for a broad group of scientists  and students
              interested in prairie environments.
