Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Study of Molecular Motions and Phase
               Transformations in Atomic-Scale Structures and Liquid Crystals, Award in Indian
               Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9714110

Award Number: 9714110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11290              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. C. Jain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delhi
	      
	      New Delhi, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9714110  Jain  Description:  This award supports the US-India Cooperative 
              Research: Study of Molecular Motions and Phase Transformations  in Atomic-Scale
              Structures and Liquid Crystals.  The project is  under the direction of S.C.
              Sharma, University of Texas at  Arlington (UTA) and P.C. Jain, University of
              Delhi (UD).  The  researchers will study the effects of molecular structure on
              phase  transition in liquid crystalline materials and will investigate 
              relationships between defects and optical properties of surface-  aligned
              liquid crystalline films.  Using techniques sensitive to phase  transition,
              they will measure optical properties of surface-aligned  liquid crystalline
              thin films.  The outcome will be a better  understanding of the processes
              occurring at the surface and in the  bulk, and their effects on the optical
              properties of a much broader  class of layered materials.    Scope:  This
              collaboration will initiate a new joint research  program between the
              University of Texas and the University of  Delhi.  The PIs are established
              researchers who have published  important results obtained from their
              experimental techniques.   Both the expertise and facilities available at UTA
              and UD are  complementary.  This project has excellent potential for addressing
               important scientific questions and improving the quality of liquid 
              crystalline films and other materials. The research is mutually  beneficial and
              the support requested is primarily for travel and per  diem.    ***
