Title       : FSML: Water Treatment System and Electronic Communication Capability for the
               Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9714082

Award Number: 9714082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Taber D. Allison taber@earthnet.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol L. Boggs  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) is an  independent, nonprofit
              field station with  no institutional affiliation, which provides facilities for
               researches who wish to study high-altitude  biology in a field setting. 
              Researches have come to the  RMBL for 69 years, and during that time  have
              patiently put up with inadequate housing and research  facilities.  Recent
              facilities grants from  NSF assisted with construction and renovation of
              several  buildings.  With this project RMBL will  provide necessary treatment
              of its water supply and proper  installation of telecommunications cables  to
              laboratories, offices and residences.    First, though RMBL's water has
              consistently tested as high  quality, new State Public Health  Department
              regulations require treatment of all water  sources classified as surface water
              sources.  A treatment system designed by a Water Treatment Engineer  needs to
              be installed.  Second, a rural  improvement grant for the local
              telecommunications company  provided service to RMBL in late 1995.  During
              summer 1996, RMBL staff laid unprotected surface  cables to a number of
              laboratory and  residence buildings, to facilitate immediate use for that 
              field season.  These surface cables need to be  encased in weatherproof
              protection, buried where necessary,  and the network completed according  to a
              master distribution plan.
