Title       : Dissertation Research: An Ethnoarchaeological Study of Enset Cultivation and
               Plant Use Among the Sheko of Southwest Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1997  
File        : a9714733

Award Number: 9714733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona Marshall fmarshal@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, MS. Elizabeth Hildebrand will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct anthropological
              investigation among the Sheko people of southwestern Ethiopia to study the
              methods they employ to cultivate enset and other local crops. Agriculture arose
              independently, at roughly the same time in several areas in both the Old and
              New World. Regions such as the Andean highlands, Middle America, the Near East
              and China are relatively well known to archaeologists because their main
              domesticates - potatoes, corn, wheat and rice - form Western dietary staples.
              Although few Ethiopian food crops, with the exception of coffee, are well known
              outside the immediate region, a number of plants were domesticated and several
              play an important local subsistence role there. Enset is a root crop
              domesticated in prehistoric times. It contains an edible tuber which grows to
              one meter in diameter and an edible stalk. It is eaten widely across Ethiopia
              and provides the main source of sustenance for a large population in the
              southwestern portion of the country.   Throughout most of Ethiopia famers
              follow a settled way of life and practice intensive agriculture, planting on
              terraces constructed in some case over thousands of years. In this context the
              Sheko are highly unusual because they are mobile, plant only small fields and
              move often. They also live in an area where undomesticated enset occurs and
              thus are probably close to the source of domestication. They also, quite
              likely, follow the subsistence strategies of early farmers and thus are of
              great archaeological interest. Over the course of her fieldwork MS Hildebrand
              will collect basic demographic and social data. She will conduct an intensive
              study of enset cultivation and use and also note Sheko farming approaches to
              other endemic plant species. She will collect samples of both domesticated and
              wild plant species and determine weedy taxa present in agricultural fields and
              other humanly altered environments. Since root crops are rarely preserved in
              the archaeological record, she will search for associated cultural and
              biological indicators of enset cultivation which might be preserved in such a
              context.  The research is important for several reasons. Anthropologists wish
              to understand the processes which led to the domestication of plants and
              animals because this transition from hunting and gathering set the stage which
              led to the development of complex societies. The Sheko offer an important
              opportunity for potential insight into this process. The specific results of
              her work will also be of direct interest and use to archaeologists who work in
              Eastern Africa. The project will assist in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
