Title       : Iron-Oxide and -Sulfide Mineral Particles as Biomarkers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1998      
File        : a9714101

Award Number: 9714101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Frankel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter R. Buseck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Moskowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis A. Bazylinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Mars-Rock Special Research Opportunity activity   supports
              research on iron oxide and iron sulfide minerals by Drs. Richard   B. Frankel
              of California Polytechnic State University, Dennis A.   Bazylinski of Iowa
              State University, Peter R. Buseck of Arizona State   University, and Bruce M.
              Moskowitz of the University of Minnesota.  This   project is funded by the
              Office of Polar Programs, the Chemistry   Division, and the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  This group   of investigators will direct
              expertise in magnetism, microbiology,   microscopy, and mineralogy to
              determining the structural, morphological,   surface, chemical, and magnetic
              features of iron oxides and iron sulfides   that can serve as markers for
              biogenic origin.  Advanced electron   microscopy and magnetic technologies will
              be used to characterize the   samples.  In addition to martian meteorite
              ALH84001, biogenic iron oxides   and iron sulfides in both magnetotactic
              bacteria and iron-reducing and   sulfate-reducing bacteria will be
              characterized.   Magnetotactic bacteria   and magnetite in pure culture as well
              as a variety of uncultured bacteria   available in high concentrations in
              chemically-stratified, marine or   brackish, semi-anaerobic basins will be
              sampled.  Magnetite and iron sulfides of presumed biogenic origin in the
              carbonate   inclusions in martian meteorite ALH84001 are critical components of
              the   evidence cited for the possible existence of past life on Mars.   
              Alternatively, magnetite in ALH84001 has features that have been cited as  
              evidence for high-temperature formation of the carbonate.  This research   will
              develop criteria for distinguishing biogenic from non-biogenic  
              iron-containing minerals in order to develop an improved framework for  
              interpreting the evidence observed in martian meteorite ALH84001.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
