Title       : Demand for quality-differentiated network services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9714559

Award Number: 9714559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $772156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pravin P. Varaiya varaiya@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hal R. Varian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    Future growth of Internet and other network services depends upon how
              these services are marketed.  Two decisions are involved: the division of
              services into quality-differentiated market segments, and the pricing structure
              of each segment.    There is evidence of diversity in user demand for service
              quality depending on application, familiarity, and willingness to pay.  On the
              supply side, network technology now can support a wide range of service
              quality.  Successful growth therefore requires service providers to offer
              combinations of quality and price that match user need.  But to do this
              providers must understand the structure of user demand.  Such understanding is
              lacking  at present.    This is a proposal for a market experiment to estimate
              the demand for network services.  INDEX---the Internet Demand Experiment---has
              three objectives:    1. Measurement of user demand for Internet access as a
              function of quality of service (QoS), pricing structure, and application;    2.
              Demonstration of an end-to-end system that provides access to a diverse group
              of users at attractive price-quality combinations;    3. Development of a
              prototype system that can be scaled to serve the demand for remote network
              access from all Berkeley students, faculty and staff on a user-financed basis. 
                The experiment will recruit 160 students, faculty and staff from the Berkeley
              campus community.  Users will select and pay for network services from a menu
              of QoS-price offerings.  User decisions will be monitored and the data will be
              used to estimate their structure of demand.  The experiment will produce a
              unique set of data that can be analyzed to characterize individual and
              aggregate network traffic and to evaluate strategies for managing network
              resources to accommodate diverse user needs.
