Title       : Adaptive Resource Management for IP/ATM Hybrid Switching Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a9714586

Award Number: 9714586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: San-Qi Li sanqi@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              IP traffic is becoming the killer application for ATM networks.  One challenge
              in current network research  is how to effectively transport IP traffic over
              ATM networks.  IP was independently developed on basis of connectionless model,
               while ATM was originally designed for connection-oriented services.  IP
              traffic is usually switched using packet  software-forwarding technology, which
              is expensive  and has substantially limited forwarding capacity.  In contrast,
              ATM switches are designed with high transmission bandwidth,  but having limited
              connection setup processing capacity due to its  complex signalling structure
              developed for connection-oriented services.    The proposed research addresses
              a fundamental problem in resource management  for hybrid switching systems. 
              Such systems aim at efficiently transporting  layer 3 connectionless IP traffic
              over layer 2 connection-oriented ATM  switching fabrics. The hybrid switching
              technology is further classified  into flow-driven switching and
              topology-driven switching.   The idea behind the flow-based hybrid switching is
              first to decompose  individual IP packet streams into flows  and then to
              classify them into short-lived flows and long-lived flows.  While the
              short-lived flows are best forwarded  by the embedded software through
              permanent virtual connections (PVC),  the long-lived flows are more effectively
              transmitted by hardware  through to-be-established switched virtual connections
              (SVC).  Clearly, the key issue in such a flow-based hybrid switching system is
              the  design   of an on-line flow classification scheme, which can effectively  
              utilize the constrained system resources to achieve the maximum throughput 
              performance.   In contrast, the topology-driven switching establishes switch
              connections  based on current network routing information, i.e.,   associated
              with routing table entries rather than individual flows.   Hence, no software
              forwarding is required if the arriving packets  can be mapped into such
              pre-established switched  conne ctions.  The key issues in such a
              topology-based hybrid switching system are   related to routing scalability,
              connection-setup initiation and traffic merge.    The first part of our
              proposal will consider the flow classification design   in flow-based hybrid
              switching systems, such as IP switching and MPOA.   Unlike the traditional
              emphasis on resources such as link bandwidth and cell  buffer size, our
              proposal focuses on the resources which are directly  associated with  packet
              processing power, signaling capacity and routing table size.  Our study
              indicates that the presently available {\it static flow  classification}
              methods have a vital shortcoming in balancing the   utilization of the system's
              resources.  This is due to the various system design strategies  for allocating
              resources as well as the time varying traffic characteristics.  As a
              consequence, hybrid switching system can end up operating  in a highly
              unbalanced mode where some resources are  significantly underloaded while
              others are heavily  overloaded, causing substantial inefficiencies in network
              performance.     We propose a novel approach for {\it adaptive flow
              classification}  which can balance the utilization of system resources  to
              match the time varying traffic characteristics.  The proposed flow adaptation
              is formulated as a stochastic control  problem, where the stochastic control
              framework can be applied  towards the development of efficient and stable flow
              adaptation algorithms.  Our preliminary studies for this proposal show  the
              viability of the proposed flow adaptation  for dynamic resource management in
              hybrid  switching system design.  Due to its great impact on system
              performance,  we propose to carry out further theoretical analysis, algorithm
              development   and simulation study for flow adaptation mechanisms.      The
              second part of our proposed research will focus on the development of   an
              unified modeling technique for performance comparison study between   the
              flow-driven and topology-driven switching tech nologies.   One of the most
              challenging issues in networking field today is   to decide which of these two
              switching technologies should be adopted.   The success of proposed research is
              expected to have a substantial  technical impact on the selection of the next
              generation switching  technologies and also the design and resource management 
               of such IP/ATM hybrid switching systems.   Please visit
              http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~sanqi/NSF.html for further  information.
