Title       : School of Marine Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9714007

Award Number: 9714007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Eckelbarger kevine@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Over the last six years, the University of Maine has made  an unprecedented
              investment in its marine laboratory, the  Darling Marine Center to benefit both
              University faculty  and visiting researchers and their students.  Facility 
              improvements include many new laboratory and offices  spaces, more research
              instrumentation, and basic support  facilities such as a dining hall and new
              classrooms.  The  inauguration of a Visiting Investigation Program in 1991, 
              the expansion of educational offerings, and the growth of  a large
              undergraduate internship program, have resulted in  a population explosion that
              shows no sign of abating.    To set priorities for improvements, the University
              has  involved visiting investigators and visiting out-of-state  colleges in
              facility planning.  Based on their  recommendation, housing has been targeted
              as the  greatest facility weakness.  The Center's housing is  primitive,
              overcrowed, and woefully inadequate and this  deficiency is restricting the
              growth of both educational  and research programs that impact a growing
              community of  visiting faculty and students.  The University's  Department of
              Environmental Health & Safety has issued  unfavorable reports on the status of
              much of the Center's  housing, mostly due to inadequate fire protection and
              ADA-  access.  Most housing is of cottage construction and is  restricted to
              summer use.  Some housing lacks both heat  and running water.  In order to
              temporarily meet housing  demand, every available space has been converted to
              bunk  space throughout 11 separate building.  Due  to the age and condition of
              many of these structures,  modernization would be largely cost prohibitive. 
              While the Center now has beds for 60 people during the  warm weathers months,
              year-round housing will currently  accommodate only 18 students.  The Center's
              growing  educational and Visiting Investigator programs are being  severely
              hindered by this housing shortage, resulting in  schedule juggling and
              restrictions on the number of  individual s and visiting college classes that
              can work on  site at any given time.  In addition, the dining hall,  built in
              1992, was designed to feed 35 people at a time  but now must accommodate twice
              that number. 20-room  dormitory to house visiting faculty and students year 
              round will be constructed.  Two previous FSML facility  improvements awards to
              the University have been  responsible for stimulating the number of visiting 
              investigators to the Darling Center and making their  visits more productive. 
              In addition, the awards have  helped immeasurably to encourage additional
              investments by  the University and by local, citizens who support the  Center
              through their private donations.
