Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: A Study of the Land ProcessesAssociated with the
               Indian Monsoon, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9714611

Award Number: 9714611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9677               (Estimated)
Investigator: P.A. Aswatha Narayana   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst Tech Madras
	      
	      Madras, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 1303,5976,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9714611  Narayana  Description: This award supports collaborative  research
              between Drs. Sethu Raman and Leonard  Pietrafesa of North Carolina State
              University  (NCSU), Raleigh, and Dr. P.A. Aswatha Narayana  of the Indian
              Institute of Technology, Madras  (IITM), India.  These scientists, in 
              collaboration with the Indian National  Institute of Ocean Technology, will
              study  Indian sea breezes, atmospheric convection  along the sea breeze front,
              and storm surge  processes along the East coast of India.  In  the first part,
              the scientists will investigate  the horizontal extent of the sea breezes in 
              relation to land-sea temperature differences  and the ambient wind, as well as
              the formation  of deep convection along the sea breeze front  and its
              dependence on other factors such as  land use pattern and upper air stability. 
              They  will use a hydrostatic numerical model  developed at NCSU and transferred
              to IITM.   This model will be extended to a 3-dimensional  state and used with
              atmospheric observations in  India that are taken every three hours and that 
              date back for 30 years.  The model may be  supplemented with a non-hydrostatic
              model as  needed.  In the second part, the scientists  will utilize a storm
              surge model available at  the NIOT and based on Sea, Lake and Overland  Surges
              from Hurricanes (SLOSH) model originally  developed in the United States.  They
              will  develop methods to prescribe meteorological  forces that drive the ocean
              model and will also  use a simple hydrodynamic model developed at  NCSU that
              was successfully used in predicting  the tropical storm surge in North
              Carolina.    Scope:  This award allows cooperation between a  US team that is
              quite active in modeling  various atmospheric-sea-land phenomena, and an 
              Indian team that has excellent analytical  capability as well as access to
              extensive data  sources including governmental organizations  that operate
              radar, satellite, and other  atmospheric and ocean measurement  instrumentation
              on a continuous basis.  The  resear ch is of significant scientific benefit  to
              the US and India, and is of particular  importance to the meteorological
              activities of  the Indian authorities in predicting severe  climatic and
              weather conditions.  The project  involves both eminent and young scientists.  
              ***
