Title       : Dissertation: Acoustic and Articulatory Manifestations of Consonant Weakening
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9714868

Award Number: 9714868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abigail C. Cohn acc4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although consonant weakening or lenition is a common phenomenon, no 
              comprehensive explanation exists. If weakening is a decrease in the  duration
              and magnitude of consonant production, as it has recently  been described,
              quantifying these changes should clarify the  phenomenon. Duration is easily
              measured with acoustic analysis, but  other methods must be employed for
              magnitude. This study will use  dynamic electropalatography (EPG) to gather
              data on the magnitude  of linguopalatal contact over time. Stress,
              position-in-word, and  speech rate will be manipulated to determine their
              effects on the  production of consonants in American English and Spanish
              languages  with different types and degrees of phonologized weakening. 
              Differences between phonetic and phonologized weakening will be  assessed and a
              contact-based metric to differentiate them will be  provided. The possibility
              that duration and magnitude varying  separately~an account for the range of
              weakenings for a single  segment (e.g.  k  weakening to either  g  or  x ) will
              be explored.  This study will provide new insight into the nature of connected 
              speech processes, add to existing knowledge about speech rate  variations, and
              demonstrate the importance of prosodic structure to  consonant articulation.
              Methodologically, it will advance  techniques in applying EPG data to our
              understanding of acoustic  and phonological patterns.
