Title       : Magneto-Rheological Fluid Dampers for Structural Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a9714334

Award Number: 9714334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faramarz Gordaninejad faramarz@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
               9714334  Gordaninejad    Innovative energy-absorbing protective systems are
              needed to  enhance the safety of structures in the event of  earthquakes,
              severe storms, and other natural man-made  hazards.  This project aims at the
              developing and  implementing magneto-rheological fluid (MRF) dampers for 
              protect of structures.  The focus of the research will be on  the
              proof-of-concept utilization of a novel MRF damper for  seismic protection of
              buildings.    MFR dampers are semi-active decides that contain magneto- 
              rhelogical fluids.  Initiation of the damper's built-in  magnetic field causes
              a fast and dramatic change in the  viscosity of MRF dampers contained in the
              damper.  The  fouled changes state from liquid to semi-solid in  milliseconds. 
              The result is an infinitely variable,  controllable damper capable of very
              large damping forces.  MRF dampers offer an attractive solution to seismic
              energy  absorption in structures because they require minimal power  for
              operation this can be battery operated.  They are  inexpensive devices to
              manufacture, utilize, and maintain  which require no mechanical, valving and
              have large  temperature tolerance and long operational life.    The focus of
              this project is to develop controllable MRF  dampers that can demonstrate the
              capabilities needed for  protecting buildings under strong motions.  The
              research  tasks included:  (1) Comprehensive theoretical and  experimental
              studies for basic understanding of the behavior  and identification of the
              proposed MRF dampers, (2) Design  and development of MRF dampers for building
              applications.  Issues of robustness, maintenance, aging, and heat transfer 
              will be investigated, and (3) Proof-of-concept laboratory  tests on several
              scaled building systems.    To maintain and improve the present performance of 
              structures under severe seismic excitations and/or storms,  new or improved
              technology is a clear solution.  The  proposed MRF damper system will take
              advantage of the state-  of-the-art in advancement of materia l s to produce a 
              practical, efficient, and inexpensive protective system for  seismic
              structures.  Successful completion of the research  will contribute to the
              understanding, development and  utilization of innovative protective systems in
              the design  of new and/or retrofit of aging structures.
