Title       : Petrologic Studies of Martian Carbonates in ALH84001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a9714012

Award Number: 9714012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E R. Scott escott@kahana.pgd.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shiv K. Sharma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lauren B. Browning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714012  Scott    Abstract    This award supports a collaborative
              interdisciplinary project to  characterize the carbonates and associated
              minerals in Martian  meteorite ALH84001 toward an improved understanding of the
               conditions and mechanisms involved in their formation.  It is  supported by
              the Office of Polar Programs, the Chemistry  Division, and the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  These chemically and isotopically heterogeneous
              carbonates have  been described as possibly containing organic and inorganic 
              fossils of ancient Martian biota.  Understanding the origin of  the carbonates
              is the key to evaluating these interpretations.  Two models for the origin of
              the carbonates in ALH84001 will be  studied: shock melting of carbonates at
              high temperatures, which  would virtually preclude the presence of fossils of
              carbon-based  life, and low-temperature deposition in pores and fractures from 
              aqueous fluids.    Petrologic studies using optical and electron microscopy and
               electron probe analysis of thin sections will focus on the  effects of shock
              melting and shock metamorphism of minerals in  ALH84001.  Shock-formed silica
              and plagioclase glasses will be  studied in pyroxene fractures, crushed zones
              and uncrushed  regions and compared with analogous phases in other shocked 
              meteorites and terrestrial analogs to constrain the shock and  deformation
              history of ALH84001. Carbonate globules, disks and  grains in pyroxene
              fractures, crushed and uncrushed regions and  their associated oxides and
              sulfides will be studied to test  whether carbonates could have crystallized
              from shock melts that  formed and were partly mobilized during the impact that
              melted  plagioclase and silica.    Carbonates and shock-formed glasses will
              also be studied in  sections with laser micro-Raman spectroscopy and
              FT-infrared  microscopy to search for carbonate ions in glass and to 
              understand the shock and thermal histories of glasses and  carbonates. 
              Carbonates, glasses and other phases will be studied  on  fracture surfaces of
              the rock with atomic force microscopy  (AFM) to clarify the origin of the
              carbonate and its relationship  to the glasses.  AFM studies will focus on the
              distribution of  organic phases in the carbonate, its crystallinity and  the 
              degree of rotational disorder of carbonate-ions.  These features  will help in
              distinguishing biogenic and abiogenic carbonate  mineral phases.
