Title       : Evaluation of the West Coast Picket-Fence Observing Concept to Improve Mesoscale
               Prediction Downstream from the Eastern North Pacific Data-Sparse Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9714552

Award Number: 9714552
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell L. Elsberry elsberry@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey DiMego  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Hirschberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    831/656-2099

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714552  Elsberry        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the National Science  Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration, the National  Aeronautics and Space Administration and the
              Office of Naval Research are jointly  evaluating and supporting research of
              high priority to the USWRP.           The precedent circulations that
              contribute to the development of damaging  weather systems over the western and
              mid-western U.S. often approach from the  data-sparse region of the eastern
              Pacific. In many cases, these precedent circulations  have small horizontal
              dimensions that are not well resolved by the existing upper-air  sounding
              network. A special set of upper-air observing stations called the West-  Coast
              Picket Fence was established to measure the circulations crossing the west 
              coast of the U.S. during the Stormscale Operational and Research Meteorology- 
              Fronts Experiment Systems Test (STORM-FEST) held from February to March  1992.
              In particular, three-hourly Picket Fence soundings were obtained from the 
              combination of seven special and seven existing upper-air stations during four 
              intensive observing periods. Analyses completed thus far demonstrate that the
              higher  spatial resolution of the combined Picket-Fence sites with three hourly
              soundings  better resolve the energy fluxes crossing the coast than the seven
              existing sites with  the regular 1 2-hourly soundings. This Picket Fence is
              considered to be a prototype  for a future system of ground-based remote
              sensors that might be deployed along the  west coast that would monitor all
              circulations crossing the coast.        One goal of the USWRP is to determine
              the "best practicable mix" of  observations, data assimilation schemes, and
              forecast models that will yield cost-  effective weather forecast improvements
              for operations beyond the year 2000.    Crucial steps towards realizing this
              goal, and the associated goals of the North  American Observing System (NAOS)
              Program include the development and  evaluation of new data sources and
              observation strategies. We propose to evaluate  the potential impact of a
              quasi-linear array of special observing sites along the west  coast of the
              United States for the purpose of improving the downstream 0 - 2 day  forecast
              accuracy over North American.  Specifically, we propose to utilize the 
              operational and special west coast Picket Fence data collected during
              STORM-FEST  in tests with the National Centers for Environmental Prediction
              (NCEP) mesoscale  data assimilation and modeling system to examine the impacts
              of the special data  and new observing strategy on simulations of selected
              events during (the experiment  ***
