Title       : Developing a Framework for an International Study of Exemplary Practices in the
               Application of Technology to K-12Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9714122

Award Number: 9714122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72141              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline Hess jhess@aed.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Resta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Academy for Ed Dev
	      1825 Connecticut Avenue  NW
	      Washington, DC  200091202    202/884-8000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                    Developing a Framework for an International Study of
              Exemplary          Practices in the Application of Technology to K-12 Education
                                                   Project Summary            A number of
              current efforts to restructure educational systems include technology as an    
               important component of the national strategy. In doing so, it is particularly
              important for      decision-makers and educators to understand the ways
              technology can impact learning in the      context of the culture, the
              curriculum, educational system goals, evaluation criteria, as well as the     
              costs and projected benefits of the technology implementation. To help inform
              national policy      decisions related to the application of technology in
              education, it is particularly important to      identify and carefully document
              exemplary practices within different educational systems.            A
              well-designed study of U.S. and international experience in educational
              technology      implementation will provide examples of successful strategies
              and will identify the problems and      pitfalls encountered and how they were
              overcome. The study may identify the importance of the      knowledge, skill
              and commitment of the teacher in successful integration of technology into the 
                  learning environment and help define patterns and profiles that may help
              distinguish successful      technology implementation efforts within and across
              countries. For example, what common      characteristics and strategies can be
              identified in the planning and implementation of technology      at the state
              or provincial level? In addressing these questions and others, the study should
              help      further an understanding of the appropriate application of technology
              within different cultural      contexts. It should also describe effective ways
              of facilitating the transfer of educational      technology under varying
              resource constraints.            The Academy for Educational Development (AED)
              and the International  Society for Technology      in Education (ISTE) propose
              a project that will develop a framework for an international study of     
              exemplary practices in the application of the new information technologies to
              K-12 education.      The framework would be developed by a distinguished group
              of approximately 20 national and      international researchers, educators and
              policy-makers who would come together in a short-term      intensive workshop.
              Prior to the workshop, a larger group of educators, technologists, and     
              policy-makers will be engaged in a 4-6 week mediated on-line discussion in
              order to capture a      broad view of the most significant issues, approaches
              and experiences.            Both AED and ISTE have extensive experience and
              expertise in addressing international issues      of technology in education.
              The co-investigators and a number of individuals identified in the     
              potential list of invitees (see Attachment 1 ) have worked together in
              designing the UNESCO      ITEC Project: An International Study of Information
              Technology in Education of Children. This      experience will provide a base
              of knowledge related to many of the issues related to designing a      study of
              technology across national contexts, educational systems, and cultures and will
              help      assure that the workshop and subsequent on-line work is productive
              and focused. The experience      of the ITEC study participants, coupled with
              fresh perspectives provided by other invitees, will      assure the development
              of a coherent and realistic framework for an international study of     
              exemplary practices in the application of technology to education.
