Title       : Urban LTER: Human Settlements as Ecosystems: Metropolitan Baltimore from 1797 -
               2100
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a9714835

Award Number: 9714835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steward T. A. Pickett picketts@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1064,1306,9177,9278,CVIS,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9714835  Pickett  This LTER project in metropolitan Baltimore, Maryland, will
              address three general questions: 1) How do the spatial structure of
              socio-economic, ecological, and physical factors in an urban area relate to one
              another, and how do they change through time? 2) What are the fluxes of energy,
              matter, capital, and population in urban systems, and how do they change over
              time? 3) How can people develop and use an understanding of the metropolis as
              an ecological system to improve the quality of their environment? These
              questions will be addressed at a range of scales, from individual patches up to
              the entire Primary Statistical Metropolitan Area. In so doing, this project
              will help resolve fundamental issues about the ecology and temporal dynamics of
              cities and suburbs, and quantify an end member ecosystem for comparison with
              less human-dominated ecosystems.   The project revolves around an integrated
              framework to study urban areas as ecological systems, including physical,
              ecological, and socio-economic components. The target will be processes that
              control the function of urban areas as ecological systems, and their effects on
              other ecosystems. The framework will be tested by determining whether
              socio-economic, physical and ecological components of systems share common
              spatial structures, and whether each component responds to changes in others in
              space and time.    The research plan includes descriptive, historical, and
              experimental analyses. Dominant patch types will be characterized using
              ecological, physical, and socio-economic variables. This approach will produce
              high resolution, whole watershed, and whole city estimates of ecological and
              socio-economic fluxes, as well as allow development of simulation models
              capable of depicting the interactive effects of land use, habitat and social
              change on ecological functions. Data from historical records and sediment
              pollen cores will allow testing of hypotheses about how social and ecological
              factors interact to affect how these function s have changed in the past and
              how they might change in the future. Two long-term experiments - a manipulation
              of exotic plant species and an ecologically-based social initiative in
              neighborhood restoration - will test how human and ecological components of the
              system interact and change.   Research on system function will address
              surface/atmosphere energy exchange, hydrologic and nutrient flux, atmospheric
              deposition, and the import/export of raw and processed materials and waste
              products, and of capital. Two scales will be considered - the whole-city scale
              and the small-watershed scale - in part to foster comparison with other studies
              of natural and human-dominated ecosystems.    The education objectives will
              provide useful ecological understandings and data access to the research
              process, and direct support to students, teachers, managers, and the general
              public. This project will build close linkages with existing formal and
              informal education programs and institutions to build programs that improve the
              ecological literacy of students, citizens, and decision makers.
