Title       : Dissertation Research: Subsistence and Mobility in the Late Upper Paeolithic:
               Fauna from the Fucino Basin, Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9714934

Award Number: 9714934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona Marshall fmarshal@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, MS Francesca Alhaique will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation.  She will analyze archaeological faunas
              collected during the excavation of a series of six cave sites located on the
              edges of ancient lake Fucino in Abruzzo, Central Italy. Taken together the
              sites span the time period between 18,000 and 10,000 years ago and thus
              document the very cold period at the end of the last glaciation and the
              transition to warmer Holocene climatic conditions.  Occupation in the region
              appears continuous and in contrast to most other inhabited portions of Europe,
              stone tool industries remain relatively unchanged over this period. Thus it
              seems likely that a single cultural group was present throughout and the
              complication of possible population replacement can be discounted. MS Alhaique
              shall document changes in settlement and subsistence strategy over this time.
              Many archaeologists have argued that within Europe (and in other parts of the
              world as well), the Pleistocene-Holocene transition was marked by a change in
              which hunting and gathering groups became more sedentary, and shifted their
              subsistence focus from a limited number of large mammal species to a broader
              range which included smaller animals and birds.  However careful faunal
              analysis of relevant materials has rarely been conducted and other factors,
              such as age dependent selective destruction of smaller more fragile bones has
              not been considered. In her work, MS Alhaique will analyze the fauna from the
              six Fucino sites. Since these have already been identified in most instances to
              a species level, she will focus on human modification to the materials to
              determine which bones result from human agency and on natural destructive
              factors which may serve to distort the sample. She will also reconstruct season
              of death since this sheds light on length of site occupation. Seasonality can
              be determined to the study of migratory species and through cementum analysis
              of mammal teeth.   The stage for the Neolithic Revolution - the domestication
              of plants and animals - was set during the terminal Pleistocene and early
              Holocene. The (supposed) increased focus on smaller species, the apparent
              increase in sedentarization and population density all foreshadow later
              developments. MS. Alhaique's research will provide additional insight into the
              process. It will provide useful data on an important archaeological region and
              assist in training a promising young scientist.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
