Title       : U.S.-Russia Cooperative Research: RA-Ven.NET/Russian American Virtual Enterprise
               Network Primary Raven Server Connection and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1997  
File        : a9714563

Award Number: 9714563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian-Richard Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institution for Intl
	      205 Suburban
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93401    805/544-0761

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,1338,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                            INT-9714563  Jordan    This U.S.-Russia Cooperative Project is on
              "Rav-en.net: Russian-American Virtual Enterprise Network Primary RAVEN Server
              Connection and Development."  The principal investigator is Dr. James A. Jordan
              of the Institute for International Manufacturing Enterprise Research  IIMER , a
              non-profit research group in San Luis Obispo, California.    The purpose of the
              ra-ven.net effort is to implement a practical network mechanism in which to
              assist in the initial phase of RAVEN development.  RAVEN is a U.S.-Russian
              cooperative effort to develop a prototype electronic network that will enable
              U.S. manufacturers to access specialized capabilities of the Russian
              manufacturing base.  In a larger sense, RAVEN will facilitate the development
              of U.S.-Russian virtual enterprises as part of the global manufacturing
              infrastructure.  To accomplish this, IIMER will develop, install, and connect
              to the Internet a dedicated network server for RAVEN; develop content
              associated with the primary network activity related to WWW, Telnet, FTP, and
              Index search engine service for RAVEN network development; maintain and
              moderate all network activity; assist in the installation and the connection of
              10 Russian counterpart Internet accounts; compile existing Department of
              Commerce Bureau of Export Administration and Defense Nuclear Agency "Russian
              Business Information" into a network of searchable and readable form; and
              submit a final, one year, report of RAVEN development progress.  By creating a
              central Internet based network for the development of RAVEN, much more
              interactivity will be possible, at a minimal cost and higher efficiency rate,
              between U.S. and Russian counterparts in the development of a complete RAVEN
              program and implementation vehicle.  By creating a central information bank for
              network communications, index servers, and program information, it will be
              possible to attract the attention of a much larger educational, scientific, and
              industry base in which to be involved with  the development of RAVEN.    This
              research in computer science fulfills the program objectives of bringing
              together leading experts in the U.S. and Russia to combine complementary
              efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on
              the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.    ***  ??
