Title       : LExEn: Fe(III)-and Humics-Reducing Microorganisms in Extreme Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9714285

Award Number: 9714285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek R. Lovley dlovley@microbio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lovely  DEB-9714285    Fe(III)- and Humics-Reducing Microorganisms in Extreme
              Environments.    Geochemical signatures potentially attributable to Fe(III)-
              and humics-reducing microorganisms have been found in modern and ancient
              extreme environments on Earth as well as on Mars.  However, there has been
              little investigation of Fe(III)- and humics-reducing microorganisms in extreme
              environments. The goal of this research is to recover Fe(III)- and
              humics-reducing microorganisms from a variety of extreme environments and to
              study their metabolism and potential geochemical impacts. A major focus will be
              on geothermal environments because they are considered to be analogs for the
              environmental conditions that may have supported life on early Earth and
              possibly other planets. Other extreme environments that may provide insights
              into potential forms of microbial metabolism on other planets such as cold
              soils and sediments from polar regions, alkaline and hypersaline environments,
              as well as acidic mine drainage will also be studied.    These studies are
              expected to suggest geochemical and/or biochemical signatures that may be used
              to evaluate the previous presence of Fe(III)- and humics-reducing
              microorganisms in ancient environments on Earth or other planets. These studies
              should greatly increase our understanding of the diversity of microorganisms
              capable of Fe(III) and humics reduction and may yield insights into the
              potential role of Fe(III) and external organic electron acceptors in the
              evolution of microbial respiration. Furthermore, the potential application of
              Fe(III) and humics reducers for environmental restoration, the recovery of
              precious metals, and the production of valuable minerals suggests that Fe(III)
              and humics reducers recovered from extreme environments may have economic
              value.
