Title       : MOTI: Cognitive Abilities, Information Processing and Innovative Effectiveness
               of Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9714080

Award Number: 9714080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald Senich                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald Gordon gordong@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Bush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Wilkes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Morton S. Isaacson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9714080  Gordon  The objective of this research is to establish a firm link
              between the way that individuals with certain cognitive abilities are deployed
              in organizations, and to measure the success with which organizations
              accomplish technological innovations- The study is intended to be normative for
              technology managers hence the primary dependent variables will be those
              measures of effectiveness which technology managers use to assess innovative
              organizational accomplishment. Recognizing that innovation is not simply the
              result of an individual act, but that it is also the result of organizational
              processes, the research focuses on the interplay between organizational and
              individual variables which are likely to facilitate or inhibit knowledge and
              information  processing. In particular, factors which facilitate or inhibit the
              making of remote associations (the ability to form new and useful concepts from
              seemingly unrelated information) will be studied. The assumption is that an
              individual makes the remote associations but must be able to draw upon the
              necessary information.  This information and the motivation to make the
              appropriate remote association is largely a result of managerial decisions and
              organizational structures.  Therefore, on an organizational level, it is
              important to select managers as well as researchers who have the ability to
              identify problems, who possess the skills to contribute to technological
              innovation and who can direct appropriate information.   While the focus of the
              study will be on industrial research and development, there are analogous
              implications for the management of technology by academic, non-profit, and
              government performers of R&D.  The outcome of the research will be broadly
              disseminated and the results used to educate engineers, scientists and
              managers.
