Title       : Fair Scheduling and Admission Control for Shared-Channel Wireless Packet
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2000   
File        : a9714685

Award Number: 9714685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharghavan Vaduvur bharghav@crhc.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rayadurgam Srikant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for the web page http://tesla.csl.uiuc.edu/~srikant/~wireless.html   
              Fair scheduling of delay and rate-sensitive packet flows over a wireless
              channel is not addressed effectively by most contemporary wireline fair
              scheduling algorithms because of two unique characteristics of wireless media:
              (a) bursty channel errors, and (b) location-dependent channel capacity and
              errors.  Besides, in packet cellular networks, the base station typically
              performs the task of packet scheduling for both downlink and uplink flows in a
              cell; however a  base station has only a limited knowledge of the arrival
              processes of uplink flows.  Fair scheduling is closely connected to admission
              control and channel measurements since these are used to allocate a fraction of
              the channel's capacity to each flow based or its Quality-of-Service (QoS)
              requirements.  In this proposal, we will study the problem of admission control
              and scheduling together.  Most previous work has addressed these two problems
              separately in the context of wireline networks, but such an approach is not
              applicable to wireless networks.  On-line measurements will be used along with
              admission control, scheduling and rate adaption to provide good QoS
              performance.  We plan to use on-line measurements to estimate the parameters of
              simple stochastic processes (such as on-off Markov models) describing the
              channel state.  Off-line measurements would be used to validate and refine our
              prediction algorithm as well as to develop a simple model for the channel which
              can used by the on-line measurement algorithm.  We will also study the impact
              of fair wireless packet scheduling on medium access and develop an effective
              MAC protocol to support simple rate and delay guarantees.  Finally, using
              existing testbeds, we will evaluate the algorithms that result from this
              research project.
