Title       : LEXEN: Ecology of Microbial Systems in Extreme Environments: The Role of
               Nanoflagellates in Cold and Nutrient-Poor Arctic Freshwaters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9714327

Award Number: 9714327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hobbie jhobbie@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell L. Sogin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In one extreme freshwater environment, a long-term research site in arctic
              Alaska, a large amount of information about microbial communities and their
              ecology has been  accumulated.  The least known member of this, and most other
              microbial communities, is the single cell eukaryotes.  This LExEN project will
              investigate the ecology, physiology, and evolution of nanoflagellates, and
              important member of the aquatic microbial system.  There will be extensive
              cooperation with two funded projects, one on freshwater ecology and one on
              flagellate evolution.    * With the large ecological project this new research
              will extend knowledge of nanaflagellates in their natural habitat of arctic
              lakes and ponds with an emphasis on their adaptation to cold and freezing
              conditions.    * Diversity of protists and of their evolutionary relationships
              will be studies.  In addition, microaerophilic environments will be examined to
              look for amitochondriates flagellates, basic knowledge of lineages basal to all
              other eukaryotes.    LExEN additions to this existing understanding of the
              microbial system will focus on the biology and ecology of the nanoflagellates,
              the main predator of the aquatic bacteria. Protists from a shallow pond that
              freezes solid each year and from a deep arctic lake with a 9-month ice cover
              will be intensively sampled during the winter, spring, summer and fall. 
              Results will include:    * The identity of the nanoflagellates present, their
              seasonal abundance, distribution, and succession with microscopic and molecular
              methods (including probes targeting ribosomal RNA for species in samples from
              the field).  * The reconstruction from rRNA sequences of the evolutionary
              relationships among the flagellates present in these extreme environments
              including the microaerophilic layers of sediment.  The data base will enable
              further research on these virtually unknown organisms.  * The physiology of
              organisms cultured from this extreme environment with emphasis on the effects
              of cold and freezing on their  feeding behavior and on their respiration and
              survival during starvation.  The experiments will examine flagellate
              adaptations for survival in cold waters and in frozen sediments.
