Title       : Earthquake Deformations of Subway Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9714859

Award Number: 9714859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent W. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  9714859  Lee  Most large metropolitan areas here in the United States, or 
              countries in other parts of the world, already have or are  planning to have
              underground infrastructure systems as an  alternate way of urban
              transportation.  It is important to  understand the characteristics of damages
              associated with the  underground construction and to find out the cause of both
               geotechnical as well as structural deformations, and also, to  study the
              influence of local site effects in the vicinity of the  structure on the
              amplification of structural deformations  resulting from strong earthquake
              motions.    Experiences from previous earthquakes suggest that the recorded 
              motions in some areas had larger than expected amplitudes.  These  are usually
              areas with large depths of alluvial sediments  together with comparatively soft
              soil deposits near the surfaces.   Massive civil infrastructures (dams, freeway
              networks, bridges  and now the underground subways) respond to strong
              earthquake  ground motions that are highly dependent on the surface and 
              subsurface topographies at the local sites.  This project is to  study the
              effects of the interactions among the subways, the  multiple structural
              foundations and the local geology, to explore  how all these key elements will
              affect the resulting  amplifications of foundation motions.  The proposed
              method is  based on the wave propagation in elastic solid media.  The 
              challenge in solving the problem will be in the boundary  conditions where the
              nonorthogonal compressional and shear  potentials are coupled.  This will be
              overcome with expanded  series and integral representations of the wave
              potentials.    Results from these studies will be compared with the actual 
              deformations as recorded from previous earthquakes.  The  comparisons will
              serve as guidelines to the correct modelling of  the problem under
              consideration.  With proper understanding of  how surface (buildings and
              freeways) and subsurface (underground  subways) structures performed during str
              ong-motion earthquakes,  future structural design of new buildings and retrofit
              plans for  existing structures can be improved by including these local site 
              effects to provide the correct design strength and reinforcement.   Then it
              will help to minimize property damage and the loss of  life in future
              earthquakes to come.  ***
