Title       : Pathways of Mineral Alteration and Organic Synthesis in Hydrothermal Systems on
               Mars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9714060

Award Number: 9714060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Everett L. Shock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Mars-Rock Special Research Opportunity activity   supports
              theoretical evaluation of mineral alteration in hydrothermal   systems by Dr.
              Everett L. Shock of the Earth and Planetary Science   Department, Washington
              University.  The project is funded by the Office   of Polar Programs, the
              Chemistry Division, and the MPS Office of   Multidisciplinary Activities. 
              Martian meteorites show isotropic,   petrological and mineralogic evidence for
              hydrothermal or aqueous   alteration of the martian crust.  The presence of
              thermaphilic microbes   in terrestrial hydrothermal ecosystems raises the
              possiblity that   subsurface life, independent of photochemistry, atmospheric
              chemistry,   and the presence of a surface hydrosphere, may exist or have
              existed in   hydrothermal environments on other planets.  In order to develop a
                predictive model for crustal alteration on Mars, all petrologic,  
              geochemical and isotopic data on minerals and organic compounds in   ALH84001
              and other martial meteorites will be used to examine various   pathways for the
              formation of carbonate minerals, polycyclic aromatic   hydrocarbons, and other
              organic compounds during water-rock reactions.    Rigorous, quantitative models
              of geochemical mass transfer based on   irreversible thermodynamics will be
              used.  The results will determine the   constraints on temperatures and fluid
              compositions required for mineral   alteration and organic synthesis.  Recent
              advances in the theoretical   geochemistry of hydrothermal systems and ongoing
              research in geochemical   bioenergetics will be used in developing the model. 
              The research will   involve conducting theoretical mass-transfer calculations
              that simulate   the reactions of aqueous fluids with a rock of the composition
              of martian   meteorites to establish the ranges of temperature and fluid
              composition   consistent with the deposition of carbonate minerals without the 
               formation of hydrous silicate phases.  The conditions leading to   carbonate
              deposition will be compared to those necessary for synthesis of   aqueous
              organic compounds from carbon dioxide.  Specific attention will   be paid to
              whether polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are compatible with   the alteration
              assemblage at metastable redox equilibrium.  The discovery of microbes capable
              of living in terrestrial hydrothermal   conditions raises the possibility that
              life may have existed in similar   conditions on Mars or other planets.  A
              theoretical model that compares   geological conditions to the requirements for
              organic synthesis will be   developed.  The result will be an analysis of the
              potential for martian   hydrothermal systems to support hydrothermal
              ecosystems.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
