Title       : A New Treatment of Nonlinear Structural Analysis and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1997 
File        : a9714069

Award Number: 9714069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Burns s-burns@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Monomial (single-termed power function) approximation more faithfully models the
              power function behavior of the structural system, while at the same time,
              becomes a linear form when transformed into log space.  Thus, computational
              tools based on linear algebra remain useful and effective.  Since the monomial
              approximation provides a much higher quality approximation to the nonlinear
              phenomena exhibited in structural applications, incremental and iterative
              methods become much more effective since the local approximation allows
              significantly larger steps to be taken.  The net result is an increase in
              reliability of the solution process and a significant reduction in
              computational effort.  The main goal of this research is to develop efficient
              and reliable methods for structural analysis and design based on this monomial
              approximation.  The scope will include treatment of geometric nonlinearities in
              structures modeled by finite elements, including trusses, frames and
              continuation structures.  A general load increment method  based on the
              monomial approximation will be developed.  The project will also consider
              material nonlinearities.  The typical stress-strain relationship for a
              nonlinearly elastic material nonlinearities.  The typical stress-strain
              relationship for a nonlinearly elastic material is remarkably monomial in
              shape.  The monomial approximation will model this behavior very well and
              should produce a very effective analysis tool.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
