Title       : Use of Polishing Process Model as an Example for Manufacturing System Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1999  
File        : a9714604

Award Number: 9714604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivasan Chandrasekar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas N. Farris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Dale Compton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9714604  Chandrasekar  Technology implementation in the discrete manufacturing 
              sector is more difficult than in the continuous process  (e.g. chemical, flat
              glass) and semiconductor industries,  where the availability of scaling laws,
              unit process models,  and integrated system models has allowed for the rapid 
              implementation of new technology.  In this study, a new  approach is developed
              for modeling a manufacturing system by  starting with detailed physical models
              of the unit  processes, such as machining and polishing, and integrating  them
              into a unified system model. This development  illustrates an avenue for the
              discrete manufacturing  industry to achieve many of the capabilities of the 
              continuous process and semiconductor industries. Models are  first developed
              for an example unit process, viz. abrasive  polishing, which is widely used to
              produce smooth surfaces  of precision mechanical and electronic components. 
              This is  accomplished through a combined experimental and theoretical  study of
              the mechanics of polishing.  The models have the  capability of predicting
              various outputs of the polishing  process such as surface finish, residual
              stresses and depth  of plastically deformed layers on polished surfaces; and 
              rate of material removal.  The problem of integrating a  collection of unit
              process models into a unified model for  the entire manufacturing system is
              next studied.  This  requires, for example, that unit operation models be 
              developed to a stage where they can provide information  about process
              variances and the sources of these variances.  The results of this research
              enable the development of a  unique seminar course and short monograph that
              will help  advanced undergraduate and graduate students to compare and 
              contrast process and system modeling issues in the  continuous process,
              discrete manufacturing and semiconductor  industries.  ***
