Title       : Combined Automatic Assignment of NMR Spectra and Calculation of Macromolecular
               Structure by Self-Correcting Distance Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9714937

Award Number: 9714937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Werner A. Braun werner@newton.utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This project will enhance the stability, reliability  and efficiency of a
              new computational tool, the self-  correcting geometry (SECODG) method for
              combined assignment  of NMR spectra and 3D structure calculation.  The SECODG 
              method implemented in the DIAMOD/NOAH software package  dramatically reduces
              the time to generate protein structures  from NMR data.  Unlike previous
              distance geometry methods,  which were designed for consistent data sets, the
              method can  generate accurate structures from sets of constraints that  contain
              errors.  This project will further improve this  method to be applicable for
              larger proteins.       Several tests have demonstrated that the present method 
              can deal with real data and is significantly faster than  manual interactive
              spectral interpretation methods.  The  first test was to compare the results of
              automatic structure  calculation from NOESY spectra that had been analyzed by 
              earlier manual methods for 6 proteins ranging in size from  40 to 135 amino
              acids.  The automated method assigned 70-80%  of the NOESY cross peaks and the
              three-dimensional  structures were of similar quality.  In a second test, 
              previously uninterpreted NOESY and TOCSY spectra were used  by NOAH/DIAMOD to
              automatically calculate a 3D structure  bundle for an isoform of crambin. 
              Slight modifications and  some manual assistance were required so that the
              program  could deal with a significant number of missing chemical  shifts. 
              Based on this practical experience, the method will  be improved by optimizing
              the error-tolerant target  function, incorporating sensitivity tests for
              constraints,  including line shape information in the peak assignment  method
              and interfacing the program suite with programs for  automated sequential
              assignment from other groups to develop  a completely automatic computational
              package for direct  interpretation of NMR spectra.       This program package
              will be a powerful computational  tool to speed up macromolecular structure
              determination from  NMR da ta.  Experimentally determined three-dimensional 
              structures are the basis for designing new drugs and  proteins with improved or
              new functions.  In combination  with energy minimization and Monte Carlo
              simulations, it  will help in designing proteins with a desired structure and 
              new functional properties.
