Title       : Chemical and Spectroscopic Studies of Organic Radical Cations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9714850

Award Number: 9714850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz D. Roth roth@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Heinz D. Roth, of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers, the   State
              University of New Jersey, carries out chemical and spectroscopic   studies of
              organic radical cations with the support of the Organic and   Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program.  Organic radical cations are generated   by photo-induced
              electron transfer and by chemical oxidation in a range   of media, including
              fluid solutions, frozen glasses, and solid supports   (zeolites). 
              Spectroscopic techniques, including optical spectroscopy,   electron
              paramagnetic resonance, and chemically induced dynamic nuclear   polarization,
              permit the study of the structures of these radical   cations.  Through a
              combination of experimental and theoretical   techniques, Professor Roth
              explores the regiochemistry of radical cation   reactions, focusing on ring
              strain, extent of conjugation, and steric   hindrance as determinants of
              regioselectivity.  Also explored are issues   relating to the reactions of
              triplet radical pairs, including biradical   formation, generation of
              biradicals or triplet states from `vertical`   radical cations, formation of
              perpendicular triplet states, and   generation of extended biradicals by
              coupling of triplet ion pairs.  Many chemical reactions proceed via a sequence
              of chemical steps, each   producing a reactive intermediate species which
              undergoes further   reaction, ultimately leading to the final reaction product.
               The   intermediates in chemical reactions often display unusual chemical and  
              structural features, and often bear a positive charge (`cations`) or   negative
              charge or a lone electron (`radicals`).  With the support of the   Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Heinz D. Roth, of   the Department
              of Chemistry at Rutgers, the State University of New   Jersey, studies the
              formation, structure, and reactivity of reactive   intermediates containing
              both a positive charge and an unpaired electron.    Through the application of
              a variety of physical and chemical   techniques, complemented by calculational
              studies, Professor Roth   elucidates the chemical nature of these `radical
              cations,` contributing   to our fundamental knowledge of how chemical reactions
              occur.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
