Title       : Acquisition of a 600 MHZ NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9714119

Award Number: 9714119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337500             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Bachovchin   (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Baleja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                A  new, state-of-the-art 600 MHz NMR spectrometer and an upgrade for  an 
              existing  500  MHz spectrometer is requested for shared use by  six  major 
              users  or  major  user groups at the Department of Biochemistry  at  Tufts 
              University  School of Medicine and the Department of Medicine at  The  New 
              England  Medical  Center.  The new instrument  and  the  upgrade  will  be 
              incorporated into the existing biological NMR facility at Tufts University 
              School of Medicine and will be located in the Department of Biochemistry.   
              The  major  user  groups are currently working  on  eleven  NIH  or  NSF 
              sponsored  projects  that  require modern  NMR  instrumentation.  The  new 
              instrument and the upgrade are therefore needed for application in a  wide 
              range of basic biological and biomedical research. The projects include:     
              (i)  Structural analysis of the domain from SV40 T antigen that bind to    the
              origin DNA replication, including structure        determination of the protein
              origin DNA complex.  (ii)      Structure and mechanism studies of serine
              proteinases.  This    includes work on the type A hepatitis virus 3C proteinase
              and the glutamic    acid specific proteinase from S. griseus.  (iii) 
              Development of improved NMR sensitivity through electron-nuclear  cross
              polarization.  (iv)  Structural analysis and characterization of synthetic
              crosslinkers  of T cell surface receptors.  (v)   Structural analysis of
              papillomavirus E2 protein and its complex  with DNA.  (vi)  Structural analysis
              of human papillomavirus inhibitor proteins.  (vii)  Structural analysis of SH2
              domains and other signal transducing  elements.  (viii) Structural analysis of
              blood coagulation proteins and their  interaction with phospholipids.  (ix) 
              Structural analysis of cellular adhesion domains.  (x)   Structural analysis of
              the extracellular domain of the thrombin  receptor.  (xi)  Structural analysis
              of an anti-DNA antibody.
