Title       : FSML- An Arctic Winter Residence Facility for the Toolik Field Station, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9714094

Award Number: 9714094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196762             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Barnes ffbmb@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean W. James  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Abels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Toolik Field Station, located on Alaska' s North Slope, provides a 
              nationally and internationally significant research platform for  biological,
              hydrological, geological, and atmospheric investigations on  unique arctic
              terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems. Since 1975 it has  served investigators
              and students from 63 institutions and universities  from 39 states and 25
              countries. Since 1992 use of the Toolik Field  Station CFFS) has increased by
              40% to its current occupancy of  approximately 3,500 user days in a four month
              field season; this demand  is expected to be sustained or grow further over the
              next 10 years.  This proposal is for building a winter residence facility that,
               together with the winter laboratory acquired in 1994, will expand  access to
              TFS and its arctic research programs to all of the year.  Currently there are
              no field research stations in the U. S. and few in  the circumpolar region at
              which scientists can work year-round. This  new capability is expected to
              increase the scope and nature of current  research programs that have not
              before been able to investigate and  integrate into summer-based models the
              significant and important winter-  season processes that occupy 75% of the
              arctic year, and new  investigators from a variety of disciplines are expected
              to be  attracted to using the facility. A modern residence facility with 
              redundant heating and power sources and a satellite phone is necessary  for
              winter research operations and the safety of investigators and  staff.    A
              winter residence facility was a key and highest priority item in the  Toolik
              Field Station: The second twenty years, recommendations on the  science mission
              and the development of Toolik Field Station, the  report that resulted from a
              NSF workshop of U.S. arctic researchers and  logistics  experts  held in 1995.
              It is also an immediate  priority  of  U.S.  Logistics  for Arctic Science, a
              forthcoming publication  of  the  arctic Research Consortium of the United
              States.    Current NSF-sponsor ed studies based at TFS include the arctic
              Long-Term  Ecological Research program,  the U. S. International Tundra
              Experiment program, Components of the  Arctic System Science's Land- 
              Atmosphere-Ice-Interactions, The Effects of Climate and Vegetation on  Below
              Ground CO2 Fluxes in  Arctic Ecosystems; Hydrologic Linkages with Arctic
              Freshwater and  Terrestrial Systems; Development  and Validation of a Biosphere
              Model for Arctic Tundra with Linkages to  Satellite Radiobrighmess;  Primary
              Production in Arctic Ecosystems: Interacting Mechanisms of  Adjustment to
              Climate Change;  Effects of Increased Season Length on Plant Phenology;
              Community  Composition, Productivity, and  Ecosystem Carbon Fluxes in Alaskan
              Tundra: Implications for Global  Change; and Hormone-behavior  Adaptations in
              Arctic Birds; these are among 22 different projects that  are expected to use
              TFS in 1997.
