Title       : LEXEN: Longevity and Diversity of Microorganisms Entrapped in Tropical and Polar
               Ice Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9714206

Award Number: 9714206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340005             (Estimated)
Investigator: John N. Reeve   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lonnie G. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Mosley-Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  This project is to determine the phylotypes, abundance and antiquity of
              microorganisms that can be resuscitated from within ice cores taken from such
              diverse environments as the Tibetan Plateau, the South American Andes, and both
              polar regions. PCR-amplified small subunit (16S and 18S) rDNAs will be cloned
              and sequenced to determine the range of phylotypes that are, or were, present
              in these ice cores that are refractory to laboratory culture.  The experiments
              are conceptually very simple, and technically require only routine
              microbiological and molecular biology procedures; however, preventing
              contamination with microorganisms and nucleic acids from exogenous sources will
              be critical.  An automated ice-sampling device will therefore be constructed
              specifically to eliminate this problem.  The ice cores are archived under
              carefully controlled conditions at the BPRC, and several cores area available
              from most locations, so that multiple samplings to evaluate different
              procedures and to confirm positive results are possible without field trips. 
              The experiments proposed will determine the longevity of microorganisms
              entrapped in ice under different environmental conditions, the diversity of
              microorganisms deposited at the same geographical sites, but separated by
              thousands, or possibly by hundreds of thousands of years, and the diversity of
              microorganisms deposited at the same archeological times but at geographically
              very different and remote locations.    This might be the first concerted
              effort to apply PCR technology to amplify material from within very ancient ice
              cores, and it seems very likely that "extinct" genes, or at least fragments of
              extinct genes will be amplified, facilitating intriguing comparisons with the
              sequences of their contemporary homologs.  Although many of the core isolates
              are likely to be Actinomycetes, evaluating novel antibiotic synthesis by core
              isolates is beyond the exploratory goals of this proposal.  Determining the
              antibiotic resistance patterns of microorgan isms that were entrapped in ice
              before the widespread use of antibiotics will, however, be routinely
              undertaken.
