Title       : Interval Based Methods for Uncertainty in Computer Aided Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9714124

Award Number: 9714124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafi L. Muhanna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This grant provides resources for the development of  design and analysis
              tools that include uncertainties and that will address a variety of
              manufactured products. Unlike previous probabilistic methods for treating
              uncertainties in design, the developed method will treat uncertainties in terms
              of possible values expressed as conventional tolerances.  The methods and tools
              that will be developed have their foundation in fuzzy set theory, which allows
              the formulation to have a strong mathematical base with rigorous analysis of
              the developed methods.  The work will initially address the treatment of load
              uncertainty and loading combinations in problems of static stress analysis of
              mechanical components.  The methods and software developed will then be
              expanded to treat uncertainty of material properties and component geometry. 
              Along with developing the analysis methods, software tools will be written that
              are needed for implementations such as mesh generator for fuzzy geometry.
              Evaluation of results of the fuzzy based calculations will be compared to
              combinatorial solutions when possible.  The methods will then be extended to
              time dependent problems.      The results of this research will provide both
              the methods and software tools to include uncertainties in the stress analysis
              of components via conventional tolerances.  The expression of uncertainties in
              terms of tolerances will allow design engineers to include uncertainties in
              analysis using a familiar concept. The methods, while developed explicitly for
              solid mechanics, will be applicable to any finite element based engineering
              analysis (heat transfer, fluid mechanics, electric and magnetic fields).  The
              software tools will include methods for solving a sparse, fuzzy based system of
              equations and integrating element stiffness matrices and will allow the
              developed methods to be incorporated into existing commercial finite element
              programs.  When such methods are included in commercial analysis and design
              programs, designers will be able to routinely consider the effects of
              uncertainties in geometry, materials, and environmental loading in design
              decisions.  Hence, the reliability of product designs using these tools will be
              improved.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
