Title       : Microstructure-Property Relationships in Sm-Fe-N-Based Permanent Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a9714946

Award Number: 9714946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293323             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Shield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9714946  Shield    Samarium-iron compounds with interstitial nitrogen (Sm-Fe-N) 
              comprise a promising class of magnetic materials with  properties competitive
              to those of Nd-Fe-B permanent  magnets.  This project seeks to accomplish two
              interrelated  objectives: (1) to control the microstructure evolution in 
              Sm-Fe-N-based permanent magnets through processing and alloy  development; (2)
              to establish relationships between the  microstructure and magnetic properties
              in Sm-Fe-N-based  permanent magnets.  Of primary concern is the influence of 
              grain boundaries, second phases, and grain size on the  magnetic properties. 
              To control microstructure evolution,  alloys are designed that effectively
              enhance the formation  of the samarium-iron compound during rapid
              solidification  processing.  Alloying additions, such as Ti, Zr, Si, V, C,  and
              combinations of these, are used to alter the  solidification behavior of Sm-Fe
              alloys.  The goal is to  either enhance the formation of the Sm-Fe compound at
              lower  solidification rates or to suppress the formation of  crystalline phases
              altogether.  In the latter case the  resultant amorphous materials are
              crystallized to the Sm-Fe  compound.  Subsequent nitrogenation results in the
              hard  magnetic Sm-Fe-N phase.  The relationships between the  microstructure
              and magnetic properties of Sm-Fe-N-based  permanent magnets should be clarified
              in this project.  %%%  The most notable advantage of Sm-Fe-N materials over
              Nd-Fe-B  magnets is the Curie temperature (approximately 150 degrees  C higher)
              allowing applications in more demanding thermal  environments.  However,
              Sm-Fe-N magnets pose many  challenges, especially with regards to intelligent 
              processing and understanding of the microstructure-property  relationships.  
              ***
