Title       : Inorganic Redox Mechanisms in Aqueous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9714981

Award Number: 9714981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin S. Gould amcphers@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Edwin S. Gould, Chemistry Department, Kent State University, is   supported
              in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry   Program, for
              investigations of aqueous phase oxidation-reduction   reactions which emphasize
              less common oxidation states. Two areas will be   studied: 1) reductions with
              unipositive indium and 2) metal ion catalysis   of oxidations by peroxynitrite.
              In the first part of the study the   factors that determine when In(I) reacts
              by 1e and when it reacts by 2e   pathways will be defined. These data then will
              be used to determine which   ligating units will allow effective inner-sphere
              bridging in indium (I)   reactions and to learn how the reactivity of In(I)
              compares with that of   other 2e oxo-acceptor species. In the second part of
              the project, the   ability of transition metal catalysts to modify rates of the
              reactions of   the peroxynitrite ion will be evaluated. In particular,
              conversions with   both one and two electron reductants will be studied and
              problems   associated with maintaining effective concentrations of catalytic
              metal   centers in the high pH region necessary for the survival of
              peroxynitrite   will be addressed.  Reactions in which electrons are
              transferred between reactants are of   enormous importance in virtually all
              areas of pure and applied chemistry.   In this project the little studied
              indium +1 ion will be studied in order   to develop fundamental knowledge about
              its ability to provide one and two   electrons to chemical processes. This will
              provide background information   to facilitate the develoment of further
              applications for this species.   The peroxynitrite ion, the subject of the
              second part, is a powerful   oxidant and is formed in biological systems by the
              coupling of nitric   oxide and superoxide. Transformations of this ion with
              reductants are   complicated by the decomposition of peroxynitrite to nitrate
              and this   study will develop the behavior of this biologically ubiquitous and 
               unusually reactive peroxo species. In addition to the chemical studies,   an
              important goal of this project is the training of a cadre of chemists   with a
              strong background in inorganic solution chemistry. This is an area   of great
              importance, but one in which there are few young practitioners.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
