Title       : Air-Sea Coupling Mechanisms in Tropical Cyclones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a9714885

Award Number: 9714885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502836             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn K. Shay lshay@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gustavo Goni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714885  Shay        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
              activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve
              the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this Program, the
              National Science  Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration (NOAA), the  National Aeronautics and Space Administration
              (NASA) and the Office of Naval  Research are jointly evaluating and supporting
              research of high priority to the  USWRP.  One of the primary goals of the USWRP
              is to perform the research  necessary to improve track and intensity forecasts
              of hurricanes.        The goal of this research effort is to improve
              understanding of the role of air-  sea interactions in modifying the
              near-surface wind structure of tropical cyclones.   Of particular importance is
              to understand the role of these interactions as tropical  cyclones pass over
              warm oceanic features that surround the United States Eastern  Seaboard and the
              Gulf of Mexico states.          Specific research objectives are: (a) Determine
              locations and heat content of  warm core oceanic eddies;  (b) Examine the
              forcing of warm ocean features on  enhanced surface stresses, fluxes and waves
              in the APBL and the role of the OPBL  feedback on the APBL; and (c) Quantify
              the roles of mixing and horizontal  advection of SST and salinity gradients
              including the mass, heat and salt budgets in  the OPBL.        Research
              approach involves an ocean monitoring program based on satellite  remote
              sensing to detect warm, mesoscale oceanic features during the summer  months.
              These features will be monitored using the analyzed sea-surface height 
              anomalies derived from the NASA TOPEX and Geosat Follow On missions to 
              determine their locations relative to the forecast storm track.  Sea surface 
              temperatures will be monitored from Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer.  
                   Additionally, as part of the NOAA Hurricane Research Division experimental
               field program, a coupled atmospheric and oceanic ob servational program will
              be  conducted from an NOAA aircraft.  Observations will include measurement of
              upper  ocean current, temperature and density structure using airborne
              expendable profilers.   Concurrent observations of the turbulent fluxes of
              momentum, heat and moisture in  the APBL during these oceanographic
              deployments; and remote-sensing of surface  winds and stresses using the
              Stepped Frequency Microwave Radiometer and airborne  C-Band Scatterometer, and
              possibly 2-dimensional directional wave spectra from the  NASA Scanning Radar
              Altimeter will be acquired during reconnaissance and  research missions.       
                Successful completion of this research will lead to a better understanding of
               the role of warm upper oceanic features on surface wind variations.  This may
              lead  to improved boundary layer parameterizations and improved hurricane
              intensity  forecasts.  ***
