Title       : Collaborative Research: Human-Environment Interactions in the Lower Jequetepeque
               Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9714430

Award Number: 9714430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60186              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Dillehay dilleha@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this collaborative research project Drs. Alan Kolata and Thomas Dillehay will
              lead a scientific team to study the prehistory and paleoecology of the lower
              Jequetepeque Valley in northern Peru. Working in an arid coastal region which
              saw the rise of pre-Hispanic civilization, the group wishes to analyze
              long-term social processes of urbanization and economic diversification and to
              specify the pathways and mechanisms through which these transformative human
              processes interacted within a dynamic physical environment. To accomplish these
              goals the team will reconstruct how regional environmental conditions in the
              Jequetepeque Valley varied over time, how urbanized human populations responded
              to this environmental variation, and how, in turn, underlying ecological
              processes and regional environments were altered by large-scale human actions
              mediated through the urban system. In this first phase of the research a first
              principal objective will be a full-coverage archaeological survey of the lower
              valley followed by limited test excavations in domestic contexts of residential
              sites and in selected agricultural features. The group will analyze aerial
              photographs of the lower valley to identify natural microenvironmental zones,
              architectural complexes, irrigation networks, reservoirs, roads and other
              salient features. A fundamental objective of this aspect of the work will be to
              establish a site typology based on size, function and proximity to natural
              resources and it will serve to establish the basic characteristics of the
              settlement pattern. The simultaneous paleoenvironmental aspect of the project
              will focus on two goals: 1. a geomorphological and landscape analysis of the
              valley and 2. a paleolimnological analysis of lakes within the watershed and
              adjacent highlands. These data will permit reconstruction of spatial and
              temporal changes in the environments exploited by human populations over the
              past 1500 years.  Early urban societies in Peru were locally based and did not
              transport foods and other agricultural projects over long distances. Thus they
              had no strong mechanisms for buffering local environmental effects and the ties
              between environmental change and social response were extremely tight. This
              northern region of Peru saw the rise of urban society and its subsequent
              decline. This phenomenon can only be understood in an environmental context and
              this project, through its focus on both human and natural variables should
              significantly increase understanding of the processes which underlie the rise,
              and in some cases subsequent declines, of civilization.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
