Title       : FSML: Planning for Improvements to the Greene Field Station of Carroll College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9714086

Award Number: 9714086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5965               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Lewis lewiss@cc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carroll College
	      100 North East Avenue
	      Waukesha, WI  531863103    414/547-1211

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Carroll College established the Greene Field Station in 1069  as an outdoor
              laboratory for teaching and research by the  students and faculty at Carroll
              College.  The 60-acre  Station is part of a primary environmental corridor in 
              Waukesha County. Significant ecological resources  include a calcareous fen, a
              class I trout stream, native wet  prairie, and a large cattail marsh.  The
              diversity of  aquatic habitats the Greene Field Station particularly  important
              for studies of wetland ecology.  The Greene Field  Station Advisory Committee
              is engaged in a strategic  planning process to produce a management plan for
              the Field  Station.  The goal is to enhance the effectiveness  of the Field
              Station as a resource for researches and  educators from Carroll and throughout
              the region.  Carroll  College wishes to ensure that this process will maximize 
              input from both current and prospective of the Field  Station.  The two
              strategies to accomplish this goal are: 1)  to convene a conference on Natural
              Areas Management  Planning, and 2) to solicit critical analysis of the 
              strategic plan through a focus group of current and  potential Field Station
              users.    The Natural Areas Management Planning Conference will bring  together
              students, faculty, and professionals from  throughout the upper Midwest.  At
              the conference,  participants will share results of research relevant to the 
              management of natural areas.  Proceedings from the  conference will be
              distributed to all conference  participants and other interested parties. 
              Participants  will also be engaged in discussions of the critical elements  of
              natural areas management planning, using the  Green Field Station as a case
              study.  This will provide the  Greene Field Station Advisory Committee with
              input from a  wide variety of experts to ensure a comprehensive strategic  plan
              for the Field Station.  The conference will also  increase exposure of
              potential users to the Field Station as  asignificant regional resource for
              education and research.    The Fie ld Station Advisory Committee will use input
              from the  Conference to develop the strategic plan for the Field  Station.  The
              Committee will then circulate the plan to  twelve critical readers selected
              from current and  prospective users of the Field Station.  These readers will 
              meet with the Committee to discuss specific recommendations.  Suggested
              revisions will be incorporated into the final  management plan, which is
              expected to be completed by the  spring of 2000.
