Title       : Mechanisms for Rapid Intensity Changes in Hurricanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9714253

Award Number: 9714253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295889             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Frank frank@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714253  Frank        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the National Science  Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration (NOAA), the  National Aeronautics and Space Administration and
              the Office of Naval Research  are jointly evaluating and supporting research of
              high priority to the USWRP.                    The intense winds and rainfall!
              associated with landfalling hurricanes are  organized on smaller scales than
              those that can be forecast using currently available   analyses and models. 
              Although much of the damage caused by hurricanes results  from small-scale and
              rapidly changing features of the core, the physical mechanisms  governing
              changes in the winds, convection and related phenomena are poorly  understood. 
              There is, however, growing evidence that the major changes and  asymmetries
              observed in the cores of hurricanes are strongly modulated by larger-  scale
              features that can be predicted.  A promising approach to improving forecasts of
               the structure and intensity of hurricanes near landfall is to improve our
              quantitative  understanding of these causal relationships.        This research
              program will study the mechanisms by which hurricane  structure and intensity
              vary near and after landfall using a series of numerical  simulations of
              hurricanes.  A state-of-the-art non-hydrostatic model will be used to  simulate
              rapid, small-scale variations in the hurricane core as it responds to imposed 
              variations in wind speed, vertical wind shear, large-scale gradients and
              anomalies of  potential vorticity, and changes in boundary layer processes.    
                 A primary focus of the study will be on the manner in which the imposed 
              variations in external circulations and surface properties affect the
              hurricane's  secondary circulation, and hence modulate the magnitude and
              distribution of  convection. The re search will also analyze the manner in
              which asymmetries in the  storm convection, including convection in the spiral
              rainbands, affect the storm's  intensity and core structure.  The results
              should provide significantly improved  understanding of the processes governing
              rapid changes in hurricane structure, and  they should be of immediate use in
              improving forecasts of the winds, storm surge  and rainfall in hurricanes.  ***
