Title       : Monitoring, Visualization, and Control of High-Speed Networks with Emphasis on
               Multi-Layer Protocols and Human- in-the-Loop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9714698

Award Number: 9714698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200059            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan S. Turner jst@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gurudatta Parulkar  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ron K. Cytron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen T. Kraemer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computer networks (such as the Internet and the Global Information
              Infrastructure) have become critical for education, research, business, and
              military operations.  Recent advances in network infrastructure technology
              (such as gigabit Ethernet, ATM and Ipv6) have enabled the development of high
              performance local area and wide area networks.  Efficient management of these
              networks is essential. However, existing algorithmic methods for managing
              networks have not matured to the point where performance bottleneck and fault
              detection, isolation, correlation, and correction can be automated scalably. 
              Thus, it is crucial to build efficient and user-friendly network monitoring,
              visualization, and control (NMVC) systems.     The proposed effort is aimed at
              the design, prototype implementation, and demonstration of a highly scalable
              NMVC system with advanced algorithmic and human-in-the-loop capability.  This
              capability allows network administrators to calibrate and fine-tune network and
              application parameters in real-time according to observed traffic patterns. 
              The goal of the NMVC system is to ensure adequate quality of service to network
              users, while maintaining high network resource utilization.    The proposed
              system leverages the following innovations to meet its objectives:    * An
              inexpensive, yet high performance network monitoring and observation probe that
              does not interfere with high speed network traffic.  This probe can be
              programmed to collect pertinent information at any layer in the protocol
              hierarchy (including application-specific information).    * An efficient
              probing mechanism for endsystems (i.e., workstations and servers) that can
              collect relevant performance  satistics from both applications and kernel
              resident protocols (such as TCP/IP in Unix).  The endsystem probes introduce
              minimum interference with protocol operation and can be dynamically and
              remotely invoked and configured for the information of interest.      * A
              highly flexible and highly efficient software network man agement agent design
              that extends the functionality and scalability of the network probe by
              filtering data based on programmable criteria (such as protocol header
              attributes or application-level frames).  This agent can be configured,
              installed, and controlled remotely at network nodes by administrators or
              automated management applications.    * Efficient online event ordering
              algorithms that can help synthesize and display a consistent view of network
              health, status, and performance using events collected throughout a large-scale
              high speed network.    * A View Choreographer that allows management
              applications and administrators to specify the mapping of network events to
              higher-level events and to visualization objects and updates.  The
              Choreographer uses semantically-guided filtering algorithms to enable low
              latency updates of displays that present an accurate  real-time snapshot of
              current network state.      * A visualization system that is highly
              configurable and can support multiple simultaneous real-time display views of a
              large-scale network.      * Algorithmic and interactive steering mechanisms
              that perform critical network management functions such as protocol parameter
              tuning for better end-to-end performance, bandwidth enforcement, fault
              detection and recovery, and quality of service monitoring and control.      * A
              prototype system to be demonstrated on a high speed IP/ATM testbed running a
              variety of applications (including multimedia teleconferencing systems and high
              speed digital imaging).
