Title       : High Resoluton Examination of the Intact "Microfossil" - Mineral Interface of
               ALH84001 for Evidence of Physical and Mineralogical Changes Consistent with
               Microbial Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9714014

Award Number: 9714014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Barker barker@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jillian F. Banfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Mars-Rock Special Research Opportunity activity   supports
              investigation of mineralogical effects of microbial activity by   Drs. William
              W. Barker and Jillian F. Banfield of the Geology Department,   University of
              Wisconsin-Madison.  The project is funded by the Office of   Polar Programs,
              the Chemistry Division, and the MPS Office of   Multidisciplinary Activities. 
              Martian meteorite ALH84001 will be   examined for mineralogical and textural
              evidence of biogeochemical   silicate mineral alteration.  The specific goals
              of the research are (1)   to search for evidence of long-term interaction
              between low-temperature   hydrous fluids and mineral surfaces by careful
              examination of surfaces   for submicroscopic quantities of hydration products,
              such as clays; and   (2) to examine the structure of the interface between the
              `nanofossils`   and underlying minerals for evidence of polymer-mediated clay
              formation,   dissolution features due to exposure to metabolic byproducts, and 
               chemical signatures due to elemental concentrations associated with the  
              presence of biopolymers.  High resolution transmission electron   microscopy
              (HRTEM) and energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy   (EFTEM) of ion
              milled and ultramicrotomed meteorite samples will be used   to examine the
              minerals at the crack surface for evidence of   low-temperature alteration. 
              Additional information will be gathered   using high-resolution scaning
              electron microscopy (HRSEM) and other   modern microscopy techniques capable of
              resolution to the atomic level.    These methods will enable examination of the
              structure, composition, and   mineralogy of the zone at the interface between
              the `microfossils` and   underlying substrate.  If ALH84001 contained microbes
              that lived in proximity to mineral   surfaces, fine scale evidence for their
              interactions may be preserved at   the microbe-mineral interface.  Advanced
              physical and chemical methods   will be used to detect alteration of the
              mineral surface.  Terrestrial   models for mineral-organism interaction will be
              used to distinguish   biologically from inorganically-mediated alteration as a
              means of   evaluating evidence of early Martian life.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
