Title       : Traffic Management in Wireless ATM Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9714702

Award Number: 9714702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91348              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaime Bae Kim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This research collaboration project between NCR-9714702, Jaime B. Kim, 
              California State University, Northridge, and NCR-9714700, W. Melody Moh, San
              Jose State University, aims to study traffic management in wireless ATM 
              networks.  It includes the following two phases:    PHASE 1: BASIC TRAFFIC
              CONTROL     In this initial  phase, we will focus on two basic traffic
              management issues for wireless ATM networks:    1.  Admission Control   We
              propose to develop admission control schemes which can provide a high degree of
              QoS guarantee for the multimedia traffic carried in micro-cellular, wireless 
              ATM  networks.  The proposed schemes can also adapt to the changing network
              conditions by constantly monitoring current network traffic load and adjusting
              the amount of reserved bandwidth.    2. Multicasting Flow Control   We propose
              two new branch-point control  mechanisms:  the  ISQ (Ignore the Slow reQuests)
              and the WS (Weighted Sum) schemes.  Both schemes can be readily  applied  to
              the  existing multicasting  ABR flow control mechanisms, most of which adopt
              the LSQ (Listen to the Slowest  reQuests) principle.  We also propose two
              complete multicasting flow control mechanisms for non-real-time traffic, each 
              includes specific controls  at switches, branch-points, destinations, as well
              as the source.    PHASE 2: INTEGRATED AND EXTENSION OF BASIC TRAFFIC CONTROL   
                This phase will focus on integration of basic traffic control mechanisms to
              achieve the ultimate goal of a complete traffic management scheme.  For this
              purpose, extensions on basic traffic control projects of Phase 1 will be
              carried out in the following directions:    1. End-to-end admission control for
              multicasting connections  2. Multicasting flow control for real-time traffic 
              3. Integrated traffic management by combining admission  control,     dynamic
              bandwidth allocation, and flow control    For each of the sub-projects in both
              phases, we have identified research issues  for  investigation  and presented
              analytical and simulation me thods.  We believe that the proposed research is
              vital to the next generation of broadband wireless networks.
