Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Complexity and Corporate Group Dynamics: A Case
               Study of Corporate Households on theLower Columbia River, on the Southern
               Northwest Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9714273

Award Number: 9714273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Speth jdspeth@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. John Speth, MS Elizabeth Sobel will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze archaeological materials which have
              been excavated from three sites on the lower Columbia River on the
              Washington-Oregon border. These sites span the chronological period from late
              prehistoric to early historic times and thus serve to document both pre and
              post-Colombian periods. This Northwest area is well known anthropologically for
              the degree of cultural complexity achieved by groups which relied solely on
              hunting and gathering and lacked domestic plants and animals. This level of
              complexity is unique among hunter gatherers and is characteristic of settled
              agricultural and pastoral populations. Therefore this region has been focus of
              sustained anthropological work. MS Sobel is interested in the social processes
              which fostered this development and has turned to a body of theoretical
              literature which examines the relationships between corporate groups and
              broader social organization. Northwest societies were organized into
              multifamily units which inhabited individual long houses. A series of
              alternative formulations posit driving forces based on competitive
              relationships both within and between such corporate groups. Longhouses often
              leave a clear archaeological imprint and the three sites which form the basis
              for MS Sobel's analysis contain a number of such units. Working with well
              controlled museum collections she will examine the spatial distribution of
              objects both within and between structures. Abundant, well preserved remains
              such as highly prized obsidian (volcanic glass) tools and other exotics which
              were traded over long distances allow status relationships to be determined.
              Thus it is possible to elucidate hierarchical relationships and see how these
              changed over time.  This research is important for several reasons. It
              addresses an important anthropological question. It makes maximum use of
              excavated data and synthesizes it in a form useful to many researchers. It also
              will assist in training a promising young scientist.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
