Title       : WGIDPO: AWSEM Advocacy Program: Expanding Outreach to Engineering and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a9714862

Award Number: 9714862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $871442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail N. Whitney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joann S. Loehr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen Boerger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce Cresswell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Leighton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hollis MacLean  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Melissa Fisher-Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Advocates for Women in Science, Engineering and Mathematics  (AWSEM) is a
              science and math advocacy program for fourth  through twelfth grade girls.  A
              program of Saturday Academy  at Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and
              Technology, the  AWSEM project creates and supports regional networks of 
              science and technology professionals, educators, parents and  community
              organizations dedicated to enriching the  opportunities in science, engineering
              and mathematics for  young women.    These regional networks of community
              leaders work together  to:  (1) dispel the pervasive attitude that science, 
              engineering and mathematics are inappropriate fields for  women; (2) create
              links within local communities and their  public and private institutions to
              promote the expansion of  science opportunities for young women; and (3)
              establish a  vertical support system beginning with school girls and  including
              college students, teachers, parents and  professionals that will ensure
              sustainable, long-term  contact between young women and science practitioners. 
                AWSEM currently maintains a network of eighteen after-school  science and
              math clubs in the Portland metropolitan area  dedicated to hands-on learning
              and on-site experience with  professional women.  At present, professional
              women at over  twenty corporate, agency and academic worksites provide day- 
              long interactive site visits for club members throughout the  academic year. 
              Other, AWSEM clubs have begun with the  support and training of AWSEM's staff,
              using AWSEM  curriculum and materials.  The program is in the process of 
              expanding nationally through a collaboration with the  professional
              organization, Women in Technology International  (WITI).    AWSEM maintains a
              comprehensive regional database of science  and engineering practitioners and
              acts as a central resource  center for local communities interested in
              encouraging young  women to study science and mathematics, offering day-long 
              workshops on creating advocacy programs, and developing and   disseminating
              supplementary curriculum and materials.  These  materials include "Passing the
              Torch,: a video overview of  the AWSEM Project, and the AWSEM "Action Kit," a
              guidebook  to creating advocacy programming, including sections for  parents,
              teachers and professional, templates for permission  slips and other important
              paper work, and over 45 hands-on  curriculum pieces broken down by age group
              and field.  All  templates and curriculum are included on disk as well.   
              Other AWSEM materials include the "Directory of  Practitioners:  Role Models
              for Young Women," a listing of  over 150 women in science, engineering,
              mathematics and  technology interested in working as mentors, and the 
              "Passport to Science,," a guidebook for individual  explorations of science.   
              Since 1983, Saturday Academy's programs, including AWSEM,  have served over
              44,000 motivated 4th through 12th grade  students throughout Oregon and
              Southern Washington,  providing opportunities to learn beyond the classroom by 
              making use of the expertise, equipment and facilities found  in industry,
              higher education and community agencies.  In  1996 Saturday Academy received
              the "Presidential Award for  Excellence in Mentoring" for its work in support
              of students  from groups under-represented in science and engineering.
