Title       : Urban LTER: Central Arizona - Phoenix LTER
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2002  
File        : a9714833

Award Number: 9714833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5049940            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy B. Grimm nbgrimm@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jianguo Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart G. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Redman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfredo G. de los Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1064,1306,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Grimm   9714833  This project is a long-term study of the Phoenix metropolitan
              area and fringing regions of central Arizona into which Phoenix is rapidly
              expanding. Objectives of this LTER program are to: 1) generate and test general
              ecological theory in an urban environment, 2) enhance understanding of the
              ecology of cities, 3) identify feedbacks between ecological and socio-economic
              factors, and 4) involve K-12 students in the enterprise of scientific
              discovery.   Phoenix is one of the largest and most rapidly growing cities of
              the arid and semi-arid American west. Because Phoenix is young, urban
              redevelopment is minor compared to expansive growth of the city's edges, where
              agricultural lands and natural desert habitats are being rapidly converted to
              suburbia. Historic patterns of growth will be reconstructed using maps,
              planning documents, aerial photographs and satellite imagery to generate a
              GIS-based record of urban change. Modeling will be centered on a hierarchical,
              spatially-explicit, patch-dynamic approach, based on land-use patch types. At
              intermediate scales, landscape models will be developed to determine
              configuration effects of multiple patches. A regional simulation model of the
              entire area will be developed to predict and test ecological consequences of
              alternative patterns of future development.   Patch-specific ecological
              characteristics will be monitored in five core areas: primary production,
              natural population and community characteristics, storage and dynamics of
              organic matter, movement of materials (including water), and patterns of
              disturbances by redevelopment, fire and flood. A successional model will guide
              this work; both short-term ecological trends associated with land-use change at
              the patch scale, and long-term changes as patches mature will be followed. Of
              special interest is ecological change within a given patch type on the
              city-center to suburban-edge gradient.   Socioeconomic factors are included in
              this study as feedbacks between land-use decisions and ecol ogical
              characteristics. That is, how do ecological features shape land-use decisions
              and how, in return, do ecological consequences modify future land use policy?
              Research will determine the importance of ecological factors to individual
              perceptions of quality of life. In addition, objective analyses of change in
              property values and shifting demographic patterns within the urban landscape
              will be assessed as an indicator of ecological and other values. These efforts
              will be enriched by multiple partnerships with agencies and municipalities.  
              This research effort includes a substantial commitment to K-12 education by
              involving teachers and students as hands-on research partners, through
              interaction with developing urban science curricula, and by providing a real
              time electronic interface with research discoveries via the Internet. This
              component of the project is enhanced by a strong interface with numerous
              educational partners in the greater Phoenix area.
