Title       : A Foundation for Generalized Network Fault Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9714750

Award Number: 9714750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia S. Hood hood@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As computer communication networks evolve from offering best-effort   service to
              offering real-time services with stringent Quality of Service   (QoS)
              guarantees (e.g. video), the need for improved fault management   techniques
              increases. Network fault management is an open problem that   continues to
              increase in complexity.  A major cause of the increase in   complexity of this
              problem is the heterogeneity of networks. Networks of   today are comprised of
              a variety of technologies (e.g. Wireless, ATM,   Ethernet), that are expected
              to support a diverse set of networked   applications (file transfer, WWW, video
              conferencing).  The fault   management problem has been studied in varying
              degrees for different   technologies, but there are many open issues  29 , 40 ,
              and we are   unaware of any methods that can effectively be applied across  
              technologies. Current methods are largely ad hoc and rely on the expertise   of
              a human network manager. Even within single-technology networks   (e.g.
              Ethernet LANs), strategies developed for one network, cannot be   easily
              generalized to other networks.  In addition, the rate of change  within   a
              network makes it difficult for the network manager to maintain a high   enough
              level of expertise to develop and maintain effective fault   management
              strategies.  New techniques that can be generalized and   applied across
              technologies are needed to ensure network reliability in an   efficient manner.
                   The long-term goal of this research is to automate as much of network  
              management as possible.  Within network management, we will first focus   on
              fault management.  Along these lines, the plan is to develop methods   for
              fault management that (1) can be applied across different technologies,   (2)
              can generalize from network to network, and (3) can adapt to changes   in the
              network. Previous research  12 , 13 , 14  has demonstrated that   adaptive
              statistical techniques can be used for network fault detection.   These types
              of techniques use the network measur ements to learn the   behavior of the
              network and can thus be generalized.  The goal for this   planning period is to
              identify a set of  problems within fault management   that can be addressed
              using rigorous, generalizable methods.    Fault management encompasses a large,
              complex set of problems that   have not been well studied or defined.  Before
              methods are evaluated, the   problems to be addressed must be identified.  Each
              network technology   will be studied in terms of fault management, and a set of
              issues that are   common across all or most of the technologies will be
              extracted.   For   each of the problems that are identified, the feasibility of
              using automated   techniques and generalization will be evaluated.  Preliminary
              results will   be obtained using the TCP/IP test network.  The result of the
              planning   activities will be a research direction that is focused on a set of
              feasible   problems that are widely applicable across network technologies.   A
              web   page will be created for the fault management research planning project. 
                The web page will contain a description of the activities and results  
              obtained.  The URL of the web page will be 
              http://www.nml.csam.iit.edu/~planning/.
