Title       : A Probabilistic Framework for Assessment and Interpretation of Quantitative
               Precipitation Forecasts from Storm-Scale Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9714387

Award Number: 9714387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334169             (Estimated)
Investigator: Efi Foufoula-Georgiou efi@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9714387  Foufoula        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the National Science  Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration (NOAA), the  National Aeronautics and Space Administration and
              the Office of Naval Research  are jointly evaluating and supporting research of
              high priority to the USWRP.            Over the past decade, a significant
              efforts have been directed toward research  and data collection initiatives
              that focus on improving numerical weather prediction.   These investments have
              been somewhat successful and state-of-the-art in numerical  weather prediction
              has truly advanced through a deeper understanding and improved  
              parameterizations of the physical processes involved, new and better data 
              assimilation techniques, and greatly improved numerical schemes.  Despite this 
              progress, however, precipitation still remains one of the most difficult
              variables to  predict quantitatively in atmospheric models.  Also, the inherent
              uncertainty  associated with numerical predictions often makes the
              interpretation of forecasts  difficult and limits their practical utility.     
                The Principal Investigators have proposed an interdisciplinary approach to
              the  problem of predicting precipitation on the storm-scale and interpreting
              the numerical  forecasts.  The approach will involve utilization of an advanced
              mesoscale  meteorological model coupled with advanced statistical techniques. 
              The  Investigators will address the following three objectives, with emphasis
              on the use of  storm-scale models, initialized using radar and other fine-scale
              observations, to  generate quantitative precipitation forecasts and associated
              ensembles to be used in  applications such as hydrologic modeling and flood
              prediction.          Formulate and study a suite of multiscale statistical
              measures of forecast     performance  which can help to detect and correct
              deficiencies in microphysical     parameterizations and obtain forecast
              assessments at application-appropriate     scales, e.g., basin-average
              rainfall.    Develop a probabilistic framework under which forecast
              improvements and the     limits of predictability of current numerical weather
              prediction (NWP) models     can be assessed while explicitly acknowledging
              forecast uncertainty and     dependence on scale.    Develop a probabilistic
              framework for assessing the practical utility of deterministic      forecasts
              for risk-based decision making.    Successful completion of this research will
              potentially open the doors to improved  quantitative precipitation forecasting
              and better utilization/interpretation of numerical  forecasts.  ***
