Title       : The Potential Effect the Inflow Boundary Layer has on Hurricane Intensity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a9714410

Award Number: 9714410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144237             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Barnes garyb@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714410
Barnes
	The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
              activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve
              the delivery of weather services to the nation.  Under this Program, the
              National Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration (NOAA), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
              and the Office of Naval Research are jointly evaluating and supporting research
              of high priority to the USWRP.  One of the primary goals of the USWRP is to
              perform the research necessary to improve track and intensity forecasts of
              hurricanes.
	It has been known for some time that sensible and latent heat
              fluxes from the sea surface are the energy source for hurricanes.  Due to the
              difficulty, however, of obtaining data in the atmospheric boundary layer of a
              hurricane, data is scarce and the processes by which heat and moment fluxes
              occur are not well-known.  Under this award and in cooperation with the
              National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Principal Investigator
              will conduct field experiments designed to collect data in the boundary layer
              of hurricanes.  The experiments will concentrate on the inflow to the hurricane
              eyewall utilizing new high resolution dropwindsondes and sensors on a NOAA
              research aircraft that measure turbulent-scale fluxes.  The experiments will
              provide an estimate of the depth and the energy content of the inflow that
              fuels the eyewall which is one factor that affects the intensity of the
              hurricane; they will also provide estimates of the sensible and latent heat
              fluxes in the inflow layer.  Inflows with differing histories will be examined
              to determine how the inflow responds to passage over land, or warmer or cooler
              seas.  Real time information can also be transmitted to the National Hurricane
              Forecast Center appraising them of the likelihood of a change in the intensity
              of hurricane prior to landfall.  
	Successful completion of this research
              could lead to improved methods for predicting the intensity of
              hurricanes.
***

