Title       : Development of Advanced Guidance for Forecasting High-Impact Weather
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9714154

Award Number: 9714154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317717             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Fritsch fritsch@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9714154  Fritsch        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency  activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve  the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the  National Science  Foundation, the National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric Administration,  the National  Aeronautics and Space Administration
              and the Office of Naval  Research are jointly  evaluating and supporting
              research of high priority to the USWRP.        It is well documented that the
              utility of raw observations  and numerical  model output can be greatly
              enhanced by statistical  post-processing.  Recent  advances in numerical
              modeling and the installation of new  observing systems have  created an
              opportunity and a need to redesign existing  post-processing techniques  and to
              develop new techniques.   The Principal Investigator will  design, construct, 
              and test new statistical post-processing procedures that will  capitalize on
              the  emerging ensemble technology and will minimize the effects of  changes in 
              operational numerical models on statistical post-processing  procedures.  He
              will also  construct an advanced observations-based statistical forecasting 
              system for providing  reliable probabilistic short-term guidance on high-impact
              weather.   The observations-  based system will capitalize on high-frequency
              observing platforms  such as  WSR-88D Doppler radars and satellite information.
               A primary tool  of the proposed  work will be the application of general
              additive models that allow  for certain non-  linearities in statistical
              regression relationships.        It is expected that the resulting techniques
              will yield  significant lead time  advances in forecasts of sensible weather
              parameters and provide  much-needed  probabilistic guidance for short-term
              decision making during  high-impact weather  events.      ***
