Title       : Research Planning Grant: Implementation of Generalized Linear Models for
               Designed Experiments with Nonnormal Response Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9714035

Award Number: 9714035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole Shlaes shlaes@ie.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,9221,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9714035  Shlaes   This grant provides funding for the investigation of
              statistical techniques for dealing with nonnormal response variables through
              the use of generalized linear models (GLIMs).  Almost all of the experimental
              design techniques in wide use today are based on the assumptions that the
              response variables have errors that are normally distributed with a constant
              variance.  However, in many real-world and industrial situations, experimental
              data fails to meet these assumptions.  Examples of nonnormal responses include
              binomial responses (1-0 responses, proportion defective data),
              exponential/Weibull responses (time to failure and survival times) and  Poisson
              responses (count data, number of defects).  Through the use of a mathematical
              link function, generalized linear models (GLIMs) relate the suspected
              distribution of the response variable to a linear   prediction function.  In
              this grant, techniques for the implementation of GLIMs in industrial
              experimentation will be examined.  Specific industrial applications that would
              benefit from the application of GLIMs and improved methods for the design of
              industrial experiments   will be investigated.   If successful, the results of
              this research on GLIMs will lead to improved statistical techniques for
              analyzing nonnormal data. In addition, improved experimental design techniques
              which exploit the knowledge about the true underlying distribution of the
              errors can be   developed. Industrial experimentation using carefully designed
              statistical test methods is vital to the optimization of processes, efficient
              utilization of resources, and improvement in the quality of   products.  These
              techniques will permit more efficient experimentation maximizing the
              information gained from a limited number of experimental trials.
