Title       : Workshop on Interdisciplinary Macromolecular Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9714024

Award Number: 9714024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel I. Stupp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9714024  Stupp  In  order  to  take  advantage of opportunities  offered  by 
              macromolecular  science and engineering, it  is  timely  and  technologically
              important to examine future projects in this  broadly  cross-cutting area.  For
              this  purpose,  a  two-day  workshop  will  be  conducted at NSF headquarters 
              with  the  participation  of  about  50  scientists  and  engineers  to 
              identify important research directions and opportunities  in  interdisciplinary
               macromolecular science  and  engineering.  This workshop is organized by a
              committee of six individuals  representing  academic and industrial 
              perspectives  on  the  subject,  and  having expertise in areas  such  as 
              physics,  chemistry, biology, and materials science and engineering of 
              macromolecules.   The  following  five  topics   have   been  identified  for
              study and debate among workshop participants  following  input from a broad
              cross-section of the technical  community: 1) novel macromolecular structures:
              synthesis and  function, 2) innovation in properties of polymeric materials 
              through   processing,  3)  the  solution  of   environmental  problems through
              macromolecular science and engineering,  4)  macromolecular  science  and
              engineering  at  the  interface  between  biological  and  physical  sciences, 
              and  5)   the  translation of macromolecular discoveries into technologies. 
              Additional issues to be studied by the participants  include  mechanisms   that
                could  catalyze   the   scientific   and  technological      development    
              of      interdisciplinary  macromolecular  science and engineering, the
              industrial  and  international context, and very importantly the  educational 
              challenges  that must be faced.  In addition  to  five   sub  groups  of  6 to
              10 participants to discuss each topic,  the  workshop  would include six
              plenary speakers on general  and  specific  issues, including P.G. de Gennes, a
              Nobel laureate  from  France recognized for his seminal theoretical work  in 
              polymer    science.    Followi ng    the    workshop,     the  organizing 
              committee  will  report  to  NSF  staff  on  the  recommendations    of   the  
               entire    group    and   will  subsequently  publish  a  final report.  %%% 
              This  workshop  is funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary  Activities  (OMA)
               of the Directorate for  Mathematical  and  Physical  Sciences (MPS) and is
              also sponsored  by  Programs  and  Divisions  in  the Directorates for
              Engineering  (ENG),  Biological  Sciences (BIO), and Education & Human 
              Resources  (EHR).  ***
