Title       : Archaeocete Whales of Eocene Tethys: Geochronology, Paleobiology and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9714923

Award Number: 9714923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. Gingerich gingeric@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5944,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714923  Gingerich    The origin and early evolution of whales is one of the
              most profound evolutionary transitions that can be studied in the fossil
              record.  The transition to whales involved a major shift of adaptive zone from
              life on land to life in water, with concomitant changes in feeding, hearing
              cognition, and locomotion that affected conspicuous features of dental,
              cranial, endocranial, and postcranial skeletal morphology.  Evidence of change
              in all of these characteristics is well preserved in fossils of the extinct
              Eocene suborder Archaeoceti, permitting direct investigation in the context of
              geological time.  Archaeocetes are best known from the Tethys Sea  Neo-Tethys 
              separating India and North Africa from Eurasia during Eocene time.    Tethyan
              whales to be studied here are found on passive continental margins in a
              succession of strata of different lithologies deposited at different points in
              cycles of sea level change.  These may reflect global change in eustatic sea
              level, which is the first hypothesis to be tested here with better
              foraminiferal control.  The origin of whales from land-mammal ancestors is not
              a controversial idea, but the evolutionary trajectory is sometimes conceived
              proceeding from a wolf-like ancestor through bear-like, otter-like, and a seal
              or sea lion-like stages to modern whales.  The second hypothesis to be tested
              is how realistic such a 'null succession' of living carnivores is as a model
              for the actual diversification of early whales through geological time.  Model
              and paleontological patterns are to be compared graphically and quantitatively.
               Finally, evolutionary transitions are often thought of as simple and straight,
              at more or less constant rate, and the third hypothesis to be tested is the
              simplicity (versus 'bushiness') of the transition and uniformity of rates
              during the transition to whales.    Methods to be employed include those of
              discovery: new Eocene archaeocete whales are to be collected from eastern
              Tethyan stratigraphic sequences in Pak istan, and possibly Egypt and Tunisia
              because these are countries where shallow marine facies are widely distributed,
              well exposed, and known to yield well preserved archaeocete skeletons.  The
              principal investigator has organized field expeditions in Pakistan and Egypt
              over the past 20 years yielding one-third of the documented generic diversity
              and the most complete skeletons of archaeocetes found anywhere.  Archaeocetes
              are diverse morphologically and their study cannot be advanced without more
              specimens of such quality.  Other methods to be employed here include 18O
              isotopic study of ontogenetic and phyletic series to document adaptation to sea
              water on both time scales, and newly developed quantitative graphical methods
              for illustration and paleobiological interpretation, with multivariate
              quantification of 'distance' and rates of change between these to be developed
              as part of this research.    The proposed research is important because whales
              enjoy great public interest and their origin provides an opportunity to
              illustrate and explain evolution to a wide audience.  The origin of whales can
              and should serve as a model for investigation of major evolutionary transitions
              in the fossil record in terms of morphological and temporal intermediates,
              graphic representation of these, and quantitative comparison through geological
              time.
