Title       : Statistical Attributes of Two-Dimensional Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1999   
File        : a9714328

Award Number: 9714328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe M. Davis davis@chem.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 The use of statistical overlap theory for the deconvolution of complex  
              chromatographic data is extended to applications including   two-dimensional
              (2-D) separations.  In the approach employed by Professor   Davis and his
              students at Southern Illinois University, the extent of   overlap of co-eluting
              components can be predicted as well as computation   of the required peak
              capacity to reduce the degree of overlap to   manageable levels.  A key
              component to this program is the distribution   of the generated  mathematic
              codes via the internet so that practitioners   can have direct access to the
              deconvolution methodologies.      Chromatographic separations are a vital
              component in many chemical   analyses.  Analytical separations remove some of
              the ambiguities present   in many detection methods, and thus the ability to
              identify the presence   of co-eluting species is of utmost importance.  The
              wide variety of   separation media and underlying phenomena make the
              development of   universal computational methods to deconvolve overlapping
              peaks very   difficult.  The continued development of the statistical overlap
              theory   and placement of the computational capabilities on the internet by  
              Professor Davis and his students may serve to address the needs of a wide  
              range of chromatography applications.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
