Title       : Genomic Database for the Flowering Plant Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9714160

Award Number: 9714160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $853807             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Cherry cherry@genome.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     The small flowering plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, a member of       the
              mustard family, has become a model system for plant       biology. Its unique
              features allow it to be applied to a wide       variety of research problems,
              including plant physiology, the       molecular genetic study of organ
              development, and plant-       pathogen interactions. Arabidopsis has
              established itself in       this role for several reasons: its small size;
              short life       cycle; small genome size; low amount of repetitive DNA      
              sequences; and the relative ease with which it is manipulated       by
              molecular and genetic methods. The importance of       Arabidopsis to plant
              biology is increasing with the       international development of germplasm and
              DNA stock resource       centers, genetic and physical maps and their
              techniques, plus       expression sequence tag (EST, single pass cDNA
              sequences) and       genomic sequencing projects. Furthermore, because
              flowering       plants evolved recently, characterizing a gene in Arabidopsis  
                  often simplifies the isolation of a corresponding gene in       another
              flowering plant.              This project will provide an electronic database
              containing       the genomic information for Arabidopsis thaliana including    
                convenient and correlated access to all published and       otherwise
              publicly available information about genes, their       products, their
              positions on the genetic and physical maps,       and their DNA sequences.
              Furthermore, this resource will       accommodate a diverse group of users,
              ranging from       Arabidopsis molecular biologists to other biologists whose  
                  own research problems can take advantage of work conducted       using
              Arabidopsis. This database project will provide an       information resource
              on the Internet using the World Wide Web       using client and server software
              developed specifically for       genomic information presentation and analysis.
                           The primary mission of this project is to develop  a      
              scientific database using object-relational database       technologies as well
              as to develop an appropriate interface       through the WWW to the information
              needed by the worldwide       plant molecular biological community. The major
              product of       this project will be the creation of a database environment   
                 which will validate and store information about physical and       genetic
              maps, DNA sequences and their features, plus cross-       references to the
              literature and detailed primary data.       Collaborations with the Arabidopsis
              Genome Initiative (AGI),       an international group of scientists working to
              determine the       complete DNA sequence of the Arabidopsis genome by the year
                    2004 have been developed to provide the plant biology       community
              with a easy access to the maps and sequence being       created around the
              world.
