Title       : National Center of Excellence for Advanced Manufacturing Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2002    
File        : a9714424

Award Number: 9714424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Sehi george.sehi@sinclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Harrison  (Principal Investigator former)
              Anthony Polsinelli  (Principal Investigator former)
              Diana M. Hunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Houdeshell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick J. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Bonnie L. Coe  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Sinclair Cmty College
	      444 West Third Street
	      Dayton, OH  454021460    937/512-2525

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Center of Excellence for Advanced Manufacturing Education (NCE/AME)
              is a national partnership focused on a customer-driven approach to
              manufacturing education.  The Center, funded in part by the National Science
              Foundation's Advanced Technological Education Program, is operated by the
              Advanced Integrated Manufacturing (AIM) Center, a partnership between Sinclair
              Community College and the University of Dayton.  Through its work, the Center
              encourages strong customer/supplier relationships between manufacturers and
              educators.  The program is developing interdisciplinary curriculum materials
              leading to an associate's degree in manufacturing engineering technology and is
              providing substantial faculty development opportunities for all educators
              involved in manufacturing-related fields. The program provides students a
              seamless educational pathway beginning in secondary schools with possibilities
              to continue to a baccalaureate degree and beyond.  Faculty and teachers
              involved include those from mathematics, science, communications, business, and
              engineering technology.       The competency-based, occupationally-verified
              approach to the programs' curriculum development activities ensures that the
              skills acquired by students provides them the knowledge and ability to become
              quick contributors to the companies that employ them. These curriculum
              materials emphasize hands-on problem solving activities throughout, enabling
              participants to build a strong foundation of analytical and problem solving
              skills required for lifelong learning and technical growth.      Faculty and
              teacher development workshops offer opportunities for high school, community
              college, and university educators to better understand the technical,
              analytical, and interpersonal skills required in today's career fields and
              provide tools for them to integrate these skills into the classroom.    The
              Center's partners include educational institutions throughout the United
              States; manufacturing employers of all sizes; the Miami Val ley Tech Prep
              Consortium, other secondary school systems; and teachers; national professional
              associations, including the Society of Manufacturing Engineers; and local,
              state, and federal government agencies.
