Title       : Dissertation Research: Behavioral Change and Regional Variation across the
               Middle to Upper Paleolithic Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1997  
File        : a9714180

Award Number: 9714180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Bar-Yosef obaryos@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Ofer Bar-Yosef, Mr. Gilbert Tostevin will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Approximately 40,000 years ago Upper
              Paleolithic archaeological industries appeared in Western Europe. They were
              associated with the first appearance of anatomically modern humans and contain
              finely made specialized stone tools as well as delicately carved bone and ivory
              figurines which provide compelling testimony for cognitive abilities comparable
              with our own. However point of origin for the Upper Paleolithic is unknown as
              in the process by which it entered Europe. To attempt to answer this question
              Mr. Tostevin will analyze 29 archaeological assemblages dating between 60,000
              and 30,000 years ago from key regions in western Eurasia and the Near East.
              Although numerous archaeologists have worked on such materials, the research
              has proceeded in a regional context and employed individualized analytic
              techniques which make broad scale comparisons across time and space impossible.
              Target regions of Central Europe (specifically the Czech Republic), Eastern
              Europe (Ukraine), Southeastern Europe (Bulgaria) and the Levant (Israel) have
              been chosen because of the importance of their archaeological assemblages to
              this issue and to the excellent excavation techniques used to procure them. Mr.
              Tostevin will analyze the lithic (stone tool) components, determine degrees of
              similarity and then interpret these in a geographical and chronological
              context. In this way it should be possible gain insight into points and time of
              origin and rates and direction of diffusion. Rather than study artifacts alone,
              Mr. Tostevin will focus on the entire production process and base his
              comparisons more on production technique than finished product.  This research
              is important because it will shed light on the appearance and spread of
              anatomically and culturally modern humans. It will produce a large and
              consistent data set of interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
