Title       : Joint NCSU-Boeing Academic-Industrial Research Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9714811

Award Number: 9714811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl D. Meyer meyer@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Betts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl T. Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ilse C.F. Ipsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen L. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to build a collaborative  structure involving
              personnel from Boeing's Mathematical and  Engineering Analysis Division (John
              Betts and Daniel Pierce) and  NCSU's Applied Mathematics program (Carl Meyer,
              Stephen Campbell,  Ilse Ipsen, Carl Kelley and four graduate students) to 
              investigate problems of mutual interest which arise in  the design and
              development of modern aircraft.    Modern manufacturing techniques attempt to
              utilize sophisticated  automatic assembly machines to reliably construct a
              product while  reducing production cost and time.  The problem of modeling  the
               motion of complex dynamical systems such as robot arms,  multi-axis milling
              machines and automated assembly tools is a  central issue in the effort toward
              manufacturing modernization.   Complex differential-algebraic equations (DAE's)
              are often at the  heart of these problems, and the goal is to use these DAE's
              to  simulate system performance, thereby avoiding ad hoc process  design
              approaches and circumventing the need to build physical  mockups. 
              Notwithstanding recent advances, computer simulations  in these areas are not
              always performed using the DAE's because  state-of-the-art solution technology
              for DAE's is not robust and  reliable enough for everyday use.  Instead,
              engineers convert the  problems to initial value differential equation problems
              and  treat algebraic constraints using heuristics.  As a result of  this ad hoc
              process, each problem requires special treatment  which not only translates
              into increased costs, but extends  product-to-market times.  The net result is
              a degradation in both  industrial and national competitive advantages.    This
              joint academic-industrial research project focuses on some  immediate problems
              requiring advanced and robust DAE solvers.  Specific applications include
              Boeing's current tool planning  project which is aimed at optimizing the path
              of a trim tool in  the production of airplane parts, the solution of an inverse
               problem that uses measured d ata to determine actual air  pressures, and the
              trajectory planning problem required for  Boeing's high speed civil transport
              project. Common to each  application are DAE models which require advances in
              DAE solution  technology before more sophisticated production engineering 
              computing tools can be developed.    The joint research effort will be
              facilitated through regular  short visits by members of each team to the other
              team's site,  and it will be further strengthened by installing NCSU graduate 
              students in Boeing's Mathematics and Engineering Analysis  division.    Boeing
              will allocate a substantial amount of salary support from  their research
              budget to allow members of their team to engage in  this collaborative effort. 
              Boeing will provide facility support  in the way of office space, computing
              hardware and software,  library resources, etc., while NCSU team members visit
              Bellevue.   NCSU will reciprocate when Boeing personnel visit Raleigh.   
              Boeing will provide funds to help support NCSU graduate students  working on
              the project commensurate with their level of  involvement.  These funds will
              provide salary and living expenses  for students while at Boeing.  While at
              NCSU, the graduate  students would be supported by traditional research 
              assistantships through this grant.    It is anticipated that the regular visits
              the PIs make to the  other team's site would be short (on the order of two to
              three  weeks per visit), but flexibility for longer visits exists.  The  NCSU
              students would stay at Boeing for longer periods so as to  become fully
              integrated in the applications and research.   Students could be at Boeing from
              anywhere between a few weeks to  several months, depending on project needs and
              individual  circumstances.    Boeing will also grant a license for use of their
              nonlinear  optimization software for the use of the team of principal 
              investigators at North Carolina State University.      It is currently
              estimated that developing a complete solution to  the optimization  of the path
              of tool trim problem could result in  a substantial cost reduction of all
              Boeing machined tools and  parts.  It would also allow Boeing to achieve its
              targeted  manufacturing rates while stabilizing employment oscillations and 
              improve the quality of its manufactured parts.  the savings are  expected to be
              substantial by the year 2000 when it is hoped that  a sizable percentage of the
              machining tools at Boeing will be  using these methods.  In the years to
              follow, the cost savings  are expected to be truly dramatic.  Moreover, this is
              a  fundamental industrial need, used in manufacturing everything  from
              components of your car's continuous velocity joint, the mold  for your
              computer's cabinet, to the booster rockets on the Space  Shuttle.  The advances
              made on the machine path problem would  have a very wide ranging impact.       
              This GOALI project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
