Title       : WGIDPO: Imagination Place
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9714749

Award Number: 9714749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1602027            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy T. Bennett dbennett@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cornelia Brunner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Idit Harel  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/969-7100

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              EDC's Center for Children and Technology, in collaboration  with commercial web
              developer MaMaMedia Inc., and Libraries  for the Future, has proposed an
              intensive three-year project  to develop Imagination Place! - an interactive
              on-line  design space that will invite girls ages 8-14 to think and  act as
              designers of technology, not just users.  Past  research has shown that by
              engaging girls in collaborative  design, new ways of "seeing" and thinking
              about technology's  role and importance in their lives become possible. 
              Imagination Place! will be crafted to involve girls as  shapers and makers of
              technologies and to promote  technological fluency.  The intent is to construct
              an on-  line design space that will provide powerful pathways for  girls into
              the world of engineering.    Imagination Place! will be a highly interactive
              Internet-  based environment where girls' ideas and visions for the  future of
              technology can be realized and grown.  Specifically, Imagination Place! will
              enable girls to (1)  engage in discovery-based activities that pique curiosity 
              and critical awareness about familiar technologies; (2)  create inventions that
              have personal meaning; (3) share  design ideas and concerns with peer mentors; 
              (4) interact  with real-world designers and engineers around short-term 
              design-based projects; and (5) offer resources and design-  related activities
              for parents and informal educators.    Building on a strong foundation of
              research around gender  and technology, EDC's Center for Children and
              Technology  brings to the project extensive knowledge about design-based 
              learning activities that are engaging for girls.  CCT's  prior work has led to
              the development of successful  strategies for supporting human collaboration
              and  interaction on-line among young women and engineers.  The  conceptual
              design of all activities and spaces within  Imagination Place! will build upon
              this work.  While  designed with girls' interests in mind, Imagination Place! 
              will also be relevant to diverse  populations of 8-14 year-  old children in
              home, school, and informal settings.
