Title       : A Scalable and Robust Multicast Architecture for the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9714680

Award Number: 9714680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia M. Lo lo@cs.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur M. Farley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marilynn L. Livingston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Proskurowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 A critical challenge for development of the Internet is how to support
              efficient and effective multicast communication in response to the intense pace
              of growth of the Internet and the concomitant demand for communication services
              from its users. Current multicast protocols, while well-suited to local or
              smaller scale communication, have suffered from serious shortcomings with
              respect to scalability, stability, and inter-domain coordination.    Our
              approach to the multicast routing problem involves the introduction of new
              graph theoretic structures as underlying abstract communication topologies for
              multicast and the integration of these new structures with current
              technologies.  There are two key elements to our new multicast architecture: 
              a) 3-layer hierarchical multicast protocol  and b) a virtual topologies model. 
              Together these two elements provide a flexible architecture for multicast that
              has the potential to overcome the shortcomings described above.    In this
              proposal, we focus on the virtual topologies element of the architecture.
              Certain graph structures have great potential to serve as underlying topologies
              for multicast communication, due to properties of connectivity, symmetry,
              limited vertex degree, and small diameter.  Under the proposed model, an
              abstract communication topology, such as the k-tree or the k-ary n-cube, is
              used as basis for the execution and routing of the multicast protocols.  The
              mapping of the virtual topology to physical routes in the Internet occurs
              dynamically, as is done under current, shared-tree approaches to multicasting. 
              More robust topologies can be expected to provide greater flexibility and fault
              tolerance than simple tree structures.  Scalability comes from the fact that
              these virtual topologies are limited to intradomain application.  Our proposed 
              3-level, hierarchical multicast protocol follows the Internet domain structure,
              interconnecting domain-specific virtual topologies into an overall multicast
              structure.    We plan to develop new pr otocols for multicast under the
              architectural model described above and to test their feasibility and
              performance through simulation.  Our interdisciplinary team of researchers in
              graph theory, parallel computing, and networking brings a new synergy to the
              multicast problem.  Our theoretic work will be guided by an understanding of
              the pragmatic issues involved in today's Internet protocols.  We hope to define
              and develop fundamental new multicast structures and algorithms that can
              ultimately serve as the foundations for a realistic, effective multicast
              architecture for the Internet.
