Title       : Investigation of Cloud Entrainment Using a Laboratory Heated-Jet Analogue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9714810

Award Number: 9714810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajay K. Prasad prasad@me.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract/Prasad, 9714810    It is difficult to make good observations in real
              clouds.  At best, using  aircraft, balloons, and radar, researchers have been
              able to get a few  "snapshots" of what is going on in a limited region of a aq
              few clouds at  particular instants, but to do so is very costly and difficult. 
              Thus our  knowledge of cloud processes is very spotty and limited.  The
              difficulty of  getting good observations of real clouds has led a number of 
              investigators to try to get at an understanding of cloud processes by  studying
              analogs of cloud processes in laboratory simulations using  liquids.  Although
              there are some problems inherent in this approach  because of differences
              between liquids and air (liquids are generally  virtually incompressible, for
              example), there are still many questions that  may be addressed usefully in
              this way.  One of these is the question of  entrainment of environmental dry
              air into clouds.  This award supports  research using a laboratory analog of a
              buoyant developing cloud to  address the problem of entrainment.   The release
              of latent heat in a  cloud by condensation will be simulated by injecting heat
              ohmically, that  is, through heated wires in the fluid flow.  The flow fields
              will be  visualized using some of the most recent advanced techniques,
              including  Laser Induced Fluorescence, Particle Image Velocimetry,  and
              Particle Image Thermometry.  The planned research is expected to  provide new
              and fresh insights about entrainment, and to lead to  improvements in the
              characterization of buoyant convection and  entrainment in numerical models of
              clouds.
