Title       : The Third International Conference on Progress in Durability Analysis of
               Composite Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9714608

Award Number: 9714608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel C. Davis                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Reifsnider mrl@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9714608       The International Conference on Durability of Composite 
              Systems  has  enjoyed widely recognized success in  bringing  together 
              scientists and engineers in a  technical  area  of  mechanics and materials
              that is important to the economy and  critical  to  the  defense  of  our 
              country.   This   third  Conference  is  the first ever to be held in the 
              U.S.,  the  result   of  a  successful  proposal  to  the  International 
              organizing  board.  This Conference also  focuses  on  joint  activities 
              between the U.S., Europe, and Japan,  especially  in  technical  areas  of
              great current importance  to  those  countries.   Special  attention  will  be 
              given   to   high  performance  composites, especially  polymeric  and  ceramic
               composites,  and  to  the  time-dependent  behavior  of  all  materials as
              identified by the recent U.S.-EC Commission  on  materials  research in
              Brussels.  A unique  feature  of  the  Conference is the fact that conceptual
              progress is  compiled  at  the  end  of  each Conference, and the  next 
              Conference  builds  on  the  progress that was made  in  previous  ones. 
              Concepts  were chosen in that way for the primary  focus  of  the current
              Conference.       The   timeliness  of  this  Conference  is  of  special 
              importance.   Europe  has initiated several  major  national  programs   in  
              high   performance  materials   for   severe  environments,  and the first
              results of those  programs  are  just  becoming  available.  A major  reason 
              for  requesting  support  for  this  Conference is  to  provide  a  means  of 
              inviting  and bringing to the Conference the major U.S.  and  European players
              in those technical areas to bring important  information  about  those 
              activities  and  the   associated  directions of research to the U.S. technical
              community,  and  especially to make it possible to bring young researchers to 
              the Conference who could not otherwise afford to come.    Conference
              organization         Conference  organization is being handled   by  Virginia 
              Tech  with  limited financial backing from  that  Institute.  Cooperating  
              U.S.   organizations  include   the   Virginia  Institute for Material Systems,
              and Georgia Tech; others are  being  contacted.  The scope of the Conference
              includes  all  types  of  high  performance polymer and composite  systems, 
              interfaces   and  interphases,  high-temperature  materials,  smart  materials 
              and  structures,  fatigue,  fracture,  and  damage analysis. Some 16 invited
              speakers have committed  to  the  Conference,  and  40 contributed  abstracts 
              have  been  received.  Contributed papers will be chosen in February  of 
              1997.***
