Title       : Self-Similar Network Traffic and It's Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9714707

Award Number: 9714707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kihong Park park@cs.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Project Homepage: http://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/park/nsf-ncr-9714707.html   
              Abstract:      Recent measurements of local area and wide area traffic have
              shown that   network traffic is self-similar or fractal, i.e., the measured
              time series  is bursty across several time scales.  This phenomenon has been
              shown to  be ubiquitous with potentially dire consequences to network
              performance due  to the scale-invariant nature of burstiness.  This project
              investigates   effective traffic control algorithms, architectures, and
              mechanisms for  facilitating efficient resource utilization while providing
              quality of  service   to real-time and best-effort traffic streams under
              self-similar traffic   conditions.      The project builds on recent work which
              characterizes the causal aspects   of traffic self-similarity and shows that
              scale-invariant burstiness can be   highly detrimental to network performance. 
              In a nutshell, it is shown that   self-similarity of traffic flow is an
              intrinsic property of networked   client/server systems which communicate files
              or objects of very large size  with nonnegligible frequency.  The latter is
              known, technically, as the  heavy-tailed property of file or object size
              distributions which is  evidenced in actual distributed systems including UNIX
              file systems.  On the   performance side, it is shown that conjoint provision
              of low delay and high   throughput is adversely affected by self-similarity.   
                We follow a three-pronged method of attack for managing self-similar  
              traffic, the first two based on dynamic control of traffic flow, and the  
              third being of a structural nature where resources are architected and 
              apportioned under direct control.      The first method, predictive feedback
              control, is geared toward exploiting   the long-range correlation structure
              present in self-similar traffic for   congestion control purposes.  We identify
              the on-set of concentrated periods   of either high or low traffic activity - a
              distinguishing characteristic of   scale-invaria nt burstiness - and adjust the
              mode of congestion control   appropriately from conservative to aggressive. 
              Being able to predict the  onset of persistent congestion or idleness from fine
              time scale observations   and utilizing this information effectively are two
              key issues.      The second method, adaptive forward error correction, is
              directed at   supporting multimedia traffic with real-time constraints without
              engaging  in expensive resource reservations.  Retransmission of lost
              information is   not a viable strategy for such traffic classes since lengthy
              round-trip   latencies encountered in wide area network environments render
              retransmitted  information useless to time-constrained applications.  We
              formulate and   analyze an adaptive packet-level forward error correction
              mechanism called   AFEC where the degree of redundancy is controlled as a
              function of network   state, increasing the level of redundancy when the
              network is bad and  decreasing it when the network is well-behaved.  The
              control problem is   nontrivial due to the fact that increasing the level of
              redundancy too much   can backfire, further aggrevating congestion and causing
              the probability of   timely information recovery at the receiver to decrease.  
                 We investigate the conditions under which adaptive forward error correction 
              is effective when traffic is self-similar.  We identify two regimes - packet 
              loss dominated connections and delay-dominated connections - the former being 
              most conducive to AFEC-based traffic control whereas the latter is more 
              subtle, admitting only a limited range of useful redundancy.      The third
              method, structural resource allocation, seeks to identify the   relative
              utility of the two principal network resource types - bandwidth and   buffer
              capacity - with respect to their curtailing effects on self-similarity.  We
              conjecture a highly skewed trade-off relationship between bandwidth and  buffer
              capacity in favor of bandwidth whose quantitative form becomes   important when
              computing res ource reservations for traffic streams with   stringent quality
              of service requirements.  A bandwidth-over-buffer capacity  policy also impacts
              the first two methods in terms of predictability and  packet loss
              dominatedness/delay dominatedness.      The three methods are expected to
              complement each other, each focusing on   a different mode for quality of
              service provision under self-similar   traffic conditions.
