Title       : SGER: Pronunciation Modeling for Conversational Speech Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9714169

Award Number: 9714169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev P. Khudanpur khudanpur@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Technological  advances  in  the  last  few  years  have  brought  automatic 
              speech  recognition where it can now  be  deployed  in  limited,  real-world 
              applications.  However,  serious  obstacles  still  remain in satisfactory
              recognition of spontaneous  speech.  Casual  dialog  exhibits a large amount 
              of  variability  in  the  pronunciation  of  words.   Humans  have  little 
              difficulty   in  transcribing  such  speech, but automatic  transcription 
              suffers  badly  because  of  the  inability  of  recognizers  to  properly 
              consider  nonstandard pronunciations.  This must be addressed  to  make 
              systems  robust  to a conversational speaking  style.   The  investigators 
              propose  to  examine alternate  pronunciations  of  words  in  Switchboard, a
              large corpus of conversational  speech,  and  develop  statistical  models for
              predicting  the  variations  based on cues in the acoustic, phonemic and
              linguistic context of  a  word.  Alternate pronunciations are viewed as
              perturbations of  the  canonical  ones  and,  to  predict  likely  variations, 
              the  researchers propose to use phonemic environment, lexical  stress, 
              syllabic  structure,  part-of-speech, phrase boundary  locations,  the 
              realization  or deletion of neighboring phones,  etc.   They  shall apply
              complementary nonparametric and parametric techniques  for  building 
              predictive  models  with  the  goal  of  improving  accuracy in a speech
              recognition system.  This effort addresses a  significant  obstacle  in 
              automatic recognition  of  spontaneous  speech  and,  in the process, gains
              fundamental understanding  of  the causes, mechanisms and extent of
              pronunciation variability.
