Title       : LEXEN: Characteristics of Bacteria Native to Extremely Dilute Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9714298

Award Number: 9714298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don K. Button dkbutton@ims.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1075,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714298  Button                           PROJECT SUMMARY                       
                             Oligotrophic environments contain nutrient  concentrations that
              range from near the limits of detection  in euphotic waters to unmeasurably
              dilute in aerobic  unlighted aquatic systems. Large in volume, these 
              environments contain sufficient bacteria to form a major  component of biomass
              on earth. Oligobacteria, the dominant  pelagic organisms present, are almost
              totally unculturable,  perhaps because their growth strategies favor nutrient 
              collection over induction and regulation against excessive  transport of
              extracellular solutes. Pure cultures of the  more numerous and probably more
              typical oligobacteria  virtually always fail to propagate. Thus the environment
              of  oligobacteria is extreme because conditions have been  impossible to
              formulate sufficiently well for dependable  growth, a condition stemming from
              the extremely small  concentrations involved. General strategies for growth in 
              terms of biochemistry, molecular biology and kinetics are  therefore not well
              understood.  The aim of this effort is to  bring bacteria more representative
              of the oligotrophic  environment into cultivation and report their properties.
              To  do this, extinction cultures will be prepared from seawater  and
              culturabilities established. From the number of species  detected, estimates of
              the number of culturable species in  the parent water can be determined.
              Cultures are  continuously mixed and dialyzed against native seawater for 
              nutrient supply and waste-product removal. Pure cultures  will be selected from
              these on the basis of flow cytometry  patterns and investigated for basic
              nutritional properties  in order to produce useful quantities of biomass. The 
              resulting cultures will be used for more detailed  investigations to include i)
              size, DNA content, and cell  density, ii) phylogenetic location, iii)
              cytoplasmic and  particularly membrane protein distributions with attention  to
              permeases, and iv) detailed nutri tional properties  including the kinetic
              constants that specify nutrient  uptake. These data will be used to advance
              concepts of  oligotroph functionality.
