Title       : LEXEN: Development of Capability to Measure Proxies of Microbial Activity within
               Ocean Crust (Collaborative Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9714286

Award Number: 9714286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141444             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Cowen jcowen@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1472,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9714286  Cowen  This research suggests a program to test the hypothesis that 
              there is a substantial microbial biosphere living within the  oceanic upper
              crustal rocks of the off-axis ridge flanks,  hundreds of meters below the
              water-rock interface, by  detecting specific metabolic products which are
              associated  with these sub-surface microbial communities.  These  diagnostic
              organic compounds should accompany the  hydrothermal fluid that is known to
              circulate within the  upper crustal rocks and eventually discharges into the 
              overlying seawater at diffuse vent sites in exposed rock  outcrops.  We will
              also detect and phylogeneticallv  characterize (ribosomal RNA molecular probe)
              any cellular  biomass associated with fluid discharges.  To test the ridge 
              flank subsurface biosphere hypothesis, we propose to build  an instrumented
              "bio-blanket" that focuses up-welling fluid  emanating from these diffuse vent
              areas through relatively  small scavenging columns that serve as traps for
              metabolic  (organic carbon) products.  The proposed instrumented  blanket would
              also measure up-welling temperatures and  velocities as the hydrothermal fluid
              vents into seawater.  The development of the bio-blanket will be in several 
              stages: initial instrument-component tests and fluid  sampling will exploit the
              convenient valved- plumbing system  of the "corked" ODP Hole 1026B, which has
              documented 65 C  outflowing fluids; subsequent complete prototype instruments 
              will be deployed over active diffuse vents at both an  exposed outcrop at a
              ridge flank site (Baby Bare, Cascadia  Basin) and a mid-ocean ridge spreading
              center (Endeavour  Segment), where flux rates are high and the signal-to-noise 
              ratio of any component of the fluid is quite large.    The direct detection of
              a wide-spread biological community,  living within the sub-surface ocean floor
              in the older ridge  flank regions, would dramatically alter our estimates of 
              biological productivity and the global carbon budgets, and  have a profound
              impact on our ph ilosophical view of the  earth.  ***
