Title       : FSML-Planning Activities: Turtle Cove Environmental Research Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1997    
File        : a9714004

Award Number: 9714004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Hastings bhastings@selu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeastern Louisiana U
	      100 West Dakota
	      Hammond, LA  704012512    504/549-2000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Turtle Cove Environmental Research Station has become an  important focus
              for research and educational programs on the  Lake Pontchartrain system. Use of
              the facility has increased  dramatically in recent years and Turtle Cove has
              reached a  significant stage in its development, where facility demands  exceed
              available resources.  Plans are being developed for  construction of new
              facilities to enhance the mission and  scope of Turtle Cove by providing
              additional research  and educational laboratories, housing for students and 
              scientists, supporting facilities such as docking and boat  storage, and
              complementary on-campus facilities.  However,  several questions remain
              regarding how construction should  be prioritized, how educational and research
              programs  should progress, how the facility should be administered,  and what
              activities should be emphasized. Wetlands acreage  (approximately 324 hectares
              or 800 acres) has been donated  to Turtle Cove recently and plans need to be
              developed for  the potential use and incorporation of such lands into  programs
              at the research station.  Therefore a planning  workshop, to be held in
              February, 1998, is will address  these and other questions, and will develop
              long-term plans  for development of the station.  In addition support will be 
              provided  for data management training for the station data  manager. Such
              training in automated monitoring of weather  and water quality data, and the
              proper archiving  procedures for such data will improve the long-term data set 
              being generated by the station.  The proposed planning  process should help to
              insure that Turtle Cove will reach  its goal to become a nationally recognized
              center for  environmental education and research in low-salinity  estuarine
              environments.
