Title       : LEXEN: Collaborative Research: A Window into the Extreme Environment of Deep
               Subsurface Microbial Communities: Witwatersrand Deep Microbiology Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9714214

Award Number: 9714214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192527             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tullis C. Onstott tullis@geo.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714214  Onstott    Recent investigations have identified microbial communities
              in various crustal environments down to 2800 meters below the surface (mbls). 
              Only a hand full of deep microbial samples from continental crust (>500 mbls.)
              exists, however, because coring is expensive.  The gold mines of the 2.9 Ga
              Witwatersrand Supergroup in South Africa, however, provide a unique opportunity
              to study microbial communities at depths ranging from 2000 to 3500 mbls. And
              eventually up to 5000 mbls.    Reconnaissance samples of a uranium-rich,
              gold-bearing, carbonaceous rock and of water from a gallery borehole were
              collected for microbial analyses from mined depth of 3200 mbls., where the rock
              and water temperatures were 50 to 55(C.  Measures were taken to avoid
              contamination during mining and sampling.  Samples were shipped to the U.S.A.
              in sterile, anaerobic canisters on ice, processed under sterile anaerobic
              conditions and distributed to other microbiology labs.  Microscopic
              observations indicated the presence of intact cells in both types of samples. 
              Electron microscopy reveals filamentous microorganisms in the rock samples. 
              Phospholipid fatty acid and DNA analyses indicate that the rock samples contain
              Cyanobacteria and sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB).  Growth was detected in
              aerobic and anaerobic enrichments of the rock samples.  The water sample
              yielded a strain of Thermus that is the first reported Thermus to reduce Fe
              (III) and the first facultative, thermophilic Fe (III) reducing bacteria (IRB).
                 Funds are requested to return to South Africa, set up a sample-processing
              laboratory on site, and carry out a three-month field study to address the
              following issues raised by this sample reconnaissance:  (  To what extent are
              rock and water samples contaminated by mining activity and what sampling
              strategies must be developed to reduce and quantify this contamination? 
              Specifically, do the Cyanobacteria represent mining contamination?  (  Does the
              radiation emanating from the uranium-rich, car bonaceous layer provide a
              significant source of energy for indigenous microbial communities?  In
              particular, does the radiolytic reaction with water generate sufficient oxygen
              for the growth of facultative microorganisms like IRB-SA?  (  If these
              microbial communities have been present in the rock since the time of the last
              thermal episode at 2.0 Ga, then does the in situ activity of the SRB and IRB
              explain the occurrence of framboidal pyrite and filamentous aggregates of gold?
                 To address the first question, samples of mining water, borehole water, and
              filtered air samples will be collected and analyzed.  For the second question,
              rock samples of the carbonaceous layer and host rock will be collected with
              aseptic methods in a three dimensional grid (3x3x12 meter) during excavation of
              an access tunnel.  To answer the second and third question, the relationships
              between the mineralogy and the bacteria in the rocks will be examined in situ
              and the capability of the cultured microorganisms to precipitate minerals at in
              situ conditions will be examined.  To constrain the habitation time of the
              microbial community, the present day and paleo hydrology will be modeled using
              thermal constraints provided by borehole temperatures and thermochronometry.   
              Incubations of all samples will be initiated on site.  Off site analyses during
              the subsequent 21 months will include 1) phospholipid, glycolipid, ether lipid
              analyses (Univ. of Tenn.); 2) DNA extraction, polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
              amplification, cloning, and sequencing (Pacific Northwest National
              Laboratories-PNNL); 3) acridine orange direct counts (AODC), in situ probe, and
              field emission gun scanning electron microscopy (FEG-SEM) (Princeton-Rutgers);
              4) chemical and isotopic analyses (Princeton-Indiana University); 5) fission
              track apatite analyses (Princeton-Univ. of Penn.). 6) Phosphorimaging of SRB
              and uranium reducing activity (PNNL-Princeton).
