Title       : Science Support for US/Canada/Japan SHEBA Projects in the Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9714630

Award Number: 9714630
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4250375            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Conlon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Van Woert  (Principal Investigator former)
              Randall S. Jacobson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Office of Naval Res
	      Attn: Code 511, Dept. Of Navy
	      Arlington, VA  22217    /   -

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    OPP-9714630      VAN WOERT, MICHAEL  OFFICE OF NAVAL RESEARCH       
                 This project is a key component of a large, coordinated, multi-investigator
              program, Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic (SHEBA) Ocean.  The research program
              will be conducted for 14 months from a ship frozen into the ice pack. A large
              array of instruments will be deployed from a central camp surrounding the ship
              to measure ice, ocean, and atmospheric conditions through a full annual cycle. 
              This research will be important for the determination of the effects of
              incoming heat radiating onto the ice floe as a function of changing atmospheric
              and oceanic conditions. The SHEBA results will help determine how atmospheric
              heating is coupled to adsorption of heat by the sea ice. These measurements are
              critical to understanding how heat is reflected or absorbed by the ice as it
              melts in the summer and thickens in the winter in response to seasonal
              variations in climate. This project will provide the ship from which the SHEBA
              experiment will be conducted and the icebreaker to insert the ship into the
              pack ice in the Beaufort Sea at approximately 750 N, 1450 W. The logistical
              infrastructure provided by this project makes an essential contribution to the
              SHEBA team of researchers. The combined set of measurements in SHEBA will allow
              refinement of climate models for the Arctic region. Those improved models will
              lead to better predictions of the climate and the permanence of the Arctic ice
              cap under a proposed global warming that could occur if atmospheric carbon
              dioxide levels are increased above present levels.
