Title       : LEXEN: New Physiological and Phylogenetic Types of Hyperthermophiles at Deep-Sea
               Hydrothermal Vents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9714195

Award Number: 9714195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas P. Teske ateske@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Holger W. Jannasch  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1075,4444,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 One of the most productive and exiting aspects of life at extreme
              environments has been the discovery and description of novel metabolic types of
              hyperthermophilic archaea and bacteria at deep sea hydrothermal vents. Many of
              these extremophiles represented new genera (e.g. Pyrodictium, Methanopyrus.
              Staphylothermus, Archaeoglobus) exhibiting types of metabolism and enzymatic
              capabilities that were entirely unexpected to occur at high temperatures. A
              case in point is the recent isolation of Pyrolobus fumarii with its ability to
              ammonify nitrate and to use thiosulfate as well as oxygen at low levels as
              electron acceptors. These traits greatly extend the type of microbial
              transformations that can be projected to occur at high temperatures of oceanic,
              terrestrial or extraterrestrial environments.  There is no reason to assume
              that this deep sea source of novel extremophiles is exhausted. We will combine
              new enrichment/isolation approaches for hyperthermophiles with a
              molecular/phylogenetic assessment of their in situ occurrence. To this end we
              will use denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) for a visual assessment
              of microbial biodiversity, rapid identification and parallel studies of
              molecular and cultured isolates. The field work and sample collecting will be
              done with the DSRV ALVIN at two most productive and, although in close
              proximity, characteristically different hydrothermal vent sites: Guaymas Basin
              and 21 ÝN at the East Pacific Rise.  Dilution techniques will be applied to
              delineate populations densities and habitat ranges in both our cultural and
              molecular approaches. We will link the biodiversity aspect to quantification of
              different metabolic types of hyperthermophilic organisms along selected redox
              and temperature gradients which commonly occur at Guaymas Basin vent sites and
              offer small scale analogs of two biospheres normally separated by larger
              distances: (1) the oxic or anoxic parts of the surface and subsurface
              biosphere, ultimately driven by photosynthesis, and (2) the possibly autonomous
              anoxic deep subsurface biosphere. Since the latter may hold organisms mediating
              biogeochemical reactions such as methane and sulfide formation and possibly
              anaerobic metal oxidations, their potential role in extraterrestrial
              environments is particularly intriguing.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
