Title       : An Error Control Scheme for Large-Scale Multicast Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9714661

Award Number: 9714661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcel Waldvogel mwa@arl.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gurudatta Parulkar  (Principal Investigator former)
              George Varghese  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In the Internet today, packet losses are typically recovered using 
              retransmission, as for example in TCP. The mechanism employed in TCP  works
              well in the unicast environment. In multicast environment,  however, such as
              the MBone, the TCP approach does not work  well, especially when the multicast
              groups are very large. Difficulties  arise because of two main problems:
              implosion and exposure.  Implosion  occurs when following a packet loss, many
              receivers multicast the same  request; implosion also occurs when in response
              to a request, many  receivers multicast the lost packet. Exposure occurs when
              requests and  retransmissions reach members that have not experienced loss.
              Both  implosion and exposure cause unecessary overhead.    Existing solutions
              are not general because of the trade-offs they offer  for reducing implosion
              and exposure.  SRM for example, trades latency  for reducing implosion, and
              uses a crude method for reducing exposure.  RMTP, TMTP and LBRRM reduce both
              implosion and exposure by arranging  members in a tree.  The tree, however, is
              hard to construct and  maintain in the face of dynamically changing groups
              without any access  to topology information.    We propose a new scheme to
              perform reliable multicast which overcomes  the limitations of existing
              solutions. Our scheme is based on a dynamic  tree hierarchy, but pushes the
              task of costructing and maintaining the  tree to the network, where it can be
              done very efficiently.  To achieve  this, we enhance the IP Multicast service
              model by adding new  forwarding services to the routers.  The scheme combines
              three ideas to  achieve near optimal performance: (a) electing a replier link
              at each  router to eliminate implosion, (b) defining the concept of a "turning 
              point" to discover the subtree where loss occurred, and (c) using  "directed
              multicast" to limit replies to the loss subtree. These ideas  minimize recovery
              latency and allow group members to be completely  isolated from the details of
              group topology, thus allowing fast   adaptation to dynamic membership changes.
