Title       : Implementation of a Coupled Air-Sea Numerical Model for Improving Operational
               Prediction of Landfalling Gulf of Mexico and Western Atlantic Hurricanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9714412

Award Number: 9714412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac Ginis iginis@gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis M. Rothstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714412  Ginis        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the National Science  Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration (NOAA), the  National Aeronautics and Space Administration and
              the Office of Naval Research  are jointly evaluating and supporting research of
              high priority to the USWRP.                    Under the auspices of the USWR,
              the Principal Investigators will undertake a  comprehensive numerical
              modeling/data assimilation program that has as its  objectives to develop and
              test a coupled ocean/atmosphere tropical cyclone  numerical model and to
              utilize this model to investigate the dynamical role of the  ocean in rapid
              hurricane intensity changes near landfall.        The primary components of the
              coupled hurricane/ocean numerical system are  the operational hurricane
              forecast model developed at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid   Dynamics Laboratory
              (GFDL) and the Princeton Ocean Model.  These will be  combined with new coupled
              initialization strategies and well-tested data assimilation  techniques in
              establishing this coupled model as a trustworthy numerical model.   New
              operationally available data sets will be a central component of the prediction
               system.          The Principal Investigators will employ the coupled model to
              test a number  of hypotheses concerning the oceans' dynamical role in rapid
              hurricane intensity  changes near landfall.  These include the effects of ocean
              eddies and strong ocean  fronts (e.g. the Gulf Stream) in determining the track
              and intensity of the hurricane.        If successful, this research will lead
              to improved operational predictive  capabilities.  This research will be
              conducted in active collaboration with  NOAA/GFDL.  ***
