Title       : Robust Adaptive Coded Modulation for Time-Varying Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9714597

Award Number: 9714597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Goeckel goeckel@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent work has suggested that adaptive signaling has the theoretical promise of
              greatly increasing the bandwidth efficiency of digital communication systems
              operating over wireless channels.  However, the utility of adaptive signaling
              has been questioned due to the variation of the wireless channel over time,
              which results in a different channel at the time of data transmission than at
              the time of channel estimation.  Recent results by the PI have shown that these
              issues cannot be disregarded; the channel variation greatly alters the nature
              of the problem and thus the design of robust adaptive signaling schemes for
              wireless channels presents significantly different challenges than the
              analogous design problem for wireline channels.  Many of these challenges are
              driven by the robustness necessary in these algorithms due to uncertainties at
              the transmitter about the statistics of the channel fading process.    In this
              project, a comprehensive study of the design of robust adaptive signaling
              schemes for time-varying channels is undertaken.  The main portions of this
              study include:  (1) The design and characterization of robust algorithms that
              employ a given adaptive signaling paradigm;  (2) The development of adaptive
              coding paradigms that are well suited to time-varying channels; and  (3) The
              development of adaptive hybrid-ARQ schemes, which have the added flexibility of
              partially guaranteeing robustness through retransmission.  The coupling of this
              work with the development of the necessary statistical models, in particular
              the development of appropriate classes of autocorrelation functions for the
              channel fading processes, will lead to families of adaptive coding strategies
              that can be employed in systems operating over time-varying channels with
              various rates of channel variation. These results will illustrate both the
              applications where adaptive coding is useful and the manner in which it should
              be employed.  The methods that will be used to obtain these results are drawn
              from the areas of pr obability and random processes, communication system
              theory, and statistical signal processing.  In particular, the results rely
              heavily on results from random process theory, the design of coded modulation
              schemes, and extensions of results from minimax-robust time series prediction.
