Title       : Hydroelastic Response and Optimization of Floating Runways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9714311

Award Number: 9714311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99856              (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Webster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9714311  Webster   The objective of the research is to develop theoretical 
              tools for the feasibility study and the design of a floating  runway for
              commercial air traffic in protected waters.  There are three technical issues
              which govern the  feasibility of a floating runway: structure, dynamic 
              response and mooring.  Since the light structures of shallow  depth like
              floating runway are typically very flexible, the  dynamic response of these
              runways to a variety of loads  including waves, earthquakes, and the landing
              and taking off  of aircraft needs to be small enough to avoid the structural 
              failure and not to affect the airplane operations.  Finally,  mooring system
              must resist loads resulting from the action  of wind, waves, currents and tides
              without failing.    In the proposed research the runway will be modeled as 
              orthotropic plate which we can use to analyze and optimize  the horizontal
              distribution of the stiffness.  The motion of  the plate will be dynamically
              coupled with hydrodynamic  loading from the free-surface motion of the
              surrounding  fluid and with the mooring system.  For determination of the 
              hydrodynamic loads, the fluid region under the runway and  outside the runway
              will be modeled by Green-Naghdi theory.    The research will provide designers
              of these new platforms  the tools necessary to analyze critical problems
              associated  with these new platforms: motions and structural  optimization,
              effects of earthquakes and tsunamis, mooring  loads and localized slamming
              loads.  All of these problems  must be addressed before a design can be
              considered feasible  and at the present time are no comprehensive tools
              available  to perform this analysis.  ***
