Title       : 1998 National Science Foundation Design and Manufacturing Grantees Conference;
               Monterrey, Mexico; January 5-8, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9714166

Award Number: 9714166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Way Kuo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 9199      UNDISTRIBUTED PANEL/IPA FUNDS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    This award is to conduct the annual National Science Foundation Design and
              Manufacturing Grantees Conference.  The conference will involve researchers
              from the Division of Design, Manufacture and Industrial Innovation, the
              Division of Engineering Education and Centers, the Division of Electrical and
              Communication Systems and the Mechanics and Materials Program in the Division
              of Civil and Mechanical Structures, located within the Directorate for
              Engineering, the Division of Information, Robotics and Intelligent Systems,
              located within the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering and manufacturing related projects in the Division of Materials
              Research, located within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.      The conference ensures that the individual researchers are
              informed about the ongoing activities of their colleagues.  An elimination of
              duplication of their efforts may be achieved and a degree of cooperation may
              result from this activity.  An overall improvement of efficiency of the
              research activity could be expected.  In addition, the conference program
              organization allows for ample time to discuss manufacturing research in detail
              with the collective research community at the meeting, with feedback to and
              input from the National Science Foundation.  Finally personal contacts between
              the grantees and program directors in the Divisions should contribute to
              clarifying many current issues in their work.   The aims of the conference are
              to enhance communication between researchers, encourage joint research, promote
              synergism, and develop networks for technical interchange.  Attendees to the
              conference gain an early access to the information disseminated.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
