Title       : Gas-Phase Ionic Chemistry and Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1999  
File        : a9714011

Award Number: 9714011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $835000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Brauman brauman@Stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,  
              Professor John I. Brauman, of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford  
              University, carries out studies of gas-phase ionic chemistry and  
              spectroscopy.  Through studies of thermodynamics, reaction dynamics,   electron
              photodetachment spectroscopy, infrared multiple photon induced   reactions, and
              optical photochemistry, using ion cyclotron resonance   spectroscopy combined
              with conventional and laser light sources,   Professor Brauman examines the
              spectroscopic, chemical, and physical   aspects of the properties and reactions
              of ions in the gas phase.    Through these studies is gained an understanding
              of the relationship   between structure and reactivity for ions and highly
              reactive   intermediates, permitting an assessment of the separate
              contributions of   intrinsic and solvent effects to the chemistry of these
              species.  A central need in chemistry is the ability to understand and predict
              the   properties and chemistry of reactive intermediates formed in the course  
              of chemical reactions.  While molecular groupings bearing charges   (`ions`)
              play an important role as critical intermediates in numerous   reactions, their
              properties are dramatically affected by their   interaction with the media in
              which they are usually generated,   complicating experimental attempts to probe
              their chemistry.  Professor   John I. Brauman, of the Department of Chemistry
              at Stanford University,   is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program for his   studies of the structures and reactivity of ions in
              the gas phase,   allowing him to assess the separate contributions to their
              chemistry of   the reaction medium and their intrinsic properties.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
