Title       : Processes of Aztec State Formation in the Northeastern Basin of Mexico:
               Materials Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9714583

Award Number: 9714583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Charlton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this collaborative project Drs. Deborah Nichols and Thomas Charlton will
              analyze archaeological materials collected at the Aztec site of Otumba which is
              located in the Basin of Mexico. The Aztec empire, known both through
              archaeology and historic description, had become by 1519 AD the largest state
              in the history of pre-Columbian Mesoamerica and the Basin of Mexico, the
              state's geographic core, was one of the most urbanized areas in the world. In
              addition to the imperial capital at Tenochititian the empire was administered
              and controlled through a number of regional centers such as Otumba and how
              these smaller cities functioned and were integrated with both rural hinterlands
              on the one hand and the capital on the other, is not well understood. In past
              NSF supported research the investigators have conducted extensive survey and
              excavation at Otumba and have mapped the distribution of numerous cultural
              materials across the site. They have also produced a general chronology for the
              city. The results show that manufacturing activities are not randomly or evenly
              distributed across space and this suggests a form of centralized control. In
              the present project, the team will conduct a careful analysis of material
              remains to determine the sources of raw materials and to trace their flow
              across space. They believe, as do many anthropologists that in empires such as
              the Aztecs production and distribution were centrally administered and that
              this control helped to solidify elite power and solidify the state.  To examine
              this proposition, the team will: 1. obtain accurate dates for the development
              of craft specialization and Otumba's growth as a center through radiocarbon
              analysis; 2. clarify manufacturing and distribution patterns of various
              commodities, including items locally produced and some probably imported,
              through neutron activation analysis of trace elements to match artifacts with
              their raw material sources or source areas. Neutron activation analysis will be
              applied to obsidians (volcanic glass used to make tools), basalt, and the clays
              employed to make pots as well as figurines, censers and spindle whorls.  The
              Aztec empire covered a significant part of Mexico and integrated large numbers
              of people into a single political system. With a simple technology and lack of
              horses or other domestic animals for transportation it is difficult to
              understand how such an entity could be formed and maintained for hundreds of
              years. This project will shed light on the economic organization of the empire
              and the role which control over production and distribution played in the
              emergence and sustenance of this early state.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
