Title       : FSML: Computer Network Facilities Improvement at Archbold Biological Station,
               Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9714118

Award Number: 9714118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilary M. Swain hswain@archbold-station.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Menges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Deyrup  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glen E. Woolfenden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Thomas Bancroft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Archbold Biological Statn
	      P.O.Box 2057
	      Lake Placid, FL  338522057    813/465-2571

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9139,9169,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project will provide a modern computational  platform to facilitate broad
              communication by the  research and education community of Archbold Biological 
              Station (Archbold), and provide an active presence for  the station on the
              Internet to enhance research  collaboration.  Archbold, established in 1941, is
              a not-  for-profit independent research facility in central  Florida, dedicated
              to long-term ecological research.  Staff, visiting investigators, and students
              conduct  research primarily focused onthe organisms and  environments of the
              Lake Wales Ridge and adjacent  central Florida.  Use of the facility is often
              intense.  Areas of research strength are population ecology and  conservation
              biologyemphasizing the relationship between  species and ecosystem processes. 
              Complementary  education programs involve research training for  graduates and
              undergraduates, use by college classes,  and K-12 environmental education. 
              Archbold supports  research and education by providing access to study  areas
              and organisms on its 5,000 acre globally  significant scrub preserve, which is
              one of the most  distinctive regions in the U.S., and a 10,300 acre ranch 
              landscape.  The station's integrated infrastructure-  species diversity, land,
              long-term data, ease of access,  reference collections, fire and land
              management-are its  greatest asset.    The project will support a computer
              networking system to  integrate Internet, Intranet, and Local and  Wide Area
              Networking technologies into Archbold  activities. The design can be logically
              into four  (1-4) primary computing subsystems:(1)Telecommunications  &
              Internetworking Subsystem to interface the Wide Area  Network to the Internet;
              (2) Internet Presence or World  Wide Web Interface Subsystem to incorporate
              Archbold  activities accessible via www applications, email, and  FTP (for
              efficient data transfer between remote  locations).  Archbold proposes
              selection of Microsoft's  NT 4.0 as a Server platform based on a review of
              current  performance and funct ionality and analysis of the  industry long-
              term outlook; (3) Local Area Network  (LAN) Subsystem including the physical
              backbone and  individual workstation wiring to bridge a new science  LAN with
              the existing Administrative LAN; (4) Wide Area  Network Subsystem (WAN) with
              (LAN) Extension to off-site  facilities and Dial-up; as well as (5) a small
              attic  conversion to accommodate a new computer Information  Center at the
              station; and (6) an Operations and  Management Plan.
