Title       : A New Spectrum of Hierarchical Storage Architectures for High Performance Disk
               I/Os
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a9714370

Award Number: 9714370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Yang qyang@ele.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is investigating the issues related to designs and performance 
              evaluations of several innovative disk I/O architectures. These architectures
              may  improve the I/O response time by orders of   magnitude over current
              state-of-the-art disk architectures for office/engineering  workloads.  The
              focus of the research includes:    * Minimization of disk write times by means
              of disk caching disk (DCD). This is  a technique of using a small disk to cache
              writes sequentially, as in a  log-structured file system, then using the log to
              update the file   system on the larger disks.    * Using a combination of DRAM
              and DCD to replace non-volatile RAM caches that are  currently used in RAID
              systems.    * Using DRAM as a component of the file system to allow fast reads
              and writes.   In this scheme, a log of files written to RAM will be kept in
              either NVRAM or on  disk, but only the RAM access will be in the critical  
              path.    * Upgrading existing file servers to emulate DCD using multiple
              existing disks.    These architectures will be investigated using simulation to
              compare them to  existing architectures under a wide range of I/O workloads. 
              New analytical  models will also be devised and used in evaluation of
              architectures.  Actual  implementations of the DCD architectures will be
              carried out using disk  partitions as caches on the computers in the
              department.  Performance  measurements will be performed on the DCD
              implementations and used to compare  with existing disk architectures.
