Title       : LEXEN: Paleobiology of Ancient Salt Formations: Examination of Primary Crystals
               for Biological Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9714203

Award Number: 9714203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell H. Vreeland rvreeland@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Rosenzweig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714203  Vreeland    This proposal is based on the hypothesis that extremely
              halophilic bacteria and/or macromolecules (biological materials) can be
              preserved for long periods of time inside of NaCl crystals.  This project has
              three objectives: 1) To sample a variety of ancient geologic salt formations
              and to clearly document the ages of the samples; 2) To gently extract and study
              biological materials from the crystals obtained in objective #1; 3) To
              experimentally examine the stability of various biological materials inside of
              salt crystals.  This research will advance several of the NSF's LExEN program
              by increasing the scientific understanding of the nature of primitive organisms
              from extreme environments, the nature of the early extreme environment in which
              they thrived and the influence of microorganisms on the Earth's early
              environment.  This project research will be conducted under the initial
              assumption that the best place to find extant biological materials will be
              inside primary fluid filled inclusions that are at least 200 microns square. 
              At this time, four sample sites have been selected for this project.  These
              include: depositional salts from the modern era 1.3 Million years of age (Ma)
              or less, a formation which contains Permian salt (ca 250 Ma); a formation
              containing Devonian age salt (ca. 360-400 Ma); and a fourth site made of
              Silurian age (430 Ma).  The most critical issue for this project is to clearly
              establish the age and quality of each crystal sample used for the isolation of
              biological materials.  Age dating the individual samples will basically involve
              collecting data at two levels of effort.  These levels are: microfossil
              analyses of surrounding crystals, which will be performed under the direction
              of Dr. Dennis Braman at the Royal Tyrrel Museum in Drumheller, Alberta; and
              chemical analysis of the extracted inclusion brines which will be accomplished
              under the direction of Dr. Juske Horita at Oak Ridge National Laboratories. 
              The biological sampling will be performed  in the laboratory of the project
              director (Dr. Russell H. Vreeland).  The sampling for biological material
              involves the use of surface sterilized primary crystals, which will be
              penetrated using aseptic techniques.  The inclusions will be sampled using a
              micromanipulator and sterilized capillary tubes that will allow the sample to
              be withdrawn without destroying the crystal.  This project will provide
              significant data in the following areas: 1) Demonstrated that biological
              materials can survive inside crystals for very long periods of time; 2)
              Developed and tested procedures for isolating ancient, fragile biological
              materials from mineral inclusions; 3) Provided biological material that can be
              used to determine the evolutionary state of microorganisms 250 to 430 million
              years B.P.E; 4) Provided data and sampling methods that can be used in a search
              for extraterrestrial life on long dead planets (DeVincenzi, 1992, DeVincenzi et
              al. 1990); 5) Pushed back the envelope for proven survival of intact biological
              materials by a factor of 10  1.5-2.0 x 107 (Cano and Borucki, 1995) to 2.5-4.3
              x 108 years .  The project director's laboratory has been actively conducting
              several relevant experiments in order to prepare for this project.  Dr.
              Vreeland has studied the ecology, taxonomy and physiology of halophilic
              bacteria for nearly twenty-five years.  He has been involved in sampling
              underground salt formations for the last ten years.  He has published
              twenty-five primary research publications and has one patent dealing with
              halophilic bacteria.
