Title       : LEXEN: Biogenic Fractionations of Transition Metal Isotopes: Novel Methods for
               the Examination of Life in Extreme Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9714282

Award Number: 9714282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ariel D. Anbar anbar@earth.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Professors Ariel D. Anbar and Kenneth H. Nealson, of the Department of   Earth
              and Environmental Sciences at the University of Rochester, are   supported by
              the Division of Chemistry, the Office of Multidisciplinary   Activities of the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, the   Directorate for
              Biological Sciences, and the Division of Earth Sciences   for their studies of
              the biogenic fractionation of transition metal   isotopes.  These studies test
              the hypothesis that fractionation of stable   isotopes of key metabolic metals
              occurs during uptake and metabolism of   these metals by microorganisms and
              that such isotope fractionation will   leave a recognizable signature that will
              be useful for the study of life   in environments where extreme conditions
              preclude the application of   other biomarkers.  Professors Anbar and Nealson
              use multiple-collector   inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry to
              characterize the isotopic   compositions of metals isolated from microorganisms
              sampled in the field   and from microbes cultured under controlled laboratory
              conditions.  Their   studies are focused on the kinetic fractionation of the
              isotopes of   copper and zinc, expected during the enzyme-catalyzed uptake of
              these   metals, and of iron, expected during microbially-mediated redox  
              reactions.  These biogenic isotope fractionations are expected to provide  
              information about the presence or absence of biological activity in   general
              and about specific metabolic processes in particular.  Fractionation of stable
              isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur due to   the different reaction rates
              of compounds containing different isotopes   of these elements have been used
              for years to obtain information about   metabolic processes in environments not
              accessible to direct observation.    With the support of the Division of
              Chemistry, the Office of   Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences   Directorate, the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and
              the Division of   Earth Sciences, Professors Ariel D. Anbar and Kenneth H.
              Nealson, of the   Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences at the
              University of   Rochester, are developing techniques to explore the biogenic  
              fractionation of isotopes of metals which play key roles in metabolic  
              processes.  By analyzing the fractionation of isotopes of copper, zinc,   and
              iron, Professors Anbar and Nealson obtain information about the   presence or
              absence of biological activity in general and about specific   metabolic
              processes in particular.  These studies are of particular   utility for the
              study of life in extreme environments, where extreme   conditions preclude the
              application of other `biomarkers.`  Such   environments include modern settings
              which are physically remote or   subject to extreme environmental conditions
              and ancient environments   which can be studied only through the geological
              record.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
