Title       : Single Molecule Detection and Spectroscopy as a Probe of theLocal Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  1998    
File        : a9714390

Award Number: 9714390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Chemla   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9146,9162,9183,AMPP,BIOT,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program   of
              the Chemistry Division, the Atomic, Molecular, Optical, and Plasma   Physics
              Program of the Physics Division, and the Office of   Multidisciplinary
              Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and   Physical Sciences, Chemla
              will use single-molecule spectroscopic   techniques as well as single- and
              multi-photon excitation to explore the   photophysical and photochemical
              properties of single molecules in aqueous   solution and close to metallic
              interfaces.  For single molecules under   water new immobilization schemes will
              be developed based on previous work   on dry surfaces.  The effect of the
              microscopic structure of surfaces on   chemical reactions close to those
              surfaces will be examined by way of the   fluorescence of the reporting
              molecules.  Scanning probe techniques will   be utilized to explore the
              interplay between the relative orientation of   a single dipole with respect to
              the surface and the elementary   excitations of the metal.  The effects of
              applied electric fields and   local field effects will be studied.    These
              studies are important for understanding the physical and chemical   processes
              involved in biologically important environments.  Such a   spectroscopic
              capability as will be developed here has a variety of   fundamental as well as
              practical applications, such as to the development   of improved chemical
              biosensors.  It also has relevance to understanding   the surface chemistry and
              physics of materials on a molecular level.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
