Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Ultrafast Processes in Semiconductors, Their
               Nanostructures and Optoelectronic Devices, Award In Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9714915

Award Number: 9714915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13548              (Estimated)
Investigator: A S. Vengurlekar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tata Inst of Fund Res
	      
	      Bombay, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9714915  Vengurlekar  Description:  The research "Ultrafast Processes  in
              Semiconductors, their Nanostructures and  Optoelectronic Devices, Award in
              Indian  Currency" is a new collaboration linking the  Tata Institute of
              Fundamental Research (TIFR)in  Bombay with the University of New Mexico, the 
              CNRS Laboratoire de Microstructures et de  Microelectronique in France, and
              Bell  Laboratories, New Jersey.  This research in  ultrafast optoelectronics
              developed out of an  earlier collaboration (INT-9022623) between PI  Shah and
              co-PI Arora of TIFR that established  the first and only picosecond
              spectroscopy  laboratory in India.  The scientific focus is:  (1) energy
              relaxation processes and rates in  low-dimensional semiconductors and the
              effect  of relaxation dynamics on the performance of  optoelectronic devices
              fabricated from such  structures; (2) development of fabrication and 
              characterization techniques for photoconducting  switches and electro-optic
              samplers, and (3)  the use of such optoelectronic devices for  measuring the
              response of ultrafast electronic  devices.    Scope:  This award will provide
              the linkage  costs for US and Indian collaborators.  The  research, while in
              the realm of fundamental  physics, is in an emerging area that combines 
              ultrafast optics and electronics.  The topic is  of considerable current
              interest and the  devices under study may in the future be  integral to all
              communication and computer  systems.  In addition to initiating new  scientific
              collaborations, this project will  contribute toward the ultrafast spectroscopy
               laboratory at TIFR becoming a world-class  facility.  All the experimental
              work will be  performed at TIFR and will include advanced  graduate students
              and postdocs.  The scientific  and technological benefits are mutual and the 
              research results will be published in  international journals.          ***
