Title       : Relations Between Ice Nuclei and Ice Formation in Clouds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a9714177

Award Number: 9714177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338736             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. DeMott pdemott@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Rogers  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sonia M. Kreidenweis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract/David C. Rogers/9714177    Relations between Ice Nuclei and Ice
              Formation in Clouds        This research will examine the relationship between
              the aerosol particles in the atmosphere that initiate nucleation of ice  (Imown
              as Ice Nuclei, or IN) and the formation of ice crystals in clouds The question
              of how ice begins to form in clouds is  a long-standing problem in atmospheric
              science. The need for research on this topic has been pointed out in scientific
              reviews  over the past 40 years.  To this end, many field studies have been
              performed using instrumented aircraft to examine cloud  stnucture and
              microphysics. Previous attempts to correlate Ice Nulclci and ice crystal
              concentrations oflen depended on cloud  observations at one location and time,
              collecting aerosols at a different location and time, and processing the
              aerosol collections  still later, at a laboratory.  In some cases, measurements
              addressed temperature dependencies but did not include equally  important
              variations in humidity. Problems such as this, together with the wide natural
              variability of ice concentrations, have  made it difficult to evaluate whether
              concentrations of ice nuclei are well correlated with concentrations of ice
              crystals in a  given part of a cloud. This research embraces a new approach to
              this question. Simultaneous observations of aerosols and  clouds, in real time,
              with the capability to select and adjust the temperature and humidity of IN
              measurements are now possible  with a new instrument, a fast-response airborne
              continuous flow difflision chamber (CFD). Ice nuclei will be measured at the 
              same time and in the same aircraft making microphysical observations. The
              temperature and humidity dependence of IN  concentration will be determined,
              and IN aerosols will be collected for electron microscope examination to
              determine size and  elemental composition. The work involves installing
              instrumentation on research aircraft, obtaining measurements of aerosols  plus
              cloud microphysical and other prope rties, and performing analyses and
              numerical modeling over a three-year period.    Observations will be made in
              NSF-supported field studies ofwinter storms in the Great Lakes region of the
              U.S. and in  orographic wave clouds in Colorado and Wyoming. The analyses will
              involve comparing IN measurements with aircraft  microphysical data. Numerical
              process-modeling of ice formation and cloud microphysics will also be performed
              to aid the  interpretation of these data. The relation between primary ice
              nucleation (versus secondary processes) and precipitation  formation in winter
              storms will be investigated using microphysical and remote-sensing observations
              collected by other  investigators who are participating in the field programs.
