Title       : Statistical Methods in Computational Modeling and Virtual Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9714380

Award Number: 9714380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Tucker JTucker@NAS.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: John Tucker  Proposal Number: DMS 9714380  Project: Statistical Methods in
              Computational Modeling and            Virtual Experiments    Abstract:    The
              Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics (CATS)  will convene a
              multidisciplinary study panel on statistical  methods in computational modeling
              and virtual experiments.  The panel will recommend sound methods for
              identifying and   quantifying uncertainties that arise in simulation
              experiments.  The panel will develop recommendations for improved and, where 
              necessary, new statistical methods and data analysis techniques  for use in
              simulation modeling and virtual experiments.  It will  also recommend
              appropriate statistical methods to assist  practitioners in their use of
              experimental data when validating  simulation models or assessing model fit and
              predictive   performance. These recommendations will address modeling and 
              simulation limitations associated with ever increasingly complex  systems. The
              panel's report will provide examples to illustrate  the complexity of
              evaluating model combinations that arise from  varying assumptions, parameters,
              and initial conditions within   the models, will point out possible approaches
              for addressing  those complexities from existing experimental design
              techniques,  and will highlight areas needing further research. Experts may  
              be consulted from the communities concerned with computer  simulation, discrete
              events systems, and dynamic systems  modeling, and any other scientists,
              researchers, or engineers  with significant technology or methodology to
              contribute.    A National Research Council panel of experts will examine the  
              state-of-the-art for statistical methods used in computer  simulation and
              modeling, and computational experimentation. This  is needed because of an
              ever-growing dependence upon these kinds  of simulations and "virtual"
              experiments in designing and  evaluating such complicated devices and systems
              as semiconductors,  automobiles, aircraft, spacecraft, or in very complex 
              application  areas such as transportation networks, government intelligence,
              and  battlefield scenarios. The study will address how modeling and  simulation
              tools can be developed with the robustness and  reliability to handle the
              demands of emerging intelligence,  domestic, and military technology. It will
              also look at limitations  on modeling and simulation with respect to these
              increasingly   complex systems.
