Title       : Analytical Aspects of Some Non-Linear Mathematical Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9714758

Award Number: 9714758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Caffarelli caffarel@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706260    Caffarelli    The project involves free boundary problems and optimal
              transportation.  Free boundary problems arise naturally when a constitutive
              relation  or a conserved quantity (a temperature, a pressure, a density) 
              changes  discontinuously its behavior across some value of the variables under 
              consideration.  Typical examples are solid-liquid interphases,  burnt-unburnt
              mixtures in flame propagation, and flow in porous media.  Understanding of the
              geometry and stability of the solution  and its interphase is important to
              select and evaluate simulation methods,  as well as to understand the models
              themselves.  The theory of optimal transporation discusses how to transport a
              variable  x from a state S  to a state T in a least expensive fashion (or how 
              nature would  do so).  The variable x could represent goods, trainees, 
              information, or, as in the quasi-geostrophic model, optimal disposition of  air
               masses. The links of these models to non-linear partial differential 
              equations need much further exploration.      The focus is on several
              fundamental problems of nonlinear analysis in two  areas: fast and abrupt
              transitions, allocation and optimal transportation theory.  Fast and abrupt
              transitions occur in many fields.  Typical examples are  the evolution of
              solid-liquid interphases in melting or solidification, the  propagation of
              gases or fluids in porous media or the elastic to plastic  transition in  some
              materials in  continuum mechanics. In the field of  financial mathematics there
              is the threshold state of variables after which an  option is executed, a good
              is restocked, or, in short, when a "discontinuous"  decision is taken. We study
              the stability of such processes, the way to simulate them  numerically, etc.
              The second area of interest consists of the  equations that model optimal
              transportation.  This arises for  instance  when goods must be delivered from
              one set of locations (warehouses) to  another (distribution points).  Of course
              we want to do it minimizing transp ortation costs.  Not surprisingly,  the
              basic equations governing this problem reappear in meteorology (the  
              quasi-geostrophic equations of front formation), where air masses "transport" 
              themselves optimally, and in the numerical simulation of different  fluid flows
              (lubrication, bubbles in fluids, etc.).  We hope that this  approach will
              provide a new understanding of the phenomena and better  computational
              techniques.
