Title       : WGIDPO: Action-WISE Program for Encouraging Women and Girls in Science,
               Engineering, and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2000  
File        : a9714792

Award Number: 9714792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $818277             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Marks jmarks@matc.tec.oh.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evan Blumer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Kovach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sue E. McFerren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Grubbs  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Muskingum Area Tech Col
	      1555 Newark Road
	      Zanesville, OH  437012626    614/454-2501

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Action-WISE Program for Encouraging Women and Girls in  Science, Engineering,
              and Mathematics---Muskingum Area  Technical College, Muskingum College,
              Zanesville (Ohio) City  School District, and the Wilds, an international
              wildlife  research and conservation center, will collaborate in an  intensive
              and comprehensive SEM intervention program for  sixth through twelfth grade
              females.  This four-partner  project is an expansion of a pilot project begun
              two years  ago in one of the district's middle schools.    Project objectives
              include (1) expanding the numbers and  grade levels of students involved from
              seventh and eight  grade participants in one middle school to sixth through 
              twelfth grade participants district-wide, (2) strengthening  the curriculum and
              expanding the project calendar, and (3)  developing a strong web of support for
              young women with an  interest in science, engineering, and mathematics. 
              Activities will encompass the school year and extend into  separate, intensive
              summer camp sessions for each grade  level.  Key offerings of the project are
              monthly seminars  and informal  discussions with women in SEM-related 
              professions, field trips involving hands-on learning  activities, academic
              instruction in a variety of scientific  disciplines, and a mentorship program
              with females in SEM-  related professions.    The project will serve
              approximately 280 female students  annually.  Each grade level component will
              be progressively  more personalized.  Because few of the district's students 
              have had any exposure to college, every field activity will  be tied to a
              college visit.  Student participants will  represent a diverse range of
              academic ability and economic,  ethnic, and racial backgrounds.    Summer
              components will focus on environmental science  activities which will involve
              biology, chemistry, physics,  geology, and math.  Science, math, and computer
              laboratories  at both colleges, regional field sites, and the diverse  habitats
              found at the Wilds will provide exceptional  sc ientific exploration
              opportunities.  Female undergraduate  science majors at both college will serve
              as laboratory  assistants and mentors to middle school and high school 
              participants.  A graduate course will be presented annually  to district
              teachers and administrative personnel to educate  them about gender equity
              issues concerning women and girls  in science.    At a recognition ceremony
              each spring and at the end of each  of the summer sessions, student
              participants will report on  program activities, introduce video clips of field
               experience and seminars, and present individual and group  projects.  Expected
              project outcomes include removing  artificial barriers that affect females
              entering SEM field,  increasing the number of  females continuing science 
              education, and building a solid and sound program which can  be replicated in
              other school districts.
