Title       : Electroactive Polymers-Applications to Analysis, New Materials and Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9714081

Award Number: 9714081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408860             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Michael Elliott elliott@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This renewal project, supported in the Analytical and Surface  Chemistry
              Program, focusses on the synthesis and characterization  of metal containing
              polymers that exhibit novel electron transfer  and electrocatalytic properties.
               Professor Elliott and his  students at Colorado State University will pursue
              work in four  areas.  The development of electrochemical methods to directly 
              measure the flux of ions in conducting polymers, the use of  impedance
              measurements to evaluate a polypyrrole system as a  sensor for chlorocarbons,
              preparation of fixed redox gradients in  polymers and of low-work-function
              conduction properties in  polymer films for practical applications as light
              emitting  diodes, and the preparation of metal complexes in polymers that  will
              exhibit enhanced catalytic activity compared with  conventional coordination
              complexes will be pursued.    The synthesis of electroactive polymers that have
              properties  permitting their use in diverse practical areas such as chemical 
              sensors, light emitting diodes, and superior metal centered  catalysis will be
              pursued.  Professor Elliott and his students at  Colorado State University will
              employ a wide range of techniques  in both the synthetic aspects of this work
              and in the  characterization of the newly prepared polymers.  There are 
              exciting prospects for these new materials having real value in  numerous areas
              of analysis and synthesis.  New electrochemical  methods will be developed and
              a variety of established  electrochemical methods will be used in this work.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
