Title       : Code Capacity and Code Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9714557

Award Number: 9714557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249831             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver Collins collins.62@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research will analyze the performance of concatenated coding systems and
              modulation schemes operating over the additive Gaussian channel (AWGN) and
              various fading channels by examining the loss of capacity resulting from each
              of the encoding and decoding steps.  This information will then be used to
              guide the design of new coding systems.  The techniques described in this
              research allow the separate evaluation of codes and decoders and thus the
              identification of where loss of capacity occurs.  Knowledge of this capacity
              loss is important for the overall design of a communications system, e.g. for
              evaluating the benefits of inner decoders that produce information beyond the
              maximum likelihood estimate.  First a general technique for calculating the
              composite capacity of an orthogonal code and the AWGN channel in isolation has
              been developed.  Then the composite capacities of an orthogonal code, the AWGN
              channel, and various inner decoders including the decoder estimating the
              bit-by-bit probability of a one, as in turbo codes, has been developed.  The
              calculations in these examples show that the maximum likelihood decoder
              introduces a large loss in capacity.  Some of this capacity loss can be
              regained by using only slightly more complex inner decoders, e.g. a detector
              for M-ary frequency-shift-keying that outputs the two most likely frequencies
              and the probability that the ML estimate is correct gives substantially less
              degradation than one which only outputs the most likely frequency.  This
              project extends these results to other codes and other channels.  Practically
              useful results should be short codes that come close to the sphere packing
              bound for the Gaussian channel and improved conventional and parallel
              concatenated codes for fading channels. Experimental studies will be included
              in the work.
