Title       : Tolerance Graph for Tolerance Control in Process Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a9714029

Award Number: 9714029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong-Chao Zhang hzhang@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This grant provides funding for the development of a theoretical scheme for
              automated tolerance control of discrete mechanical part setup planning in
              numerically controlled (NC) machining.  The proposed tolerance control scheme
              is based on graph theory.  The features of a part are represented by means of
              vertices while the parametric and geometrical tolerances assigned among the
              features are represented by edges.  The entire design specifications of a part
              is  represented by a hyper graph or tolerance graph.  Hence, an optimal setup
              planning problem is transformed into a graph search problem.  An optimization
              algorithm will be developed based on analysis of the minimum setup errors
              according to the respective setup methods.  Characteristics of NC machining are
              incorporated within the tolerance graph.  Finally, the proposed research will
              be implemented into a computer program and will be integrated with a computer
              aided design system.      If successful, this research will yield two major
              contributions:  (1) It will establish a theoretically sound foundation and
              scientifically rigorous base for tolerance control in process planning, and (2)
              It will develop a tolerance graphing technique that will eventually replace the
              limited tolerance charting technique.  With the help of a tolerance graph,
              planning related tolerance control problems can be solved effectively.  As a
              result, precision parts could be produced at reduced cost.  The proposed
              tolerance control algorithm would provide a practical approach for process
              design and analyzing currently existing process plans.  Specifically, by using
              a tolerance graph, one can (1) select appropriate setups, locating datums, and
              operation sequences to minimize tolerance stackup, (2) calculate operational
              dimensions and tolerances for machining cuts, and (3) simultaneously deal with
              tolerances along all axes.  As an additional benefit, this research adopts a
              science-based approach to solving tolerance control problems.  Science-based
              approaches are much more easily computerized to facilitate the realization of
              computerized tolerancing.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
