Title       : Forecast Sensitivity to Regional and Global Targeting of the Initial State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9714291

Award Number: 9714291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Paegle jpaegle@met.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9714291  Paegle        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the National Science  Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration, the National  Aeronautics and Space Administration and the
              Office of Naval Research are jointly  evaluating and supporting research of
              high priority to the USWRP.        In this research, the Principal Investigator
              will investigate the relative  contributions of regional and global-scale
              initial uncertainties on model forecasting  sensitivity.  Several recent
              studies emphasize benefits of locally targeted  observations, based upon
              estimates of uncertainty growth produced by adjoint, "bred  mode", and singular
              vector analyses.  Such methods identify dynamically unstable  regions within
              which details of the local initial state may have special relevance for 
              subsequent forecast evolution.  It is unclear whether those approaches
              distinguish  forecast sensitivities due to slightly uncertain specification of
              the global-scale,  background flow.  Sample forecasts of the "superstorm" of
              12-14 March 1996  suggest that details of the upstream domain that includes the
              initial potential vorticity  maxima leading to the storm are important for a 96
              h forecast.         Such findings motivate the proposed work which will
              estimate uncertainty in   specification of the atmospheric state, and will
              quantify impact of the uncertainty  upon numerical weather prediction as a
              function of uncertainty location and scale.   The working hypothesis of the
              research is that local weather prediction by numerical  methods often depends
              more sensitively on relatively small uncertainties of the  initial global-scale
              state than upon uncertainties of the initial regional state.          Three
              separate global reanalysis products will be compared.  The differences  of
              different, equally credible atmospheric analyses prov ide a measure of current 
              uncertainty in the initial state, and will be spectrally quantified.  The
              uncertainties  thus estimated will be inserted into the initial states of a
              global variable resolution  model to determine the scale dependence of
              subsequent forecast sensitivity.   Sensitivity studies will focus on a number
              of initial states selected from Spring and  Winter conditions.  Initially
              targeted domains will also include the Pacific data void.        Successful
              completion of this research potentially will have important  implications for
              data collection strategies for operational forecasting.     ***
