Title       : CMS Workshop for the Advancement and Retention of Under- represented and
               Minority Engineering Educators: to be held September 24-26, 1997, Washington,
               DC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9714139

Award Number: 9714139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison B. Flatau   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca S. Kellogg  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Civil and Mechanical Systems Division workshop is designed  to encourage
              retention and advancement of qualified women and  underrepresented minority
              engineering educators in pursuit of  scientific and engineering challenges. The
              workshop brings  together a select group of 100 of the nation's outstanding 
              engineering educators. Participants are women or minority  engineering
              educators who essentially have been in tenure track  positions for less than
              five years, or are in the final phases of  their Ph.D. program and actively
              pursuing tenure track academic  positions. The participants are usually
              employed in teaching and  /or research positions and are actively developing
              their own  unique research programs in civil and mechanical engineering 
              disciplines. The major goals of the workshop are to foster  technical and
              intellectual exchange among Ph.D. level  underrepresented and minority
              engineers who work in the area of  civil and mechanical systems; to instill in
              its participants, the  sense of a technical community in which they can thrive
              and to  which they can contribute; and to increase participant awareness  of
              research and funding opportunities. The workshop emphasizes an  integration of
              research and education. A panel of university  deans discusses perspectives on
              reasonable career expectations  and demands, and includes an in-depth
              discussion of issues  related to tenure, teaching, research, publications,
              funding,  outreach and a rewarding personal life along the career path of  an
              engineering educator. All participants give a brief summary of  their current
              research interests, thus increasing fellow  participants' awareness of the
              diversity of related opportunities  for involvement in civil and mechanical
              systems research areas.  The workshop proceedings include research interest
              statements  from each participant, the outcome assessments, and workshop 
              recommendations                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
