Title       : Gordon Research Conference on "Electronic Materials: Chemistry, Excitations, and
               Processing," New England College, Henniker, NH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9714991

Award Number: 9714991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry P. Gillis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. George  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9714991 Storm  A Gordon Research Conference will be held July 6-11, 1997 on
              'Electronic Materials: Chemistry, Excitations, and Processing' with focus on
              chemical issues in the growth, processing, and performance of three materials
              systems--Group III Nitride Semiconductors, Organic Thin films, and Quantum
              Confinement Structures. Emphasis will be given to the role of molecular and
              collective excited states in the emission of light and in synthesis and
              processing via excited states and non-thermal pathways. New applications and
              new techniques will be explored in three special sessions; a)requirements for
              quantum materials for computing and communicating in the 21st century, b)newer
              synthetic methods, expected to have impact on electronic materials in the next
              decade, c)new and powerful optical techniques for in situ monitoring during
              growth and processing. Objectives of the Conference are: a)to stimulate
              communications among the materials communities working in these areas, b)to
              delineate the crucial role of chemistry in moving these materials systems to
              technological success,  and c)to stimulate the academic chemistry, materials
              science and engineering, and condensed matter physics communities toward
              multidisciplinary, collaborative research and education in electronic
              materials. NSF funds will be used to support participation by graduate students
              and young faculty.  There will be an opportunity to assess the field, future
              directions, and to establish ties between universities, research institutions,
              and industry.  It is expected that top scientists in the field will attend, and
              that the symposium will provide an effective forum to discuss and delineate
              critical scientific issues. %%%  An evaluation of chemical issues in the
              growth, processing, and performance of the materials systems--Group III Nitride
              Semiconductors, Organic Thin films, and Quantum Confinement Structures,
              especially critical materials and device related research areas, and the
              relationship of materials research to device fabric ation along with current
              assessments of the most important developments in this field will be of great
              value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of materials in computing,
              data processing, and communications.    ***
