Title       : Enabling Future Multimedia Information Systems to Leverage Next-Generation
               Networking Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9714591

Award Number: 9714591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kien A. Hua kienhua@cs.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop a suite of techniques to allow  
              video distribution at low cost.  We explore a novel version of multicast  
              called Dynamic Multicast, a clever way to deliver videos to homes called  
              2-Phase Service Model, and an efficient technique for disseminating videos  on
              demand over satellites called Skyscraper Broadcasting.        - Dynamic
              Multicast is designed to address the network-I/O bottleneck which       hinders
              the server from taking full advantage of the network capacity.        With this
              technique, the system is able to support many more simultaneous      
              multicasts than the server is physically capable of.        - Skyscraper is
              designed to exploit the unique broadcast capability of       satellites.  In
              this environment, since the bandwidth requirement is       proportional to the
              number of videos, not the number of users, we have a       very scalable
              technology.  In terms of costs, the fact that this approach      requires
              essentially no wiring makes it very appealing.        - The third technique,
              2-Phase Service Model, is intended for environments       where the video
              playback requires a higher bit rate than the physical       medium can sustain.
               Home users can benefit from this technology.  It      offers a very effective
              environment for searching high-resolution video      libraries from home.     
              To demonstrate the feasibility of these ideas, we implement three  
              video-on-demand systems.  We also conduct experiments to assess the 
              performance  of these techniques using real video data.    For more information
              on this project, please visit the web page at  
              http://www.dsg.cs.ucf.edu/NSF/nsf.html.
