Title       : Intelligent Computer-Based Learning Environments for Undergraduate Engineering
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9156244

Award Number: 9156244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79757              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Bourne john.bourne@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur J. Brodersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              This project builds on two years of investigation concerned                    
              with creation of laboratory learning environments for                          
              undergraduate engineering education.  The general theme is how                 
              to improve undergraduate engineering laboratory education by                   
              creating visually-oriented learning environments that combine                  
              computer-based intelligent tutoring systems, interactive                       
              visualization systems and laboratory instrumentation.  The                     
              hypothesized pedagogical gain is the enhanced understanding                    
              that students should receive from interactive computer                         
              visualization of theoretical concepts that are directly linked                 
              to the same information provided by laboratory instrumentation.                
              The principal practical benefit of the project is the creation                 
              of builder tools that permit instructors to rapidly construct                  
              new laboratory curricula in significantly reduced time on                      
              commonly available computer hardware.  First, the capabilities                 
              of the current tutoring systems will be expanded by combining                  
              concept visualization and intelligent tutorial systems with                    
              laboratory instrumentation.  Second, curriculum building tools,                
              student modeling methodologies, and seamless integration of                    
              common PC/MAC tools into the systems will be explored.  Third,                 
              specific laboratories will be implemented and tested to                        
              demonstrate the utility of the tools constructed.  Fourth,                     
              electronic dissemination of the tutorials will be implemented.                 
              The long-term objective of this proposed project is to                         
              integrate new software methods, laboratory instrumentation, and                
              intelligent tutoring system concepts to create new learning                    
              environments for undergraduate engineering laboratories.
