Title       : Micro Statistics in Signal Decomposition and the Optimal Filtering Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1991   
File        : a9020667

Award Number: 9020667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gonzalo R. Arce arce@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Optimal Filtering is a statistical signal processing problem of                
              major engineering importance.  Historically, the most frequently               
              used signal processing tools have been linear in nature, but                   
              despite rich linear systems theories, many signal processing                   
              problems have not been satisfactorily addressed through the use of             
              linear schemes.  This research aims at the theoretical development             
              of a large class of non-linear filters which are based in                      
              combination of either the observation vector, the sorted                       
              observation vector, or in general a non-linear transformation of               
              the observation vector.  Thus, we achieve non-linear filter                    
              response characteristics but with the machinery of linear systems              
              theory available for their optimization and design.  The optimal               
              solution requires the statistical characterization of the set of               
              decomposed signals (micro-statistics).  The filtering problem                  
              reduces to a set of filters operating on the decomposed signals                
              (micro-statistic filters) where the output is a weighted sum of the            
              decomposed filtered signals.  In this work, a theory will be                   
              developed for robust micro-statistic filters in which linear                   
              operations are executed in a sorted observation vector.  For                   
              environments with unknown or non-stationary characteristics, we                
              develop adaptive micro-statistic filters and address issues such               
              as convergence, lattice structures, fast algorithms, and                       
              complexity.
