Title       : Ecology of Intercontinental Avian Migrants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1991     
File        : a9020530

Award Number: 9020530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Moore Frank.Moore@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Long-distance migration is an integral part of the life                   
              history of many animals, including over half of all North                      
              American landbirds.  The mortality associated with migration is                
              substantial, and yearling migrants suffer greater mortality than               
              adult individuals.  This research project compares the behavioral              
              ecology of yearling and adult Neotropical landbird migrants and                
              examines the consequences of age in relation to how migrants meet              
              the energy demands of migration.  Many of the adaptations that                 
              have evolved in association with long-distance migration are                   
              critical when birds must cross geographic barriers.  Hence, the                
              best place and time to study the stopover ecology of Neotropical               
              landbird migrants is immediately before or after they cross the                
              Gulf of Mexico.  Study sites along the northern Gulf coast                     
              provide a unique opportunity to work with populations of                       
              migratory species.                                                             
                   Habitat loss is one of the most critical ecological                       
              problems associated with global environmental change.  The degree              
              and timing of these large-scale effects can have significant                   
              ecological repercussions that are hard to measure unless one can               
              assess each stage of a species' life cycle.  Dr Moore's research               
              into the critical stopover stage promises new insight into                     
              species-level effects of higher-order ecological dynamics.                     
                   Decline in populations of Neotropical landbird migrants is a              
              serious conservation problem; one linked to habitat loss on the                
              wintering grounds and fragmentation of forested breeding habitat.              
              The status of migrant populations is also affected by the                      
              availability of suitable stopover habitat and the response of                  
              migrants to en route events.  Consequently, factors associated                 
              with the stopover biology of migrants must figure in any analysis              
              of population change and in the development of a comprehensive                 
              conservation "strategy" for Neotropical landbird migrants.  The                
              current research project combines observational and experimental               
              studies to compare stopover biology of yearling and adult birds                
              and should contribute measurably to the conservation of                        
              Neotropical landbird migrants.
