Title       : The Genetic Basis of Alternative Maternal Tactics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1991   
File        : a9020014

Award Number: 9020014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Tallamy dtallamy@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is designed to examine the degree to which the               
              expression of several alternative maternal behaviors exhibited by              
              Gargaphia solani, is under genetic control.  It is founded upon                
              the fact that within the same animal population, behaviors with                
              similar functions are often so different that one response can be              
              considered a distinct alternative to other responses.  The                     
              factors determining whether behavioral alternatives stem from                  
              genetic or environmental differences among individuals are                     
              understood in only a few cases.  Gargaphia  provides a model                   
              system with which to examine behavioral alternatives because of                
              the unusual maternal behaviors exhibited by these organisms:                   
              within a single populaton females either guard their offspring                 
              from predators, abandon their eggs after laying, or leave their                
              eggs to the care and protection of another female.  Furthermore,               
              egg recipients either aggressively repel egg donors or passively               
              accept their eggs.  The existence of these and other maternal                  
              options in G. solani provides an opportunity to characterize the               
              extent to which the expression of each alternative is regulated                
              by genes, by environmental conditions, or by some interaction                  
              between the two.  This project will examine the genetic component              
              of behavioral alternatives associated with egg dumping and                     
              antipredator aggression by means of half-sib analyses, intra-and               
              interpopulation comparisons, and artificial selection.                         
              Integration of this information will provide a valuable expansion              
              of the experimental base upon which theories concerning the                    
              evolution, mechanisms, and ecology of alternative behavioral                   
              tactics can be tested.
