Title       : Collaborative Research: A New Paleogene Fauna from the Chilean Andes: A Critical
               Interval in South American Mammalian History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9020059

Award Number: 9020059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102097             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Norell norell@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm C. McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Novacek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Collaborative research will be conducted between Andre Wyss               
              (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Mark Norell                      
              (American Museum of Natural History, NY).                                      
                   Isolated from other continents for nearly all of the                      
              Cenozoic, there developed in South America a highly peculiar and               
              endemic land mammal fauna that has captured the interest of                    
              evolutionary biologists and paleontologists for more than a                    
              century.  An extraordinary new fauna from the Andes of central                 
              Chile falls within what previously represented the most poorly                 
              known span of the South American Tertiary record, an                           
              approximately 15 million year post-Mustersan (middle Eocene),                  
              pre-Deseadan (?late Oligocene) interval.  As this span coincides               
              with a major faunal transition, it is crucial to the                           
              understanding of several long-standing problems of phylogenetic                
              relationship among the major groups of indigenous South American               
              fossil mammals.  The new fauna thus marks the first well                       
              represented fauna clarifying the Eocene-Oligocene transition                   
              from the continent.                                                            
                   In addition to being of major paleobiologic importance, the               
              new fauna bears significantly on interpretation of the                         
              stratigraphy and tectonic history in a very broad segment of the               
              central Andes.                                                                 
                   This study has three points of focus.  The first involves a               
              continued vigorous field collection and reconnaissance program.                
              The second concerns description of this diverse, well preserved,               
              and highly unexpected fossil assemblage, and placement of its                  
              constituents into a rigorous phylogenetic framework.  The third                
              consists of the discovery's placement into a highly integrated                 
              geochronologic context.  To that end, biochronologic,                          
              magnetostratigraphic, and radioisotopic methods will be employed.
