Title       : Systematics, Floral Structure and Reproductive Biology of Mid-Cretaceous
               Magnoliid Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9020237

Award Number: 9020237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Crane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The flowering plants comprise the largest group of plants,                
              Angiospermae with approximately 500,000 species.  In addition to               
              sheer diversity, the angiosperms are of tremendous economic                    
              importance to humans.  Angiosperms are also major elements of many             
              or most terrestrial ecosystems, and dominate all non-coniferous                
              terrestrial biomes.  Understandably, botanists have been interested            
              in developing models and inferences concerning the origin and                  
              radiation of this highly significant group.  Within the past two               
              decades techniques (molecular systematics and cladistics) have                 
              become available to permit rigorous scientific inquiry into the                
              problem of the origin of the flowering plants and phylogenetic                 
              models of the group.  Accordingly hypotheses of phylogenetic                   
              relationships are now available for the base of the angiosperm                 
              tree.                                                                          
                   The origin and primary radiation of the angiosperms was in the            
              Cretaceous; however, the fossil records from the Cretaceous are                
              relatively poor.  Crane proposes to examine the diversity of fossil            
              angiosperms in Cretaceous deposits in what is now the eastern                  
              United States and Portugal.  These samples include flowers, pollen,            
              fruits, and seed, all of which are of diagnostic utility in                    
              understanding and classifying flowering plants.  He intends to                 
              explore relationships among the fossil forms by integrating them               
              into the current models of relationships and to test those models.             
              Based on these findings, he proposes to explore the paleoecology               
              and and pollination of the earliest angiosperms.  New models of                
              relationships will be developed as appropriate.  Examination of the            
              specimens, which are already in collections, will be via electron              
              and light microscopy.                                                          
                   The described research will have a salutary effect on our                 
              understanding of the angiosperms and their evolutionary history.               
              This, in turn, should stimulate additional research using molecular            
              and cladistic approaches.
