Title       : Distillation Dynamics: Propagation and Fate of Disturbancesin Multicomponent
               Fractionation Columns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1992   
File        : a9020749

Award Number: 9020749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Friedrich G. Helfferich   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ying-Long Hwang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The project aims at developing a phenomenological model for                    
              describing distillation-column dynamics for multicomponent                     
              systems.  For improving practical design and control of                        
              fractionation columns the model appropriately describes the                    
              critical nonlinear and distributed nature of column dynamics                   
              with a mathematical framework which is concise enough for on-                  
              line control (e.g. feed forward controllers), control system                   
              analysis, and column design.  The ultimate goal is to make                     
              distillation columns operable at lower reflux ratios, and thus                 
              to lower energy consumption.  Better fundamental understanding                 
              of column dynamics will make it possible to upgrade existing                   
              columns and design new ones which are less sensitive to                        
              disturbances.  The research approach is based on the                           
              multicomponent coherence theory of simpler countercurrent                      
              separation processes such as fixed-bed chromatography theory.                  
              The theory is expanded by including the dynamics of reflux and                 
              reboil, interaction between two or more sections, and heat                     
              effects.  The theory and the dynamic model are tested by                       
              comparison with experimental results.  Experiments are carried                 
              out in an industrial laboratory with a pilot-plant-scale,                      
              computer controlled distillation column properly equipped with                 
              a fast gas chromatography system for on-line composition                       
              anonitoring.
