Title       : Structural Requirements for Protein Membrane Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1993     
File        : a9020759

Award Number: 9020759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross E. Dalbey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 This project addresses the problem of how the information                   
              contained in the amino acid sequence of a secreted or a membrane               
              protein determines the precise topology of insertion into or                   
              through the membrane.  This is a fundamental problem in cell                   
              biology.  Positively charged residues, often found located near                
              the boundaries of transmembrane segments of proteins, appear to                
              be involved in specifying the orientation of membrane proteins.                
              This proposal examines in detail to what extent positively                     
              charged residues play a part in this process and the mechanism by              
              which proteins obtain their unique membrane topology in                        
              Escherischia coli.  The aims of the proposal are: 1, to determine              
              whether inner membrane proteins, like other exported proteins in               
              E. coli, require molecular chaperones for their membrane                       
              assembly; 2, to define genetically the parts of the proteins that              
              participate in their membrane assembly; 3, to evaluate the                     
              mechanisms of membrane insertion for simple and complex membrane               
              proteins; 4, to establish the general role of positively charged               
              domains in protein orientation; and 5, to determine how                        
              positively charged residues exert their effect on topology.  This              
              work will be done with the E. coli leader peptidase, subunit H of              
              the photosynthetic reaction center, procoat, lac permease, and                 
              outer membrane protein A. A variety of approaches will be used,                
              including in vivo and in vitro techniques.  Protease mapping and               
              biochemical methods will determine how positive charges exert                  
              their effect on protein topology.                                              
                                                                                             
              These studies in protein membrane assembly will eventually help                
              answer some of the fundamental questions in cellular biology                   
              concerning protein compartmentalization.
