Title       : Workshop on Open Lexical and Textual Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1990  
File        : a9020708

Award Number: 9020708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Su-Shing Chen                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc for Computa Linguis
	      75 Paterson St.
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/342-9100

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This workshop will evaluate the need for computational                         
              dictionaries, the value of large text databases in creating them,              
              and the role of cooperative efforts in this area.  Both                        
              commercial and scientific interests will be considered.  By                    
              "computational dictionaries" We encompass databases containing                 
              information about the form, pronunciation, meaning and usage of                
              words and their collocations.  Such databases are not merely                   
              processed versions of conventional dictionaries.  Examples range               
              from a relation among company names, and product types; to a                   
              relation among verbs, derived nominals, and their co-occurence                 
              probabilities with various argument structures.  We believe that               
              the quality of computer programs for manipulating natural                      
              language depends crucially on the quality of such word-indexed                 
              databases, and that theories of the representation and                         
              manipulation of lexical information are central to scientific                  
              theories of language structure and language use.  We also believe              
              that some crucial kinds of lexical information can best be                     
              discovered by computer processing of very large bodies of text.                
              Progress in research and in its commercial exploitation is now                 
              hindered by the unavailability of suitable computational                       
              dictionaries, and of generally-available text databases that are               
              large enough to help construct them.  This workshop will try to                
              arrive at a consensus about what lexical and textual resources                 
              are most needed, what mix of co-operative and individual efforts               
              is appropriate to generate them, and what organizational                       
              structure is appropriate to coordinate efforts and distribute                  
              results.  It will produce a report reflecting the consensus of                 
              the participants.
