Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Ferroelectric Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1993    
File        : a9020658

Award Number: 9020658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Walba walba@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Noel A. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9162,9239,
Abstract    :
              With support from both the Organic Dynamics Program, Division                  
              of Chemistry and the Solid State Chemistry and Polymers                        
              Program, Division of Materials Research, Dr. Walba will study                  
              the design, synthesis, and characterization of ferroelectric                   
              liquid crystals (FLC), a new class of thermodynamically stable,                
              ordered organic materials. The targets of the synthetic effort                 
              are designed to possess useful properties for photonic devices,                
              e.g., fast-switching, high resolution and high contrast FLC                    
              light valves and ultrafast nonlinear optical devices. Specific                 
              projects include the following: (i) synthesis of chiral                        
              fluorinated alkylbenzoates and atropisomeric FLCs and                          
              evaluation of their FLC properties; (ii) synthesis and evalua-                 
              tion of the nonlinear optical properties of new FLC films;                     
              (iii) empirical force field modelling of FLC components (i.e.,                 
              computerization of the binding site model); (iv) polarization-                 
              sensitive IR spectroscopic studies of the FLC self assembly in                 
              thin films.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              While the powerful techniques of regio- and sterocontrolled                    
              organic synthesis and conformational analysis give considerable                
              control over the constitution and spatial relationships between                
              atoms in organic molecules, the directed design of new                         
              materials (i.e., molecular aggregates) with specific geometric                 
              relationships between functional arrays of atoms is an exciting                
              frontier in chemistry. An important goal of this project takes                 
              advantage of the self-assembly that occurs in ferroelectric                    
              liquid crystals (FLCs) to create in a controlled and general                   
              manner organic materials that possess thermodynamically stable                 
              polar order. With this objective in mind, a simple                             
              stereochemical model for the molecular level origins of the                    
              polar order that occurs in FLCs is developed and tested via a                  
              program of research that focusses upon the design,                             
              synthesis, and characterization of new FLC materials.
