Title       : Unmanned Science Research Aircraft
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1991      
File        : a9020068

Award Number: 9020068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327578             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Langford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aurora Flight Sci Corp
	      9950 Wakeman Drive
	      Manassas, VA  22111    703/369-3633

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1524,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides funds for final assembly of a proof-of-               
              concept demonstrator unmanned research aircraft and preparation                
              for initial flight testing.  The award is the fourth program                   
              element in a five program element in a five program element                    
              project to design, build, test and fly an unmanned research                    
              aircraft.  The previously completed program elements (the design               
              and construction of the aircraft components) were funded by                    
              Aurora Flight Science, NASA and NSF.  NASA anticipates it will                 
              fund the fifth element (flight testing) of the program.                        
                   The promise of significant capability enhancements                        
              associated with an unmanned, high altitude, long duration, low                 
              Reynolds number, lightweight aircraft has been enthusiastically                
              received within the scientific community.  A variety of missions               
              for such an aircraft have been proposed.  An incomplete list                   
              includes:  stratospheric ozone chemistry research;  exploring the              
              impact of SST emissions on the stratosphere;  measuring the                    
              earth's radiation budget;  determining sources and sinks of CO2                
              and CH4;  studying stratosphere-troposphere exchange; and                      
              hurricane research.  Some of these missions require extremely                  
              high altitude capability (up to 30km), while others require                    
              platforms with less altitude capability but longer durations than              
              required for the stratospheric ozone mission.  A single aircraft               
              designs is not planned to accomplish all the missions mentioned                
              above.  However, aircraft designs necessary to carry out these                 
              missions will be derived from a common technology base that is to              
              be funded, in part, under this project.  At the center of the                  
              design strategy is a basic aircraft, manned Perseus, that will                 
              serve as a proof-of-concept for the scientific unmanned aircraft.              
                   This is a high risk project with a tremendous potential for               
              significantly expanding the time and space domain of in situ                   
              atmospheric observations that could be collected in the                        
              future.***//
