Title       : Systematics and Zoogeography of Aquatic Hemiptera of New Guinea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9020442

Award Number: 9020442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John R. Gold                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87146              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Polhemus   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan A. Polhemus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bernice P Bishop Museum
	      1525 Bernice Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968172704    808/847-3511

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Aquatic Hemiptera are a worldwide group with a relatively                 
              mature taxonomy, which permits use in addressing questions of                  
              evolution and zoogeography.  Although richly represented in all                
              tropical regions, they attain their greatest diversity in the                  
              Malay Archipelago between Asia and Australia, where they have                  
              radiated to produce numerous locally endemic species.  Within                  
              this archipelago, the island of New Guinea is of particular                    
              zoogeographical interest due to its composite geological and                   
              biological nature.  The island was formed through tectonic                     
              suturing of disparate parts, essentially the opposite of                       
              fragmentation and vicariance, and the fauna is derived from both               
              temperate Gondwanian and tropical Laurasian sources.  As a                     
              result, its faunal relationships have been difficult to depict on              
              simple dichotomously branching cladograms.  The intention is to                
              address this problem by combining classical cladistic                          
              biogeography with a relatively new method involving cladogram                  
              character analysis to investigate the composite nature and                     
              relationships of the Papuan fauna.                                             
                                                                                             
                   The proposed study will be divided into five separate phases              
              that form a logical continuum:  Faunal survey, systematic                      
              revisions, character analysis, phylogenetic analyses, and                      
              zoogeographical hypothesis testing.  During the granting period,               
              the plan is to complete revisions and cladistic analyses of 19                 
              genera in 4 families, containing a total of approximately 300                  
              species.  These taxonomic works will concentrate on groups that                
              are most informative from a biogeographical standpoint, and will               
              use extensive recent collections from New Guinea combined with                 
              collections from other museums.  The zoogeographical analysis                  
              will rely on both previously published studies and the new                     
              phylogenies to be generated during the course of this project.                 
              Several  explicit zoogeographical hypotheses will be tested                    
              regarding the relationship of New Guinea to Australia, the                     
              Philippines, New Caledonia, and the central Malay Archipelago.                 
                                                                                             
                   The basic data on systematics and distribution generated by               
              this study will be of use to scientists interested in taxonomy,                
              biodiversity and conservation.  The comparison of methodological               
              approaches will provide new insights into the analysis of                      
              zoogeographical data, and the zoogeographical conclusions will be              
              of interest to those concerned with faunal interchange and                     
              distribution in areas of tectonic plate collision.  Finally, the               
              results will provide useful comparative information for                        
              geologists studying the tectonic evolution of the Malay                        
              Archipelago.***
