Title       : Studies of Globular Cluster Cusps, Mass Functions, and Binary Star Frequencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1991      
File        : a9020685

Award Number: 9020685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlton P. Pryor pryor@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore B. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Carlton Pryor and Theodore Williams at Rutgers University will            
              carry out a set of observations to study processes in globular                 
              clusters of stars.  They will determine the mass functions of stars            
              and the frequency of binary stars in specifically chosen clusters              
              for comparison to a more average population of clusters.  The mass             
              functions will be studied by measuring mass-to-light ratios, and               
              binaries will be discovered through surveys for stars with variable            
              radial velocities.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The stars in globular clusters represent one of our best samples               
              of the early generations of stars in our Galaxy.  We study them to             
              better understand more distant old stellar populations and because             
              they are among our few clues to conditions during the formation of             
              the Galaxy.  Globular clusters are also an excellent laboratory for            
              studying stellar dynamics.  Significant dynamical evolution in the             
              cluster has already taken place.  This research will address three             
              questions about globular clusters.  What is the frequency and                  
              spatial distribution of primordial binary stars?  Has dynamical                
              evolution modified the mass function in low-concentration clusters?            
              How common are steep increases of the velocity dispersion in the               
              cusps of clusters?
