Title       : Cenozoic Vertebrate Paleontology and Biogeography of the West Indies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9020002

Award Number: 9020002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross D. E. MacPhee macphee@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to evaluate competing models of                       
              biogeography of freshwater fishes and land vertebrates in the                  
              Caribbean islands.  Its novel aspect is that it will emphasize data            
              from two sources that are critical to the problem, but which have              
              been neglected:  the Tertiary fossil record and the island of Cuba.            
              The investigators' recent successes in discovering Tertiary                    
              vertebrates in the West Indies demonstrate that a significant and              
              relevant fossil record can be recovered.  Cuba is of particular                
              importance because this island constitutes one-third of the land               
              surface of the Antilles, yet its biota is known in only a                      
              rudimentary way.                                                               
              To maximize results, the investigators will prospect for fossils               
              in both Quaternary and Tertiary contexts in Hispaniola and Cuba.               
              Major goals are (1) to increase sample sizes of poorly known taxa              
              and to prospect for heretofore unknown taxa; (2) to begin a program            
              of dating to document when the Quaternary fauna of large animals               
              went extinct; (3) to establish the nature of pre-Quaternary                    
              biodiversity in the Greater Antilles; (4) to utilize ancient                   
              biodiversity as a means for evaluating the comparative importance              
              of dispersal and vicariance (i.e., plate tectonic events) in                   
              formation of the Antillean fauna; and (5) to develop human                     
              resources in the Dominican Republic in order to enhance local                  
              ability to study and conserve biodiversity.  These goals are                   
              complementary to the investigators' general program of                         
              investigating causes and consequences of reduction in biodiversity             
              on island and in islandlike settings.
