Title       : The Adaptive Significance of Life Cycle Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1992        
File        : a9020417

Award Number: 9020417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99385              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank C. Rohwer frohwer@.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana State U Agri Ctr
	      PO Box 25055
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708945055    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Practically all plants and animals show seasonal breeding,                
              wherein young are produced at defined periods of the year.  Much               
              is known about the physiology that initiates seasonal                          
              reproduction, but relatively little is known about the ecological              
              forces that cause animals to restrict breeding to a particular                 
              time of the year.  It has long been assumed that animals time                  
              production of young so that they meet a favorable environment for              
              growth and survival.  Information on a wide variety of birds,                  
              however, suggest that young produced early in the season have                  
              substantially greater success than young produced later in the                 
              season.  This calls to question the traditional view that                      
              breeding seasons for birds are timed so that young hatch at the                
              optimal time of the year.  In particular, why production of young              
              does not occur earlier in the season is of interest. This                      
              research is designed to answer that question by altering the date              
              of hatch in two colonial waterbirds, Herring Gulls and Forster's               
              Terns.  To interpret experiments that alter hatch dates, the                   
              effects of reduced incubation periods must be understood.                      
              Information on the influence of shortened incubation can be of                 
              immediate value to conservation biologists and managers working                
              on threatened birds.  Colonial waterbirds are a particularly                   
              vulnerable group because coastal islands are one of their                      
              preferred nesting habitats, yet these are favored sites for human              
              recreation and development.  Egg manipulations that shorten                    
              incubation periods and reduce a vulnerable phase of the nesting                
              cycle are one form of intensive management that have great                     
              potential for  increasing production from wild populations.
