Title       : RUI: Flagellar Apparatus Structure and Phylogeny in the Colonial Volvocales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1991      
File        : a9020013

Award Number: 9020013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold J. Hoops hoops@uno.cc.geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   The flagellar apparatus structure of the colonial Volvocales              
              has turned out to be unexpectedly diverse.  This diversity is                  
              especially noteworthy in view of the evidence that members of                  
              this group have evolved from a Chlamydomonas-like ancestor with                
              a "typical" chlorophycean flagellar apparatus.  The differences                
              in flagellar structure can be hypothesized to result from either:              
              a) independent transitions from the unicellular to the colonial                
              habit, or b) unusual plasticity in flagellar apparatus structure.              
              We cannot yet discriminate between these hypotheses because of                 
              the paucity of species examined.                                               
                   This project will study additional taxa of less uncertain                 
              affinities by detailed flagellar apparatus reconstruction at the               
              ultrastructural level, and by surveys of rootlet and flagellar                 
              positioning with immunofluorescence using a monoclonal antibody                
              that recognized stable microtubules.  In addition, correlation                 
              of structure of the flagellar apparatus with flagellar                         
              functioning will be continued to understand better the effects of              
              possible selection pressures on flagellar apparatus structure.                 
                   These studies will contribute to understanding of the                     
              phylogenetic relationships among algae in the "volvocene line."                
              In addition, they will give information on the evolutionary                    
              stability of the flagellar apparatus characters; this is                       
              especially important because the structure of the flagellar                    
              apparatus is being used increasingly in systematic studies of                  
              algae and protozoa at all levels.
