Title       : Morphogenesis of Bacteriophage T4
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1992  
File        : a9020478

Award Number: 9020478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick A. Eiserling frede@college.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              During the past three years of NSF support, progress was made in               
              understanding the regulation of shape and size in virus assembly               
              using bacteriophage T4.  Studies on head length regulation have                
              shown that the DNA inside the virus is selected for packaging at               
              specific lengths that can be interpreted by reference to                       
              icosahedral surface lattice theory.  DNA packaging in T4 is                    
              therefore dependent on the design principles used by the capsid in             
              setting its length parameters.  Use of pulsed-field electrophoresis            
              of DNA has provided the highest resolution yet for the separation              
              of T4 DNA molecules.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The new work proposed here will focus on how the measuring system              
              that determines DNA packaging operates.  The head of phage T4 is               
              elongated, not icosahedral as for most viruses.  Mutations in the              
              internal protein core or scaffold proteins all cause the head to               
              revert to its icosahedral form.  All mutations that caused                     
              elongated heads (called giants) are located in the gene coding for             
              the virus coat protein (gp 23).  We will test the idea that gp 23              
              alone controls head elongation using cloned genes for both the                 
              scaffold and the coat protein in expression vectors, site-directed             
              deletions and mutagenesis, and molecular structure determination.              
              Purified gp23 will be subjected to crystallization conditions for              
              x-ray structure determination.  Of the four models for T4 head                 
              length determination that have been proposed, it is believed two               
              can be eliminated (the simple template and the kinetic models).                
              This will now extend and confirm preliminary data that suggest that            
              length is controlled by a combination of a two-component protein               
              vernier mechanism and stabilization of accumulated strain at the               
              icosahedral vertices.  Together, the proposed experiments will help            
              substantially in understanding of the mechanisms of shape and size             
              control, and DNA packaging, at the subcellular level.
