Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Thigmotropic Differentiation: Promoters and Transacting
               Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1991     
File        : a9020578

Award Number: 9020578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srirama M. Bhairi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Staples  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The development of specialized infection structures including                  
              appressoria is a prerequisite for infection of plants by several               
              pathogenic fungi.  An appressorium is formed by the differentiation            
              of a single-cell germ tube.  Differentiation is induced by a                   
              thigomotropic (touch) stimulus.  In the bean rust fungus, Uromyces             
              appendiculatus, induction of differentiation requires contact with             
              a specific topography of a physical surface such as a collodion                
              membrane impregnated with oil or a 0.5 micrometer ridge on a                   
              plastic surface which resembles the surface of a host plant leaf.              
              The over-all goal of this research is to understand how the touch              
              stimulus initiates developmental events.  Preliminary results have             
              shown that the touch stimulus induces mitosis and expression of six            
              differentiation-specific genes.  Since it is difficult to                      
              characterize directly the "receptor" for the touch stimulus, the               
              strategy has been to trace the steps of the signal transduction                
              pathway backward, beginning from the documented effects of the                 
              stimulus, e.g. mitosis and specific gene-expression.  As a first               
              step, using polyclonal antibodies against the yeast cdc2 kinase,               
              induction of a cdc2-like protein has been observed in                          
              differentiated germlings.  On western blots, this protein is not               
              detectable in undifferentiated germlings.  The rust homologue of               
              the cdc2 gene will be cloned and the temporal expression of mRNA               
              for the protein will be studied.  Since many cell cycle specific               
              genes are regulated at the transcriptional level, the further goals            
              of this project will be to identify trans-acting factors that bind             
              to the promoter region of the gene.  Further goals are to                      
              characterize the touch-specific gene, INF88, and localize the                  
              encoded protein in vivo.  The sequence, CCGCGTTAA, has been                    
              identified about 300 bp from the transcription site(s) of INF24.               
              This sequence is very similar to the sequence, ACGCGTTAA, present              
              in several cell cycle specific genes including the thymidylate                 
              synthase (cdc21) gene in yeast.  Starting from a restriction                   
              fragment containing this sequence, trans-acting factors binding to             
              this region will be sought.  Identification and characterization               
              of these factors should reveal other components of the signal                  
              transduction pathway.  Finally, to gain further insight into the               
              function of the protein encoded by another differentiation-specific            
              gene, INF24, the protein will be isolated from the differentiated              
              germlings and its biochemcial and biophysical properties studied.              
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will further our understanding of how             
              a touch stimulus initiates the developmental changes that allow                
              this fungus to invade its plant host.
