Title       : Injection of Solutes into Sieve Tubes via Severed Aphid Stylets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1990    
File        : a9020546

Award Number: 9020546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce L. Umminger                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15114              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald B. Fisher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Phloem is the conducting system for distribution of photosynthetic             
              assimilates in vascular plants and also a pathway by which systemic            
              viral infection can be spread.  The movement of solutes out of phloem          
              conducting cells is a crucial regulation point for the distribution of         
              phloem-mobile substances in the plant.  Little is known, however, about        
              the mechanisms or controls involved.  An experimental approach to              
              understanding these mechanisms would be to introduce labelled compounds        
              that have a range of solute sizes and chemical structures into the             
              phloem and follow the movement of these compounds.  However, this has          
              been precluded because the phloem cells are pressurized and present            
              means of introducing material into the phloem also produces significant        
              artifacts.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              An aphid naturally removes sugars from phloem by selectively inserting         
              a stylet into the conducting cell.  The exploratory work proposed here         
              would attempt to overcome the problem of introduced artifacts by               
              developing a method for solute injection directly into the phloem              
              conducting cells via severed aphid stylets, an approach suggested by           
              earlier measurements of turgor pressure in phloem conducting cells.            
              An injection system will be constructed that will utilize thermal              
              expansion to generate pressure.  Precise pressure control in this              
              injection system should be possible with a precisely-regulated                 
              thermoelectric device that has a pressure transducer incorporated into         
              the injector.  Development of this system should allow injection of            
              tracer material into phloem cells by a slight and precisely controlled         
              over pressurization.
