Title       : Politics, Power and Public Administration in Urban Mexico: The Experience and
               Future Opposition Parties in Government
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1991     
File        : a9020042

Award Number: 9020042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 1,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1425               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria E. Rodriguez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Numerous formerly authoritarian regimes appear to be undergoing                
              transitions to democratic government.  The process of                          
              democratization, however, is highly diverse.  Just as there are                
              many different types of authoritarian regimes and different types              
              of democracies, there are many different paths from                            
              authoritarianism to democracy.  This award supports research on the            
              development of opposition parties in formerly one party political              
              systems.  It does so through intensive field studies of the                    
              development of opposition parties in Mexico.                                   
                                                                                             
              Specifically, this research uses interviews with urban political               
              elites to examine the nature and exercise of political power in                
              Mexico, to assess the effectiveness of emergent opposition parties             
              in responding to the challenges of exercising local political                  
              power, and to assess the viability of ongoing democratization                  
              processes in Mexico.  Although focussed on Mexico, the results of              
              this research should have broader implications for the transition              
              to democracy of other non-communist, one party political systems.              
                                                                                             
              When completed, this project should contribute to our understanding            
              not only of the nature and viability of the democratization process            
              in Mexico but to the prospects more generally for developing                   
              opposition parties in one party states.
