Title       : Stability and Mechanism of Action of the Catalytic Subunit of Aspartate
               Transcarbamoylase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1992   
File        : a9020605

Award Number: 9020605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard K. Schachman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              When highly active catalytic (C) subunits isolated from                        
              Escherichia coli aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase) interact                 
              with regulatory subunits to form intact ATCase molecules,                      
              composed of 6 catalytic and 6 regulatory polypeptide chains,                   
              there are striking changes in the C subunits leading to a                      
              dramatic decrease in enzyme activity.  Moreover, C subunits in                 
              the assembled complex undergo further extensive changes upon the               
              addition of substrates, leading a more active enzyme.  What are                
              the structural and catalytic features which endow C trimers with               
              these special properties thereby causing the C trimer to differ                
              markedly from most oligomeric enzymes?  Knowledge of the                       
              stability and possible fluctuations in structure would be                      
              invaluable.  What is the role of the long helix connecting the N-              
              terminal and C-terminal domains, each composed about 140 amino                 
              acids?  What is the significance of shared active sites in the C               
              trimer requiring joint participation of amino acid residues from               
              adjacent chains?   What role do interchain salt-links play in                  
              stabilizing C trimers and what is the role of distinct domains?                
              What is the catalytic mechanism?  Answering these questions                    
              requires many different mutant forms constructed by site-directed              
              mutagenesis, determining the role of specific amino acids crucial              
              for catalytic activity and correct folding of the chains, using                
              NMR spectroscopy to measure pK's of residues implicated in                     
              catalysis, analyzing the pattern of activity over a broad pH                   
              range to evaluate acid-base catalysis, studying isotope effects                
              to elucidate the catalytic mechanism, and studying binding of                  
              transition state analog inhibitors.
