Title       : Children's Spelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9020956

Award Number: 9020956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99727              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca A. Treiman rtreiman@sun.science.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Over the past 20 years or so, there has been great interest in                 
              how children learn to read and write and the kinds of                          
              difficulties they face.  Although a great deal of research has                 
              been done on reading, writing and spelling have been somewhat                  
              neglected.  This research fills that gap by studying how children              
              learn to spell in English.  This research focuses on normal                    
              kindergarten and first grade children, children who are just                   
              beginning to learn how the English writing system works.                       
                                                                                             
              Treiman has previously studied the spellings that were produced                
              by a group of first grade children in their everyday classroom                 
              work.  The results show that spelling is not purely a visual                   
              process, as is often thought.  Rather than memorizing the                      
              spelling of each specific word, children construct or invent                   
              spellings for words based on the words' sounds.  This research                 
              will use experimental methods, thus complementing the earlier                  
              naturalistic work.  In the experiments, children will be asked to              
              spell words containing particular sounds and to make judgments                 
              about the sounds in those words.  Together, the naturalistic and               
              experimental research can yield a better understanding of                      
              children's spelling than either approach could achieve alone.                  
                                                                                             
              Some experiments will study systematic spelling errors.                        
              Sometimes, children represent a sound with the wrong letter, as                
              when they spell "city" as CIDY or "boy" as BOE.  In other cases,               
              children fail to spell a sound altogether.  For example, the "s"               
              sound is omitted in the spelling BET for "best".  In still other               
              cases, children use a single letter to stand for two sounds.  In               
              CRT for "cart", for example, the child uses the letter r to                    
              represent both of the sounds in the letter's name.                             
                                                                                             
              Other experiments will also study children's learning of English               
              spelling constraints.  For instance, there are certain                         
              constraints on the types of letter sequences that may occur in                 
              words.  For example, double letters may occur in the middles and               
              at the ends of words, as in "banner" and "tall", but rarely occur              
              at the beginnings of words.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Finally, still other experiments will study children's learning                
              of another aspect of the English writing system.  Units of                     
              meaning are often spelled in a consistent manner, even when their              
              pronunciations change.  For example, the past tense ending is                  
              spelled the same way in "jumped", "cleaned", and "floated", but                
              is pronounced differently in the three words.                                  
                                                                                             
              Together, the results should help to show why English is so hard               
              to spell.  The results should also help to suggest how some of                 
              children's difficulties in learning to spell can be overcome.                  
              They should even be useful in the diagnosis and treatment of                   
              children with severe learning problems.
