Title       : Models of Haze on Saturn, Titan and Jupiter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9020730

Award Number: 9020730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin G. Tomasko Mtomasko@LPL.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              L. R. Doose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Tomasko, Doose, and Peter Smith, at the University of Arizona,            
              will analyze observations in hand and to be taken of Saturn, Titan,            
              and Jupiter in a coordinated effort which makes use of several                 
              existing and new theoretical tools.  These include: 1) input from              
              photochemical calculations regarding the vertical profile of the               
              production rates of gases that can form solid aerosol material; 2)             
              extension of an existing cloud physics program that includes                   
              sedimentation, coagulation, and condensation to evaluate the number            
              densities and size distribution of haze particles; 3) evaluation               
              of the absorption coefficients of methane at low temperatures; 4)              
              creation of a radiative transfer code for use in the thermal                   
              infrared; and 5) the use of radiative transfer modelling codes for             
              evaluating the reflection and absorption of sunlight from an                   
              atmosphere containing the vertical distribution of haze predicted              
              by the photochemical and cloud physics program.                                
                                                                                             
              The bright and dark cloud features which dominate the appearance               
              of Jupiter and Saturn play important roles in the chemistry, heat              
              balance, and dynamics of their atmospheres.  It is now known that              
              a haze of small particles is formed in the stratospheres of                    
              Jupiter, Saturn, and Titan by photochemical reactions.  These                  
              particles fall to tropospheric levels where they can act as nuclei             
              for the condensation of several atmospheric gases such as ammonia              
              and methane.  The coordinated efforts of these investigators will              
              greatly increase our understanding of the physical and chemical                
              processes involved in the production, transport, and recycling of              
              atmospheric aerosols as well as their role in driving the radiative            
              and dynamical state of these atmospheres.
