Title       : Physical Constraints on Form: Investigating Visual Information For Event
               Recognition and the Judgement of Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1992   
File        : a9020590

Award Number: 9020590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey P. Bingham gbingham@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              How do people perceive the size of objects visually?  Since the                
              size of the visual image of an object varies depending on the                  
              distance of the object from the observer, this has always been a               
              problem for perceptual theorists.  One possibility is that people              
              know the size of familiar objects that they can recognize from                 
              their shapes.  An important category of recognizable objects                   
              consists of biological objects whose sizes vary with growth.                   
              Physical laws that constrain growth processes produce subtle                   
              changes in the shape of biological objects that correspond to                  
              changes in their sizes.  Specific shapes, therefore, correspond                
              to specific sizes.  Is it possible that observers can                          
              discriminate these subtle variations in shape and use them as                  
              visual information about size?  This research will investigate                 
              two physically determined aspects of tree shape as information                 
              about tree height.  Observers will judge computer-generated tree               
              silhouettes appearing without any other visual information about               
              size or distance.  All silhouettes will be of the same image                   
              size.  The research will use a computer model derived from                     
              biophysical studies of tree growth.  The research will compare                 
              results with the computer-generated tree silhouettes to                        
              perceptual results with silhouettes of real trees and with                     
              judgments of real trees in natural viewing conditions.  Tree                   
              motions also vary in ways specific to tree size, due to some of                
              the same physical constraints determining tree shape.   The                    
              research will isolate these motions in patch-light displays, in                
              which only the tips of the branches can be seen moving, and test               
              their role as visual information about size.  Results of these                 
              studies will contribute to an understanding of scaling in space                
              perception, especially in circumstances where distance                         
              information is perturbed, as in looking through telescopes or                  
              other imaging apparatus.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Previous research has shown that motions from a variety of simple              
              physical events appearing in patch-light displays can enable                   
              visual recognition of the events, while static images from the                 
              displays are unrecognizable.  What characteristics of motions can              
              observers discriminate and use as information about events?  The               
              second part of this research will manipulate motions in computer-              
              generated displays via dynamical models of these simple events.                
              The importance of using dynamical models in this way is that they              
              capture the physical properties of events that determine the                   
              motions specific to an event.  The simulations will test the                   
              ability of observers to discriminate different types of motions                
              and to recognize different events and event properties.  The                   
              results will be especially relevant to understanding visual                    
              recognition in situations where only low frequency spatial                     
              patterns are available, as in vision with cataracts or with night              
              vision goggles.
