Title       : The Structure and Function of Sex Chromosomes in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1991    
File        : a9020155

Award Number: 9020155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Meagher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise E. Costich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A stable genetic mechanism for sex determination is a                     
              prerequisite for the maintenance of separate sexes in a species.               
              This in turn requires that those genes promoting or suppressing                
              female and male expression be located on the same chromosome.                  
              Chromosomal sex determination, uncommon in plants, is widespread               
              in animals and is almost invariably accompanied by morphological               
              differentiation of the X and Y chromosomes.  The relatively                    
              recent origin of sex chromosomes in plants means that, in many                 
              cases, closely related species which lack sex chromosomes, also                
              exist.  The existence of variation in sex chromosome                           
              differentiation within a closely related group of plants provides              
              a model system for the study of the origin of sex chromosomes.                 
                   We are studying Y chromosomes in Silene to test theoretical               
              predictions concerning their structure and function.  A DNA                    
              library will be generated from Y chromosomes of Silene alba                    
              isolated using flow cytometry, a technique applied with great                  
              success to the human genome.  The resulting Y-specific DNA probes              
              will be cross hybridized with chromosomes of male and female S.                
              alba, as well as the other close relatives.  Our expectation is                
              that the Y chromosome will have some regions which are                         
              structurally similar to the X.  The existence of structurally                  
              different regions serves to prevent recombination that would                   
              disrupt the "active Y" sex determination found in Silene.
