Title       : Dissertation Research: Zooarchaeological Investigations of Spanish Colonial
               Settlement, Monquegua, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1993   
File        : a9020973

Award Number: 9020973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7740               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth S. Wing ewing@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the guidance of Dr. Elizabeth Wing, Ms. Susan DeFrance (a                
              graduate student at the University of Florida), will collect                   
              archaeological data for her doctoral dissertation.  Focussing on               
              a series of sites excavated in the Moquegua river valley in                    
              southern Peru, she will analyze faunal remains to determine the                
              effect that the introduction of Old World domestic animals had on              
              the indigenous pastoral system, as well as the reciprocal                      
              transformation which occurred in Spanish colonial culture.  The                
              sites selected span the Spanish colonial period as well as the                 
              altitudinal gradient from coastal plains to Andean highlands.                  
              The faunal materials are housed at the University of Florida as                
              well as in Peru.  Ms. DeFrance will now focus on the latter.                   
                                                                                             
              Prior to the Spanish conquest of Peru, native Americans                        
              domesticated a number of animals including the llama, alpaca and               
              guinea pig, all indigenous to the region.  Because each species                
              has specific environmental requirements, the distribution of each              
              was limited.  The introduction by the Spanish of Old World                     
              domesticates such as cows and donkeys created a competitive                    
              situation where one set of species appeared to succeed in one                  
              environment and the second set in another.  The details of this                
              process, however, are not well understood.  Through examination                
              of relevant archaeological materials Ms. DeFrance hopes to gain                
              additional insight.  The research will also help to elucidate the              
              process of culture contact and increase understanding of how                   
              different ways of life affect and in turn are affected by others.              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will shed new              
              light on the early history of Peru as well as processes of                     
              biological and cultural interaction.  The social fabric which was              
              established during Spanish colonial times persists into the                    
              present day and much of the political unrest which characterizes               
              Peru today can best be explained in this context.  Finally this                
              project will assist in the training of an extremely promising                  
              student.
