Title       : Phenolic/Signal Receptor Interactions in Agrobacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1994     
File        : a9020872

Award Number: 9020872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Lynn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9119,9236,
Abstract    :
              This research will study the mechanism(s) whereby phenolics                    
              interact with specific receptors to elicit cellular responses.                 
              An important model system that cues on phenolics as signals is                 
              Agrobacterium tumefaciens, a pathogenic soil bacterium that                    
              causes tumors at wound sites of infected plants.  The bacterium                
              can transfer DNA (T-DNA) from its Ti plasmid into plant cells                  
              where it is integrated into the nuclear DNA and expressed,                     
              ultimately leading to the tumourous growth of the transformed                  
              cells.  Most of the vir genes of the Ti plasmid that encode the                
              proteins involved in the processing and transfer of the T-DNA                  
              are not expressed until the bacterium receives phenolic                        
              molecules produced by wounded plant cells.  The putative                       
              receptor of this signal (VirA) has been identified by genetic                  
              means as a 92kDa cytoplasmic membrane localized protein.  A                    
              model has been proposed for the phenol/receptor protein                        
              association and a description of chemical, biochemical and                     
              molecular genetic approaches for the characterization of the                   
              interaction have been provided.  This simple model system                      
              should provide insight into the mechanisms of signal                           
              transduction mediated by phenolics.                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              With this Chemistry of Life Processes award, the Synthetic                     
              Organic Program of the Chemistry Division and the Cellular                     
              Biochemistry Program of the Division of Cellular Biosciences                   
              will support the research of Dr. David G. Lynn of the                          
              Department of Chemistry of the University of Chicago and Dr.                   
              Andrew N. Binns of the Department of Biology of the University                 
              of Pennsylvania.  The major focus of the research is to study                  
              the role of phenolics as signal molecules in both eukaryotic                   
              and prokaryotic organisms.  Important hormones and growth                      
              factors in both the Animal and Plant Kingdoms fall within this                 
              class of compounds.  Using the model system Agrobacterium                      
              tumefaciens, the project will probe the mechanism(s) whereby                   
              the phenolics interact with specific receptors to elicit                       
              cellular responses.  The long-range research goals are directed                
              towards understanding plant development.
