Title       : Mohawk Accelerator Dating Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1991   
File        : a9020716

Award Number: 9020716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean R. Snow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support,  Dr. Dean Snow will                  
              obtain 44 radiocarbon dates on materials from Native Aboriginal                
              Mohawk sites which date from the 16th and 17th Centuries A.D.  He              
              has very carefully selected maize samples which are clearly                    
              associated with site occupation and these will be submitted to                 
              the University of Arizona accelerator laboratory which has the                 
              ability to analyze small samples.  On this basis, he hopes to                  
              date 48 sites - each to within a decade.  Long term                            
              archaeological work has provided excellent data on the early                   
              historic Mohawk peoples; most settlements are known and their                  
              size has been determined.  Before it is possible to estimate past              
              population sizes, however, and determine how these changed over                
              time, accurate dating is necessary.  At the present time, inexact              
              and relative ages are based on the nature and amounts of European              
              trade goods which are present.                                                 
                                                                                             
              In light of the Columbian bicentennial, increasing attention has               
              been focussed on the interactions between Native American peoples              
              and European colonizers.  While it is clear that introduced                    
              diseases had a major effect on Native Americans, both the process              
              and the extent have yet to be determined.  Some anthropologists                
              and historians believe that populations were decimated and that                
              in prehistoric times the number of inhabitants were many times                 
              those observed by early settlers.  Others argue that North                     
              America was never that densely populated and the effect of                     
              disease is significantly less.  The data to decide clearly                     
              between these alternatives, however, is lacking.  In this                      
              context, Dr. Snow's Mohawk work is extremely important because                 
              the quality and extent of the archaeological work in this area                 
              should allow good estimates of changing population over time.                  
                                                                                             
              This work is important for several reasons.  It will increase our              
              understanding of the early history of Mohawk peoples.  It will                 
              also provide new insight into the processes of population contact              
              and resulting change.
