Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research on Molecular Characterization and
               Modification of Lactobacillus Spp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1995   
File        : a9020678

Award Number: 9020678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21050              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Luchansky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0511300   Nutrition                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,5941,9109,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a three-year collaborative project between             
              Professor John B. Luchansky, Department of Food Microbiology and               
              Toxicology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Dr. Gerald W.                 
              Tannock, Department of Microbiology, University of Otago, Dunedin,             
              New Zealand.  The activity takes place under the U.S.-New Zealand              
              Cooperative Science Program.   The scientists will study the                   
              genetics, biology, and microbial ecology of lactobacilli,                      
              microorganisms that play an important role in the food fermentation            
              industry and in animal husbandry.  Lactobacilli have been used for             
              centuries for the production of some foods (e.g. certain cheeses)              
              and preservation of others (e.g. some meats).  The cooperating                 
              scientists in this study plan to utilize modern molecular biological           
              techniques to characterize selected lactobacilli at the molecular              
              genetic level.  This is expected ultimately to lead to a greater               
              understanding of the role of these bacilli in food systems and in              
              the gastrointestinal tract of mammals.  These efforts should also              
              facilitate the development of novel strains of the organism that               
              could have significant practical applications, including their use             
              as vectors for delivery of biologically active molecules, and as               
              effective agents for protection against targeted pathogenic bacteria.          
                                                                                             
              This project brings together complementary research experience and             
              facilities in the two countries.  Professor Luchansky has expertise            
              in molecular genetic techniques, and his laboratory maintains                  
              equipment and personnel for conducting experiments involving                   
              recombinant DNA methodologies of the type required for this research.          
              Dr. Tannock has considerable experience in studying the microbial              
              ecology of lactobacilli that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of             
              animals, and maintains a novel colony of lactobacillus-free mice               
              that will be very useful for evaluating the efficacy of genetically            
              modified strains of lactobacilli derived in this study.  The                   
              scientists plan reciprocal visits to each other's laboratory over              
              the course of the project to transfer the technologies each has                
              developed.
