Title       : U.S.-U.S.S.R. Workshop on Solar Activity, Solar Wind, Terrestrial Effects and
               Solar Acceleration (Dagomys, USSR: October 15-20, 990)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1990   
File        : a9020110

Award Number: 9020110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9464               (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn E. Schweitzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1523,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent and planned research by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.                       
              on solar-terrestrial phenomena, as well as the greater                         
              openness in the Soviet scientific research climate, make                       
              it particularly timely for the two countries to hold a                         
              scientific workshop in this area.  The workshop, which                         
              will take place in the U.S.S.R., will focus on four                            
              topics:  Solar Activity, including solar cycle                                 
              manifestations; Solar Wind, including the sources of                           
              solar winds and the theory for and evolution of                                
              large- and small-scale structures; Terrestrial Effects,                        
              such as magnetospheric responses as well as ground-based                       
              studies of ionosphere and magnetosphere disturbances;                          
              and Solar Acceleration, including the origin and                               
              propagation of solar cosmic rays as related to solar                           
              activity and terrestrial effects.                                              
                                                                                             
              The study of all these events, and particularly the                            
              quantitative reconstruction of the chain of events,                            
              requires the integration of knowledge from several                             
              disciplines.  Crucial understanding is acquired from                           
              both space- and ground-based data, research on which in                        
              the U.S. is sponsored respectively by the NASA and NSF.                        
              This workshop will be one of very few, either within the                       
              US or internationally, that review the entire                                  
              solar-terrestrial chain and thus will have the added                           
              benefit of helping to set objectives for the coordination                      
              of the U.S program of space- and ground-based research.                        
                                                                                             
              The workshop is being organized jointly by the U.S. NAS                        
              and the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. (ASUSSR).                          
              The U.S. delegation will be led by Dr. Norman F. Ness,                         
              President of the Bartol Research Foundation, University                        
              of Delaware.  The Soviet delegation will be chaired by                         
              Dr. Viktor N. Orayevskiy, Director of the ASUSSR                               
              Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism, Ionosphere, and                            
              Radio Wave Propagation.  On the U.S. side the project                          
              is being jointly supported by NASA and NSF.                                    
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in                        
              the U.S. and U.S.S.R. to combine complementary efforts                         
              and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and                        
              competence in the field of basic scientific research on                        
              the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of                           
              benefit.
