Title       : Structural Analysis of E.coli Transcription Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1991     
File        : a9020441

Award Number: 9020441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : July 1,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle M. Hanna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The synthesis of RNA (transcription) is a process common to                    
              all organisms, and is catalyzed by the enzyme RNA                              
              polymerase.  It is a central step in the flow of information                   
              from the DNA to cellular structure and function and is                         
              subject to considerable regulation.  The transcription                         
              process can be divided into two types of activities.  The                      
              first includes those steps which are common to all RNA                         
              polymerases: the synthesis of RNA by polymerization of                         
              nucleotides in the template - directed reaction.  The second                   
              includes the regulatory processes which modulate                               
              transcription and differ in complexity and mechanism among                     
              organisms.  The proposed experiments are designed to analyze                   
              these activities at the molecular level by employing                           
              photochemical crosslinking.  The bacterium Escherichia coli                    
              will be used as a model for these studies.  The in vitro                       
              transcription system employing purified E. coli RNA                            
              polymerase has been well characterized, and many                               
              transcriptional regulatory factors have been identified.  By                   
              incorporating nucleotide analogs which are tagged with                         
              photoreactive crosslinking groups into the RNA during                          
              transcription, it is possible to probe the molecular                           
              environment of the RNA during its synthesis.  RNA containing                   
              such analogs becomes covalently attached to adjacent                           
              molecules upon irradiation with ultraviolet light .  RNA                       
              will be synthesized in vito which contains photocrosslinking                   
              groups at different positions within the RNA, and the                          
              contacts made between these groups and the RNA polymerase                      
              subunits and/or DNA template will be analyzed.  The                            
              immediate goal of this work is to use photocrosslinking                        
              nucleotide analogs to identify the RNA polymerase domains                      
              involved in substrate and product binding, as well as the                      
              regions containing the catalytic activities for                                
              phosphodiester bond formation and RNA displacement from the                    
              DNA-RNA hybrid.  These experiments should provide                              
              information about the fundamental mechanisms of RNA                            
              synthesis common to all RNA polymerases.  The question                         
              conformational differences among transcription complexed                       
              from differentially regulated promoters (antiterminated,                       
              stringently controlled, etc.).  The long range goal is to                      
              structurally characterize the E.coli transcription complex,                    
              understand the mechanism of RNA synthesis at the molecular                     
              level, and analyze the effects of regulatory factors such as                   
              NusA of ppGpp on RNA polymerase conformation and activity.
