Title       : MORENET - Missouri Research & Education Network: A State Network to Access
               MIDNET/NSFNET
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9020774

Award Number: 9020774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George O. Strawn                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265087             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Mitchell bill@more.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred Brauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Mabe  (Co-Project Director current)
              Gerry Howser  (Co-Project Director current)
              Steve Earney  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award enables the State of Missouri to establish a statewide              
              data network linking the 13 state-supported four year institutions             
              in Missouri.  The network connects to the mid-level network MIDNET,            
              which then links to NSFNET.  Access to NSFNET has already been                 
              successfully implemented for five institutions, including the                  
              University of Missouri-Columbia.  This award funds expansion to                
              eight additional Missouri insitutions, emphasizing not only the                
              research needs, but also the instructional needs of small and                  
              medium-sized institutions whose primary mission is undergraduate               
              education.  This is a two-year grant, after which the consortium               
              governing the network will become self-sustaining through a dues               
              structure so that an ongoing and consistent level of service is                
              provided to the faculty and students of the participating                      
              institutions, and to insure that expansion to include other                    
              institutions is possible.  Access to NSFNET provides the faculty               
              and students with access to supercomputers, data archives, a                   
              variety of network gateways, automated library catalogs, and a wide            
              range of software.  Primary applications include file transfers,               
              electronic mail communication between local and remote researchers,            
              and remote login to and use of supercomputers and other research               
              facilities.
