Title       : Process-level Investigations of Weathering Inputs to Base-poor Forest Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1993     
File        : a9020049

Award Number: 9020049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles T. Driscoll ctdrisco@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marion E. Bickford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In many forest ecosystems, the rate of release of Ca and other                 
              mineral nutrients through chemical weathering far exceeds the                  
              rate of input from the atmosphere.  Thus, weathering is the                    
              primary mechanism by which mineral nutrient losses in streamwater              
              leaching or from forest harvesting are replaced.  Recent research              
              has focused attention on the role of Ca and other basic cations                
              (CB) in the acidification of freshwaters, ecosystem recovery from              
              acidification, long-term forest productivity, fish mortality and               
              the decline of red spruce in montane forests.  Our poor                        
              understanding of the mechanisms and rates of weathering release                
              of CB limits our ability to critically evaluate observed and                   
              predicted changes in element cycles.  This study is aimed at                   
              determining the mechanisms and rates of weathering in two base-                
              poor forest watersheds in New Hampshire.  The project is designed              
              to study weathering on the scale of individual minerals, the soil              
              profile and the watershed.  Several methods of estimating                      
              weathering rates will be used and compared, including geochemical              
              mass balances, mineral depletion estimates, watershed element                  
              balances and Sr isotope analysis.  By evaluating the                           
              contributions of individual minerals to watershed weathering                   
              rates and studying the patterns of weathering within the soil                  
              profile, our ability to predict changes in CB cycling and forest               
              productivity under future atmospheric conditions will be                       
              improved.
