Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Kinetics of Radical- Atom Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1991    
File        : a9020584

Award Number: 9020584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10106              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Curl rfcurl@ricevm1.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5941      NEW ZEALAND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1960,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a two-year collaborative project between               
              Professor Robert F. Curl, Department of Chemistry, Rice University,            
              and Professor Leon F. Phillips, Department of Chemistry, University            
              of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.  The activity takes place            
              under the U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Science Program.  The                   
              scientists will cooperate in a study of the reactions of several               
              small free radicals (transient, reactive chemical species such as              
              C2H, HCO, and CH2CN) with oxygen atoms.  Such a study is relevant              
              both to understanding aspects of the chemistry of the interstellar             
              medium, as well as the reactions taking place in various combustion            
              processes.  By measuring the rate constants of these radical-atom              
              reactions, and in some cases carrying out spectroscopic studies to             
              identify reaction products, the scientists expect to contribute to a           
              greater understanding of these reaction systems.  The radicals will            
              be produced by excimer flash photolysis of suitable precursor                  
              molecules.  The oxygen atoms (and later, other atoms and OH) will be           
              generated in a discharge flow system, and allowed to react with the            
              radicals.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Both the U.S. and New Zealand research groups have experience in               
              this area of research, involving flash photolysis, infrared                    
              spectroscopy, and the use of laser probes.  Professor Phillips and             
              his colleagues at Canterbury University have focused primarily on              
              the chemical kinetics of these reactions, and have developed                   
              experimental techniques for carrying out such measurements, including          
              methods for measuring the concentrations of atoms.  Professor Curl             
              and his group at Rice have emphasized high resolution infrared                 
              spectroscopy as well as kinetic studies.  Exchange visits by the               
              principal investigators will serve to develop the capability for atom-         
              radical kinetic studies at Rice and to enhance the spectroscopic               
              analysis strengths at Canterbury.
