Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Biochemistry of Red Algal Polysaccharides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1991     
File        : a9020691

Award Number: 9020691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 23,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285                (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Gretz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 5941      NEW ZEALAND
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Michael Gretz of George Mason University and Dr. Richard                       
              Furneauz of the New Zealand Department of Scientific and                       
              Industrial Research (DSIR). Extracellular matrix polysac-                      
              charides of red algae include the commercially important                       
              carrageenans and agarocolloids as well as cellulose, xylans,                   
              mannans, and complex heteropolysaccharides.  Due in part to                    
              the commercial significance of these compounds and their                       
              derivatives as gelling, emulsifying and sizing agents, much                    
              is known of the chemistry of these polymers from selected                      
              organisms. Relatively little is known, however, about the                      
              distribution of these and related natural compounds among                      
              major groups of the red algae. A more detailed survey of this                  
              plant division is therefore needed. The objective of this                      
              research is comparative biochemical analysis of cell wall                      
              polymers of New Zealand and North American red algae using                     
              techniques recently developed in New Zealand for methylation                   
              analysis (gas chromatography/mass spectrometry), as well as                    
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and x-ray diffraction                         
              analysis. A second objective is to better understand the                       
              biosynthetic pathways to these polysacchardides using a                        
              unique approach currently being developed in the United                        
              States incorporating  13C-labelling of precursor molecules                     
              coupled with methylation analysis and NMR.                                     
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration between the                     
              U.S. and New Zealand group in utilizing their complementary                    
              skills in algal polysaccharide research. This is important                     
              fundmental work on the biochemistry of red algal polysaccrides,                
              and has the potential for discovery of sources of additional                   
              natural products.
