Title       : Characterization and Optimization of Atomic Spectrometric Processes and
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1996     
File        : a9020631

Award Number: 9020631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $970775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Hieftje Hieftje@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9156,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program                 
              Dr. Gary M. Hieftje will continue studies intended to enhance                  
              the sensitivity, precision, accuracy and degree of utility of                  
              atomic spectrometric analysis. In one group of investigations,                 
              specially developed techniques will be employed to eluciate the                
              mechanism of solute particle vaporization and atom formation in                
              flames and plasmas of the kind used for multielement analysis.                 
              Clarification of these events is expected to reduce                            
              interelement interferences caused by incomplete vaporization.                  
              In a second area of investigation, rare-gas plasmas will be                    
              studied in an effort to determine how they are responsible for                 
              excitation of atoms and ions. Particular emphasis will be                      
              placed on understanding the characteristics of electrons in                    
              such discharges and the role electrons play in transferring                    
              plasma energy to analyte atoms and ions.  In the third area,                   
              the sources of interferences in plasma source-mass spectrometry                
              will be investigated. A typical plasma source, the mass                        
              spectrometer itself, and the interface that separates these                    
              will be examined in an effort to understand how the mass                       
              spectrometric sampling process influences a plasma, how the                    
              atmospheric-pressure gases are extracted through a                             
              medium-pressure interface into the mass spectrometer, and how                  
              space-charge effects in the mass spectrometer can influence                    
              accuracy, precision, and dynamic range in the resulting                        
              measurement. Finally, the factors that limit the utility of the                
              glow-discharge lamp as a source will be explored, with special                 
              attention to the nature and rate of rare-gas sputtering in such                
              sources.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Atomic spectroscopy is a highly sensitive and convenient method                
              for the identification and quantitative measurement of metals                  
              in biological and environmental samples. The results of this                   
              project are expected to contribute to substantial improvements                 
              in the utility and accuracy of this method.
