Title       : A Quantitative Study of Drop Coalescence in Stirred Dispersion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9020320

Award Number: 9020320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doraiswami Ramkrishna ramkrish@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is an investigation of several effects on drop                    
              coalescence in stirred liquid-liquid dispersions which may be                  
              used effectively to control drop populations.  Thus the effect                 
              of surface charge on droplets and its manipulation by various                  
              means on coalescence phenomena is investigated experimentally                  
              and theoretically.  The manipulation of surface charge effects                 
              are accomplished by addition of electrolytes and surfactants,                  
              and by varying the pH of the medium.  The effect of turbulence                 
              intensity on drop coalescence is investigated as a method to                   
              control drop sizes by energy input to the dispersion.  Since                   
              most industrial liquid-liquid contacting operations involve                    
              high dispersed phase fractions, the project investigates dense                 
              dispersions by exploiting self-similar behavior and scaling                    
              properties.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The approach presented in this work is unique in that                          
              information will be obtained at the individual droplet level                   
              so that coalescence rates are obtained as functions of drop                    
              sizes in addition to their dependence on other physical                        
              parameters.  The effects proposed for study in this work are                   
              either completely unknown or are at best ambiguous as obtained                 
              from studies insensitive to drop size distributions.  It is                    
              important to understand the foregoing effects in order to                      
              control dispersed phase systems so that contacting operations                  
              can be performed optimally with respect to conversion and                      
              selectivity.
