Title       : Olmec Settlement and Subsistence at La Isla, Veracruz
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9020609

Award Number: 9020609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34298              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Grove d-grove@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan D. Gillespie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. David Grove, Susan              
              Gillespie and their colleagues will conduct archaeological                     
              research at the Olmec site of La Isla which is located in                      
              Veracruz, Mexico.  The name "La Isla" or "island" reflects the                 
              fact that two streams bound the site which, unfortunately, is                  
              being destroyed through lateral erosion by each stream bed.                    
              Material abundant on both the surface as well as stream walls                  
              supports the attribution of this small site to the Olmec.  The                 
              investigators plan to conduct an intensive surface survey to                   
              locate and plot object densities and distributions.  This should               
              provide clues to the nature of individual activity areas and on                
              this basis, limited excavations will be conducted.  With the                   
              stream wall materials to guide them, the team will also conduct                
              horizontal excavations.  In addition to cultural materials such                
              as pottery, both plant and animal remains will constitute an                   
              important focus of the research since the investigators wish to                
              reconstruct subsistence practices.                                             
                                                                                             
              The Olmec society developed and flourished in the tropical                     
              lowlands of Mexico's southern Gulf coast between 1200 and 500 BC.              
              Large Olmec sites contain Middle America's first large public                  
              architecture and massive stone monuments.  Olmec has been termed               
              the "America's first civilization."  Surprisingly, however,                    
              relatively little is known about them and is limited to old data               
              from two large sites.  Very little is known about either Olmec                 
              social organization or subsistence.  Archaeologists have learned               
              that to answer such questions it is best to examine smaller sites              
              where people lived rather than concentrate on large ceremonial                 
              centers which served as focus for ritual events.  This research                
              by Drs. Grove and Gillespie is the first to be conducted in such               
              a situation.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will shed                  
              light on the factors which gave rise to the Olmec civilization.                
              It will also provide data of interest to a large group of                      
              archaeologists.
