Title       : Comparative Morphological and Molecular Phylogeny of the Branchiopod Crustacea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9020088

Award Number: 9020088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88843              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel W. Martin jmartin@nhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Although branchipods are often depicted as primitive crustaceans,              
              little is known about the morphology and relationships of the                  
              constituent groups.  The branchipod taxon Conchostraca, recently               
              split into two orders, is a diverse assemblage of small, bivalved,             
              freshwater crustaceans.  The first of the two conchostracan orders             
              (Laevicaudata) was addressed earlier; the Spinicaudata are the                 
              focus of this proposal.  The goals of the research have been                   
              expanded to encompass the entire Branchiopoda, with emphasis on the            
              spinicaudatan families.  The proposed research is a three phase                
              project consisting of 1) a thorough morphological treatment of each            
              genus of the four spinicaudatan clam shrimp families                           
              (Cyclestheriidae, Cyzicidae, Leptestheriidae, and Limnadiidae); 2)             
              a phylogenetic analysis of the morphological data and employing                
              outgroups in the Cladocera, Anostraca, and Notostraca; and 3) a                
              phylogenetic analysis employing 18S ribosomal RNA sequences from               
              fresh material of all 8 currently recognized branchipod orders.                
              Of the five families previously combined in the taxon Conchostraca,            
              morphological examinations and systematic reviews have been                    
              completed of two:  Lynceidae and Limnadiidae.  A third family (the             
              monotypic Cyclestheriidae) has been carefully examined and found               
              to be invariant and to agree with morphological descriptions made              
              in the last century.  Thus, three of the five conchostracan                    
              families are completed.  This project is to complete the                       
              morphological examination and data collection for the two remaining            
              spinicaudatan families ( Cyzicidae and Leptestheriidae) and for                
              the outgroups in the Cladocera, Anostraca, and Notostraca, and to              
              collect fresh material for the rRNA work.
