Title       : REU: Peatlands and Global Climate Change: Insights Obtained Through Comparative
               Studies of Northern and Southern Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9020583

Award Number: 9020583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470628             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Kelman Wieder Kelman.Wieder@Villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Yavitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will gain insights into carbon balances in peatlands             
              and measure gaseous exchanges of carbon between peatlands and the              
              atmosphere.  Drs. Wieder and Yavitt will use a series of                       
              descriptive and experimental field and laboratory studies to                   
              evaluate historical development and present function of peatland               
              ecosystems.  This research will focus on comparisons between                   
              Sphagnum-dominated peatlands that have developed over thousands of             
              years in relatively warmer climates (southern peatlands in the                 
              Appalachian Mountains of West Virginia) and Sphagnum-dominated                 
              peatlands that developed in cooler regions.                                    
                                                                                             
              Specific research objectives are: to characterize changes in                   
              chemical nature of organic matter during long-term peat                        
              accumulation, to determine the relative importance of methane                  
              production versus sulfate reduction in peatlands subjected to                  
              differing atmospheric sulfur depositions, to quantify transfers of             
              photosynthetically fixed 14CO2 within a northern and southern                  
              peatland, to experimentally evaluate effects of biotic versus                  
              abiotic factors on the transfer of photosynthetically fixed 14CO2,             
              and to evaluate the effects of temperature and water table level               
              on gaseous carbon fluxes from peatlands to the atmosphere.                     
              Information obtained from this research will improve our ability               
              to predict possible changes in peatland ecosystem function,                    
              particularly with regard to carbon balance, peat                               
              accumulation/degradation, and exchange of carbon gases with the                
              atmosphere under various projections of global climate change. Drs.            
              Wieder and Yavitt are leading peatland researchers.  The facilities            
              available for this research are outstanding.
