Title       : Collaborative Research: Experimental Studies of Ecosystem Responses to Elevated
               CO2: Interactions with Nitrogen, Water, and Species Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9020134

Award Number: 9020134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1378190            (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher B. Field   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1306,1325,1577,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Field, Chapin and Mooney will conduct integrated studies of               
              the responses of California annual grassland to altered resource               
              balance, focusing on factors controlling the response of the                   
              ecosystem to elevated CO2.  Their research involves coordinated                
              empirical and modeling programs to test a series of hypotheses that            
              potentially account for the mechanisms and feedbacks governing                 
              system-level behavior of aboveground and belowground production,               
              decomposition, and nutrient cycling in response to altered                     
              resources.  The conceptual model for the system-level effects  of              
              elevated CO2 is based on two hypotheses concerning the mechanisms              
              of the system level responses and the loci of the direct effects.              
              First, they hypothesize that elevated CO2 may generate novel                   
              resource balance, but the response of plant growth can be                      
              understood and predicted from responses of other variations in                 
              resource balance that change the availability of carbon, relative              
              to other resources.  Second, they hypothesize that system-level                
              responses to elevated CO2 are driven primarily through direct                  
              effects on plants.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This research program consists of five components: 1) a study of               
              the responses of natural ecosystems to elevated CO2 in open top                
              chambers. 2) a probe of ecosystem responses to a range of                      
              modifications, including elevated CO2, altered nutrient and water              
              availability, and altered species composition, using artificial                
              microecosystems in open top chambers. 3) a study of controls on                
              decomposition and nutrient cycling with laboratory, field and                  
              microecosystem experiments using plant litter from the other                   
              experiments as well as isotopic tracers. 4) an exploration of the              
              resource effects on plant growth, allocation, and tissue chemistry             
              with a series of greenhouse experiments.  5) a modeling effort to              
              integrate the experimental results and to link and extend existing             
              ecosystem, community, and plant models.                                        
                                                                                             
              This program has the potential to advance several aspects of our               
              understanding of system-level responses to global climate change.              
              First, studies with elevated CO2 in the California annual grassland            
              will complement CO2 studies in other grasslands, with results from             
              a system that is unique in terms of low carbon storage and rapid               
              equilibration.  Second, the small stature of the plants, combined              
              with the small time constant for system equilibration, will allow              
              the investigators to explore consequences of a broad range of                  
              resource availabilities and plant species characteristics.                     
              Finally, the emphasis on mechanisms of system-level responses,                 
              integrated through linked models, should make the results of this              
              study generalizable to other ecosystems.
