Title       : NUE: Development of Vertically Integrated Undergraduate Nanoscience Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0303830

Award Number: 0303830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Kittredge kittrekw@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ Middletown
	      4200 East University Blvd
	      Middletown, OH  450423458    513/727-3200

NSF Program : 7219      NANOTECHNOLOGY UNDERGRAD EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1990,7202,7219,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Professor Kevin
              Kittredge supports the design of a set of experiments in sequential courses
              that incorporate nanotechnology into the undergraduate chemistry curriculum at
              Miami University at Middletown.  Students benefit from these vertically
              integrated experiments will be involved in multiple aspects of a project in a
              manner that mimics a research project under a mentor's supervision.  Initially,
              the student synthesizes a target molecule in an organic chemistry course, and
              learns molecular characterization techniques, such as NMR and IR.  In their
              next course, either quantitative analytical chemistry and/or chemical
              technology, the student prepares colloidal nanoparticles and studies selective
              ion-binding of metal cations by titration.  In a second analytical chemistry
              course the student prepares a 2-dimensional self-assembled monolayer and
              studies ion selectivity by cyclic voltammetry.  Lastly, in their physical
              chemistry course, the student studies the origins of the strong plasmon
              emissions that appear in the UV and fluorescence spectra for these
              nanoparticles.  Students write a report for a particular class then rewrite it
              for each subsequent course, which is expected to lead to better student
              learning.  Experiments will be evaluated at each stage and a final assessment
              conducted.  Dissemination of experimental details will be made by both a web
              site and private publishing.  

The proposal for this award was received in
              response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering program announcement, NSF
              02-148, category NUE.  The focus is on developing laboratories that will
              introduce nanoscience to undergraduate students at two different locations,
              Miami University Middletown (a two-year regional campus) and Miami University
              Oxford (a traditional four-year university).  The vertically integrated
              nanotechnology curriculum is designed to prepare students to answer the
              challenges of society and the scientific community.

