Title       : Collaborative Research: SNEWS: The SuperNova Neutrino Early Warning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0303196

Award Number: 0303196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kate Scholberg schol@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1643      PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Supernova Neutrino Early Warning System (SNEWS) project involves an
              international collaboration of researchers representing supernova neutrino
              detectors (currently Super-K, SNO, LVD, AMANDA, KamLAND, Borexino and
              MiniBooNE). The SNEWS system will be able to provide a completely automated
              early warning of a supernova's occurrence to the globe-wide astronomical
              community by exploiting the prompt neutrino signals that arrive several hours
              before the shock breakout that produces the first optical signs of the
              explosion. The warning will be based on a coincidence of neutrino signals from
              detectors around the world. It may also be able to provide a trigger for other
              detectors, such as LIGO. 

This collaborative proposal is from the MIT and
              University of Minnesota-Duluth groups and requests funding for a program to
              build on the existing SNEWS inter-experiment network, to enhance its robustness
              and to increase the confidence of the astronomical community in this project.
              In particular, the groups wish to employ personnel to upgrade the network
              system, to increase the redundancy of the network by adding servers and to
              provide on-call physicists with communication devices.

In the
              education/outreach area, SNEWS already involves both graduate and undergraduate
              students. However, this proposal is devoted to developing the amateur
              astronomer community as an integral part of the early warning system, since it
              is very likely that the location of a new supernova will be pinpointed first by
              an amateur. Specifically, the groups plan to recruit members of the general
              public, including both experts and novices in astronomy.

