Title       : Quantum-coherent Transport in Quantum Hall Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0303705

Award Number: 0303705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir J. Goldman goldman@insti.physics.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This low-temperature condensed matter physics research is focused on fundamental
              quantum properties of matter that can be probed using the simple and
              well-characterized system of electrons confined to a two-dimensional geometry. 
              Two- and lower-dimensional electron systems manifest some of the most
              fundamental many-body quantum physics of strongly correlated electrons,
              including the integer and fractional quantum Hall effects and the associated
              one-dimensional chiral edge states, and the single particle tunneling phenomena
              in zero-dimensional quantum dots and antidots.  The quantum-coherent properties
              of the collective ground states of two-dimensional electrons and the
              size-quantized systems of few electrons, their excitations, chiral edge state
              dynamics, and the quantum phase transitions will be studied experimentally via
              techniques of tunneling and resonant single-particle tunneling.  The results
              are of great interest in the formulation and confirmation of advanced quantum
              theory.  The experimental techniques developed in the study of the
              semiconductor nanostructured samples can have an impact on technology via
              realization of new electronic devices whose fabrication and operation is based
              on similar materials and techniques.  This research includes collaborations
              with materials scientists and electrical engineers in sample preparation and
              with theorists in analysis of experimental results.  This cutting-edge research
              involves training of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students, who
              will be excellently trained to enter positions in industry, government and
              education.

This work is focused on fundamental quantum properties of the
              simple and well-characterized systems of interacting electrons in fabricated
              semiconductor structures.  Two- and lower-dimensional electron systems manifest
              some of the most fundamental quantum physics such as the integer and fractional
              quantum Hall effects and the associated one-dimensional edge channels, the
              single particle tunneling phenomena in zero-dimensional quantum dots and
              antidots.  The quantum-coherent properties of the low-dimensional electrons and
              the size-quantized systems of few electrons will be studied experimentally at
              very low temperatures and very high magnetic fields. The results are of great
              interest in the formulation and confirmation of advanced quantum theory.  In
              addition, this study can have impact on technology via realization of new
              electronic semiconductor nanostructured devices whose fabrication and operation
              is based on similar materials and techniques.  The quantum antidot physics may
              form a basis of novel quantum computing devices.  This research involves
              collaborations with materials scientists and electrical engineers in sample
              preparation and with theorists in analysis of experimental results.  Students
              in this program are excellently trained to enter positions in industry,
              government and education. The PI teaches undergraduate classes, his research
              activity is vital in bringing real-world science and modern technology into
              classroom.
