Title       : Investigations of All-Optical Bose Condensates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0303013

Award Number: 0303013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Chapman michael.chapman@physics.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1291      ATOMIC & MOLECULAR DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The scientific objective of this project is to investigate all-optical
              approaches to atomic Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC).  The recent
              demonstration of all-optical BEC by this group provided the first new path to
              achieving quantum degeneracy in atomic gases since the pioneering
              demonstrations in 1995.  The method is surprising simple and an order of
              magnitude faster than standard BEC experiments.  In the new investigations
              being undertaken in the present project, efforts will concentrate on examining
              the mechanisms behind the remarkable loading properties of these traps.
              Additionally, the considerable flexibility provided by tailoring the optical
              trapping potential will be exploited to explore alternative trapping
              geometries, allowing for formation of multiple condensates in large-period
              lattices. This capability, combined with spin-independent nature of these
              traps, will make it possible to explore many fundamental issues of
              multi-component (spinor) condensates.  In a broader scope, the achievement of
              Bose-Einstein condensation in dilute atomic gases has created a new frontier of
              research in AMO physics with significant overlap with traditional areas of
              condensed matter physics. Given the potential of the field, it is important to
              explore different methods for reaching BEC, particularly methods that offer new
              capabilities, simplicity, or speed.  Research efforts will be accompanied by
              the training of students to work in this emerging new field.  
