Title       : Support for K-theory Conferences; 2003-2006
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0303519

Award Number: 0303519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Grayson dan@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Friedlander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Proposal 0303519: "K-theory Conferences" Eric M. Friedlander and Daniel
              R. Grayson

This grant will contribute to the support of four research
              conferences in algebraic K-theory over a 3-year period.  One conference, a
              5-day conference, is to take place in Canada at the Centre de Recherches
              Mathematiques on the campus of the Universite de Montreal.  The majority of the
              funding for that conference is expected to come from Canadian sources.  The
              other three conferences will be the 10th, 11th, and 12th in the series of
              annual "Great Lakes K-theory" weekend conferences occurring at American
              universities.  These conferences will focus on exhilarating progress and
              expected new developments in settling long-open conjectures.  In August, 2002,
              Voevodsky was awarded the Fields Medal at the ICM in Beijing in recognition for
              his fundamental contributions, which have yielded important results modulo 2:
              the Milnor conjecture and the Bloch-Kato conjecture.  The proof of the Milnor
              conjectures tells us something remarkable and special about fields: that the
              Galois cohomology ring modulo 2 is presented by explicit generators in degree 1
              and explicit relations in degree 2.  Work of Rost and Voevodsky already in hand
              is expected to lead to the proof of the Bloch-Kato conjecture at odd primes,
              which by work of Suslin and Voevodsky will imply the Beilinson conjecture
              relating motivic cohomology to etale cohomology, which in turn is expected to
              lead to a proof of the Quillen-Lichtenbaum conjecture using work of Grayson,
              Friedlander, and Suslin or of Bloch, Lichtenbaum, Friedlander, and Suslin, that
              relates algebraic K-theory for varieties to motivic cohomology.  The
              Quillen-Lichtenbaum conjecture has been the driving force for research in
              K-theory since the early 1970s, and has been the focus of the interplay between
              related areas of geometry, number theory and topology.  A consequence will be
              an explicit computation of the K-groups of the ring of integers, covering the
              p-primary parts for prime numbers p for which the Vandiver conjecture is known.
               The Vandiver conjecture is an old conjecture from number theory, has been
              checked by computations for all prime numbers smaller than 12 million, and
              recent theoretical progress using algebraic K-theory has been made on it by
              Kurihara and Soule.  The conferences to be supported by this grant will
              contribute to the dissemination of dramatic new developments in the subject as
              well as introduce this important mathematical subject to the next generation of
              American mathematicians.  Because of K-theory's influence in much of modern
              mathematics, we expect that these conferences will make a significant
              contribution to the American mathematical community's efforts to maintain its
              world leadership in fundamental
mathematics.

K-theory is a relatively new
              field of mathematics which has grown and prospered in the past 40 years.  One
              now finds that K-theory plays an important role in mathematical physics (e.g.,
              various conformal field theories), classical actions of groups on vector
              spaces, number theory, and especially number theory.  K-theory is a way of
              examining features of systems of polynomial equations by considering the
              possible ways to associate flat planes (or spaces of any dimension) to each
              solution. As a concrete example, imagine that the solutions are the points on
              the surface of the earth, and for each point consider the plane containing that
              point and the horizon.  In general, these planes or spaces may twist and turn
              as one moves from one point to another, nearby or far away, so a proper
              understanding of the possibilities requires the use  of topology, the study of
              gradual change.  Motivic cohomology is another way to glean information about
              solutions of equations that uses homotopy theory and topology in a different
              way.  One examines the possible ways to augment the original system of
              equations by new ones that have one or more free parameters.  The conferences
              supported by this grant  will continue a strong tradition of delivering the
              highest quality research talks to the mathematical community, including
              graduate students and junior mathematicians in postdoctoral positions.  These
              conferences should encourage a new generation of younger American
              mathematicians to participate in various research programs concerning algebraic
              K-theory. With many issues still unsettled, the field is ripe for further
              exciting developments.



