Title       : Development of a Bi-Axial Micro-Tensile Tester of MEMS Materials for Research
               and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0303027

Award Number: 0303027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36156              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaime F. Cardenas-Garcia jcardena@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an instrument development award to University of Maryland at College
              Park for Micro-Electro-Mechanical-System (MEMS) research.
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical-System (MEMS) devices generally range from a few
              microns to a few millimeters in size. This area of technological development
              that has gone from generating curiosities such as wobble motors and
              micro-robots, to its current phase in which practical devices of common usage,
              such as accelerometers and pressure-sensing transducers, are being manufactured
              and used. This has created a need for improved characterization of MEMS
              materials to better optimize the MEMS design process. The objective of this
              research is to design and build a tensile tester for MEMS materials. The tester
              will be used to determine the elastic properties of MEMS material specimens.
              The tester will allow simultaneous loading of specimens in two perpendicular
              directions. It will also accommodate specimens of different sizes; allow
              alignment of the specimen; apply and measure the load on the specimen; monitor
              specimen deformation; and permit continuous data acquisition. Several projects
              related to MEMS materials characterization benefit from the development of this
              micro-tensile tester. Additionally, the proposed development of the
              micro-tensile tester will enhance research facilities in the Department of
              Mechanical Engineering at University of Maryland College Park. Also, it
              provides the required infrastructure for a student, who previously worked on a
              related capstone senior design project, to commence his graduate degree.
              Furthermore, the existence of this micro-tensile tester will allow potential
              interaction with the MEMS research facility at Sandia National
              Laboratory.

Micro-Electro-Mechanical-System (MEMS) devices generally range
              from a few microns to a few millimeters in size. This area of technological
              development that has gone from generating curiosities such as wobble motors and
              micro-robots, to its current phase in which practical devices of common usage,
              such as accelerometers and pressure-sensing transducers, are being manufactured
              and used. This has created a need for improved characterization of MEMS
              materials to better optimize the MEMS design process. The objective of this
              research is to design and build a tensile tester for MEMS materials. The tester
              will be used to determine the elastic properties of MEMS material specimens.
              The tester will allow simultaneous loading of specimens in two perpendicular
              directions. It will also accommodate specimens of different sizes; allow
              alignment of the specimen; apply and measure the load on the specimen; monitor
              specimen deformation; and permit continuous data acquisition. Several projects
              related to MEMS materials characterization benefit from the development of this
              micro-tensile tester. Additionally, the proposed development of the
              micro-tensile tester will enhance research facilities in the Department of
              Department of Mechanical Engineering at University of Maryland College Park.
              Also, it provides the required infrastructure for a student, who previously
              worked on a related capstone senior design project, to commence his graduate
              degree. Furthermore, the existence of this micro-tensile tester will allow
              potential interaction with the MEMS research facility at Sandia National
              Laboratory.

