Title       : Femtosecond Material Science: Phase Transitions Induced by Photo-Excited
               Carriers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0303642

Award Number: 0303642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Mazur mazur@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research uses optical techniques to study electron and lattice dynamics in
              solids that undergo semiconductor-to-metal transitions after excitation with
              intense femtosecond laser pulses.  In addition to investigating the dynamics of
              highly excited materials, the proposed work will determine the degree to which
              their phase can be controlled with multiple-pulse excitations by studying the
              interplay between free carrier dynamics and ionic motion during a
              semiconductor-to-metal transition.  A novel aspect of the work is the
              measurement of the dynamics of the spectral dielectric function with
              femtosecond time resolution, which fully characterizes the linear optical
              response of the material and from which one can infer changes in band structure
              and electronic configuration.  Through quality research-based education of
              undergraduate and graduate students, this research also contributes to science
              and engineering education and the training of future scientists and
              engineers.

The advent of femtosecond-pulse laser sources offers the
              opportunity to manipulate solid materials both by novel means and on
              unprecedented time scales.  This research is aimed at studying the response of
              semiconductors to intense femtosecond pulse excitations that drive the material
              from a semiconductor to a metal.  The goals of this work are to determine the
              mechanisms by which the transition occurs and the degree to which the phase of
              the material (semiconductor vs. insulator) can be controlled on a femtosecond
              time scale.  A novel experimental technique that measures the optical
              properties with femtosecond time resolution will be applied to these materials,
              which enables one to distinguish between the effects of electronic excitation
              and changes in crystal structure.  Through quality research-based education of
              undergraduate and graduate students, this research also contributes to science
              and engineering education and the training of future scientists and
              engineers.

