Title       : SGER: Anaphora in African Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0303447

Award Number: 0303447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Safir safir@ruccs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kenneth Safir will conduct one
              year of research on patterns of anaphora in African languages. "Anaphora" is
              the use of a linguistic term (e.g., a pronoun) to refer to an entity already
              mentioned or implicated in a discourse. Anaphora is interesting because it uses
              a limited number of terms and structures in the world's languages, and it is
              often the case that unrelated languages show exactly the same pattern. This
              research asks where the patterns come from. One possibility is historical
              connection among languages. Another is the way that language is used (e.g.,
              people in different cultures want to talk about the same things and refer back
              to things they have mentioned). But certain subtle requirements on anaphora
              seem to depend on grammatical constructions and semantic interpretation that
              could only be uniform across languages if grammar has its origin in a deeper
              human property. Thus the study of anaphora explores a subtle realm of human
              cognitive functioning that is highly, structured, systematic, and hypothesized
              to be innate. An opportunity to study African anaphora patterns is to probe the
              expertise of the hundreds of African language specialists and native speakers
              who will attend the first joint meeting of the American Conference on African
              Linguistics and the World Congress of African Linguistics at Rutgers University
              in June, 2003. This project will enlist conference participants who are native
              speakers of the non-colonial languages of Africa in a questionnaire study of
              the patterns of anaphora in their languages. After the conference, the most
              productive consultants will collaborate with the research team in building a
              database including analytic essays on a website.

Theoretical work inspired
              by the distribution of anaphora in natural language has been a major engine for
              innovation in linguistics for over 30 years, but very few African languages
              have received the detailed study that has been focused on languages like
              Chinese, Hindi, Korean, Germanic, Slavic or Romance. Many of the most
              theoretically interesting aspects of anaphora, which depend on subtle
              structural and interpretive distinctions, have only been uncovered by state of
              the art research. This new expertise has not yet been applied in detail to the
              anaphora of any African language. The understudied patterns of African
              languages may hold important keys to our understanding of anaphoric phenomena
              generally and may serve to open up many poorly studied African languages for
              wider grammatical comparison. 

