Title       : Phase Behaviors and Nucleation Kinetics of Protein Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0303758

Award Number: 0303758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark R. Pederson                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xueyu Song xsong@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Xueyu Song, of Iowa State University, is supported by the Theoretical
              and Computational Chemistry Program to study phase behaviors and nucleation
              kinetics of protein solutions.   Song develops computational models and
              machinery that allow for the understanding of protein crystallization. Models
              are based on parametrization of potentials which reproduce characteristics of
              twenty naturally occurring and understood amino acids. The resulting potentials
              are of greater complexity than many that in current use.  These potentials are
              used in concert with classical density-functional theory to study
              crystallization of highly idealized models and then globular proteins.  This
              theoretical work aids experimentalists in understanding how protein
              crystallization proceeds.   This process is currently the bottleneck in
              obtaining complete structural information about the proteins defined from the
              human genome project.  Computational skills gleaned by undergraduate, graduate
              and postdoctoral students aid in alleviating the current predictive void in the
              size regime relevant to simulation-based determination of the structure of
              biologically interesting molecules.

X-ray based structural determination of
              DNA and other biological molecules is the most reliable means for obtaining
              structural information.  However such snapshots are only possible if
              researchers can create highly ordered crystals of these molecules and this
              experimental task is proving to be very difficult. Professor Song, of Iowa
              State University, uses knowledge gleaned from twenty amino acids to develop a
              means for predicting short-range interactions between neighboring molecules.
              These short-range interactions must be understood to determine the
              environmental conditions for which highly ordered crystals may be obtained.
              Success in the area of computationally informed protein crystallization would
              significantly speed the process of structural determination for the proteins
              associated with the human genome project.  Educational efforts associated with
              this research will prepare the next generation of computational chemists for
              the challenges associated with computational biology and molecular-based
              simulation of fluids.

