Title       : Lecture Modules in Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0303813

Award Number: 0303813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Afina O. Lupulescu lupula@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin E. Glicksman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1711,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant is focused primarily on developing a series of educational electronic
              modules for graduate and undergraduate course offerings in materials science
              and engineering. Modules will be developed using the popular electronic
              PowerPoint format for the subject of kinetics in materials processing. This
              particular subject comprises an upper-divisional course in materials science
              and engineering, and explores the fundamental aspects of kinetic processes in
              materials, including diffusion-based processes, defect-mediated processes,
              surface processes, phase transformations, precipitation and coarsening, etc.
              The content of these modules, presented in a highly quantifiable manner,
              provides a study and lecture aid to students, and form the basis of
              approximately 20 lectures for the instructor. The modules can be used in
              conjunction with a textbook or as a stand-alone instructional framework.
              Approximately new 20 modules will be developed for the topics of crystal growth
              and solidification- comprising important subjects for a graduate-level
              education in materials science and engineering course. Areas such as phase
              transformations, nucleation, heat and mass transport, chemical segregation,
              crystal texture, dendritic and eutectic growth, will be developed sequentially
              and logically connected. These subjects have matured dramatically over the past
              twenty years, and now can be taught on a highly quantitative basis, for which
              few suitable texts exist. 
%%%
The modules being developed under the subject
              NSF grant will be offered to all interested parties via a cost-free down-load
              via the Rensselaer WEB-site, or as a CD. The new modules should rectify the
              lack of tutorial support by providing a new robust pedagogical framework. In
              addition, original exercises, instructional programs, Java applets, etc. will
              be added to strengthen the existing modules, as feedback is received from
              students upon their use in a real classroom setting. These modalities for
              distribution will effectively publish the educational research and form a
              meaningful deliverable. In this manner, as wide an audience as possible in
              materials science and engineering, and in allied fields of science and
              engineering, will be served through the teaching tools.
***


