Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Economy, Society, and the Use of Domestic Space
               at Classic Period Chunchucmil, Yucatan, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0303322

Award Number: 0303322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Joyce rajoyce@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the supervision of Dr. Rosemary A. Joyce, Scott Hutson will  analyze data
              gathered during his archaeological excavations at the Maya site of Chunchucmil.
              Chunchucmil is located in Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula and thrived as a
              metropolitan center between 300 A.D. and 600 A.D. Chunchucmil is notable for
              its dense residential zones, which contain fenced-off houselots and a network
              of alleyways connecting these houselots to the rest of the city. Houselots
              consist of small buildings, such as sleeping structures, shrines, and kitchens,
              embedded within much larger open-air patios, yards, and activity areas.
              Hutson's excavations focused on the recovery of data that will help determine
              how these buildings and open areas were used.

	Research focusing on
              individual houselots and the kin that occupied them is important because it
              targets a very basic level of social organization: the familial bedrock upon
              which society exists. Generalized anthropological processes such as trade,
              urbanization and social inequality cannot be understood without documenting how
              the everyday needs and choices of individual families and their members
              contribute to and are affected by such processes. This project examines three
              specific houselots and compares the activities performed within them. Detecting
              variation in the activities (craftwork, gardening, crop processing, consumption
              of resources, etc.) performed among these houselots will contribute to an
              explanation of the relations between economic strategies, social inequality,
              settlement density, and the use of space. Likewise, documenting patterns in the
              location of activities across space will contribute to an understanding of the
              variety of ways in which waste management, privacy and other issues are
              resolved in a densely populated urban setting. Because the byproducts of many
              activities are often not preserved in the form of large durable artifacts
              (broken pottery, stone tools) or because such durables may have been removed
              from their original context in antiquity, this project is geared toward the
              recovery and analysis of micro-residues, such as phytoliths, charred plant
              remains, and chemical signatures of ancient activities (Phosphates, heavy
              metals).

           Beyond research questions of interest to social
              scientists, this project will have a broader impact by enhancing the level of
              public understanding of science both in the communities in Yucatan near the
              ancient site, and at various locations in the United States. In Yucatan, public
              outreach associated with the project has focused on two villages: modern-day
              Chunchucmil and neighboring Kochol. These outreach efforts (posters, school
              visits, town meetings) will continue when the analyses mentioned above are
              completed. In the US, outreach efforts include ongoing visits to the ASCEND
              charter school in Oakland. The preparation of a website will enhance public
              visibility of the project, while publication in both refereed journals and
              professional newsletters will communicate the results to the scientific
              community. Furthermore, both the author as well as undergraduate assistants at
              various institutions will gain training in the methods of analysis mentioned
              above.




