Title       : U.S. - Japan Joint Seminar: Earthquake-Resistant Design of Lifelines Facilities
               and Countermeasures Against Soil Liquefaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0303880

Award Number: 0303880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Bardet bardet@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0303880
Bardet

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              and engineers in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on earthquake-resistant design of
              lifelines facilities and countermeasures against soil liquefaction to be held
              in Tokyo, Japan.  The co-organizers are Professor Jean-Pierre Bardet at the
              University of Southern California in Los Angeles and Professor Masanori Hamada
              at Waseda University in Tokyo, Japan.  The meeting will bring together research
              scientists from the U.S. and Japan, two countries where important and exciting
              progress in this area of science is being undertaken.  During past earthquakes,
              soil liquefaction has repeatedly damaged lifelines (gas, water and electric
              utility lines) and foundations of bridges and highway overpasses.  There has
              been much research undertaken on the effects of liquefaction-induced
              deformation on foundations and lifelines systems in the 1994 Northridge and
              1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu earthquakes.  This resulted in proposed engineering
              solutions that mitigate the devastating effects of soil liquefaction in future
              earthquakes.  These findings will be discussed, as they are critical to the
              implementation of performance-based design in geotechnical and structural
              engineering in the United States and Japan.  The meeting will then define
              directions for future research in geotechnical earthquake engineering.

The
              co-organizers have complementary scientific expertise in the field.  This
              enables them to evaluate and attract the best scientists and engineers to
              participate.  The seminar is expected to yield results that will impact not
              only engineering practice but also fundamental research in engineering.  The
              seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve postdocs, graduate
              students and undergraduate students as both participants and observers. The
              exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in the field will enable U.S.
              participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
              collaborative projects.  Following the seminar the organizers plan to establish
              a workshop web page.  Conference proceedings will be published on this web
              site.        



