Title       : Evolving Better Biofilms: The Dynamics of Community-Level Natural Selection in
               Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0303636

Award Number: 0303636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lauren A. Meyers ancel@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 7186,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the evolution of multi-species communities using both
              bacterial and computational model systems. Biofilms are assemblages of bacteria
              that adhere to surfaces, both living and nonliving, and to each other. They are
              often composed of multiple species and cause human diseases, contaminate
              medical and food production equipment, corrode pipes, purify polluted waters,
              and protect materials from degradation. In this project, communities of species
              will be selected both in vitro and in silico to produce biofilms that are
              stronger and more resistant to parasites, antibiotics and/or caustic chemicals.
              These experiments will illuminate the effects of species composition and
              diversity on the evolution of a successful community.

Natural selection not
              only favors fit organisms but also can act at a higher level, favoring entire
              populations over others, a process known as group selection. In multi-species
              bacterial infections, combinations of species that form stable, transmissible
              infections will successfully proliferate to new hosts, and will thereby be
              favored as an entire assemblage for further evolution. In cheese production and
              wastewater decontamination, dairy producers and environmental engineers
              artificially select among mixed communities of bacteria for those that perform
              these tasks best. What allows mixed communities to solve some ecological
              problems better that homogeneous communities? Does community-level evolution
              follow the same principles as individual-level evolution? Although mixed
              microbial communities underlie many health and environmental concerns,
              virtually nothing is known about their evolution. Because biofilms thrive in
              nature as both monocultures and mixed cultures, they offer an ideal test bed
              for exploring the fundamentals of community-level selection.

