Title       : Collaborative Research: Quantifying rare earth element transport in aquifers
               using field, laboratory, and numerical approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0303761

Award Number: 0303761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen H. Johannesson kjohanne@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0126222
Johannesson
	Groundwater is the principal source of drinking water in
              the United States, and represents over 68% of the world's fresh water supply.
              Therefore, assuring the quality of groundwater for current populations and
              protecting it from future contamination is of great concern.  Groundwater
              consumption can increase the loading of specific heavy metals to our bodies,
              and interaction of groundwaters with buried nuclear wastes is considered the
              most likely release mechanism of these materials to the environment.
              Understanding the geochemistry of heavy metals in aquifers is critical to
              developing accurate solute transport models, which can be employed to predict
              the fate and transport of heavy metals in aquifers over time and under
              different environmental conditions. We seek to quantify rare earth elements
              (REE) concentrations and behavior along groundwater flow paths in real
              aquifers, and develop a coupled groundwater flow and transport model for these
              heavy metals. The REEs are of interest because of their potential as
              geochemical tracers of water-rock reactions, and because their chemical
              similarities to transuranics makes them attractive natural analogs for studying
              radioactive contaminants in aquifer. Our research objectives are: 

(1) To
              elucidate the geochemical behavior of REEs along groundwater flow paths in well
              characterized aquifers emphasizing their concentrations, fractionation
              patterns, and speciation.
(2) To develop a combined surface and solution
              complexation model for the REEs that is specific to each aquifer, but can also
              be broadly applied to other systems. 
(3) To assemble and implement a coupled
              groundwater flow and reactive transport simulation model for REEs in
              groundwater systems.   

To accomplish these objectives, we will implement an
              integrated field, laboratory, and numerical modeling study over a period of
              three years. We will utilize two well characterized aquifers (i.e., Carrizo
              Sand, Texas; Floridan aquifer, Florida) for the field component of the project.
               Both are typical drinking water aquifers that represent common, albeit,
              compositionally different systems.  The data generated in the study will be
              crucial for "calibrating" reactive transport models for REEs in aquifer, and
              will improve our general understanding of reactive solute transpor

