Title       : RUI: Dynamic Properties of Magnetic Multilayers and Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0303563

Award Number: 0303563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zbigniew J. Celinski zcelinsk@mail.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Camley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              

This condensed matter physics project focuses on the properties of magnetic
              multilayers and nanostructures.  While static behaviors, such as exchange
              coupling and giant magnetoresistance have received most of the attention, there
              are important issues in understanding the dynamical behavior of these materials
              as well.  In this area three studies are proposed.  (1)  Dynamic behavior of
              exchange-coupled magnetic multilayers.  This will be studied at low fields via
              ferromagnetic resonance methods.  This area, unlike the well studied case of
              magnetic resonance in magnetic multilayers, is known as the anti-resonance
              condition - where the skin depth becomes large and the material "opens up" -
              has not been investigated.  This is surprising since theoretical calculations
              indicate that anti-resonance in multilayers is very different from
              anti-resonance in single films and because there are significant technological
              applications for this effect.  In addition we intend to investigate a very
              strong low-field absorption that occurs in some magnetic multilayers.  (2)
              Studies of the variance of exchange coupling strength in layered structures. 
              The determination of th e exchange coupling strength between two ferromagnets
              through a nonmagnetic spacer material has now been measured for many material
              combinations.  In contrast, the variance in this exchange coupling strength has
              not been addressed, even though it plays a critical role in the dynamic
              properties of the structure.  The variance will be measures by using linewidth
              information from ferromagnetic resonance measurements.  This will be done for
              the metallic multilayers and for ferromagnet/antiferromagnet structures where
              interface roughness is likely to create large variations in exchange coupling. 
              (3)  Dynamic response of ultra-small patterned structures.  This will include
              dynamic measurements on ultra-small (10 nm diameter) magnetic dot arrays, and
              both single material dots (Fe and Permalloy) and multilayer (Fe/Pd and Co/Pd)
              dots.  The Co/Pd dots are particularly interesting in that the magnetization
              can be changed from in-plane to out-of-plane by changing the thicknesses of the
              layers.  The project will also investigate how the magnetic quality of the dot
              arrays depends on fabrication process (ion-beam etching and deposition through
              a protein mask), dot separation, and dot structures.  These measurements will
              be important for magnetic memory technology
The PI's all have a demonstrated
              history of integrating education with research as well as promoting diversity,
              and this commitment to education and human resource development will continue
              to be emphasized in the proposed activity.  Graduate and undergraduate students
              involved in the project receive training in fundamental experimental techniques
              with cutting edge technology. This training will prepare them for a range of
              careers in academe, industry or government.



The field of layered
              magnetic materials has been exceptionally active in the last decade.  Important
              discoveries such as giant magnetoresistance have already been implemented in
              computer memories, leading to significant improvements in magnetic hard disk
              systems.   The project will include studies of these new layered materials to
              explore fundamental physics and possible applications.  The first of these
              investigations deals with the electromagnetic response of these materials at
              high frequencies.  Theoretical calculations show that at particular frequencies
              the material rejects electromagnetic waves.  This feature has not been tested
              experimentally even though it has significant technological promise for high
              frequency signal processing.  Magnetic multilayers will be fabricated and
              tested to see if this works as predicted and if it is usable technologically. 
              The second main topic deals with the magnetic coupling in these layered
              materials.  Of particular interest is how this coupling varies from position to
              position along the layers.  This is important because this variation plays an
              important role in the high frequency response described above.  The final
              project deals with ultra-small magnetic dots.  These ultra-small dots are only
              about 50 atoms in diameter so they can have very different properties than
              materials we deal with on an everyday basis.  The experiments will study how
              varying the shape of the dots as well as the layering pattern can change the
              magnetization direction in these dots.  This could be very important for
              magnetic recording because an array of these tiny dots could store an enormous
              amount of information.  The Principal Investigators have a demonstrated history
              of integrating education with research as well as promoting diversity, and this
              commitment to education and human resource development will continue to be
              emphasized in the proposed activity.  Students in this program receive rigorous
              training in physics and materials, and can pursue careers in either academic or
              industrial science.

 

