Title       : Molecular, Cluster, and Solid State Lanthanide Compounds With Electropositive
               Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0303075

Award Number: 0303075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Brennan bren@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7202,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Dr. John G. Brennan, Department of Chemistry, Rutgers
              University to undertake a comprehensive investigation into the synthesis and
              characterization of lanthanide (Ln) molecules, clusters, and solid-state
              materials with direct bonds  to  the  more electropositive chalcogens ( E = S,
              Se, Te).   Relationships between the physical properties of molecules,
              clusters, and solids will be determined, with an emphasis placed on
              understanding how properties evolve as a function of system dimensionality. 
              Synthetic methods leading to facile interconversion of molecular, cluster, and
              solid-state materials will be developed.  These compounds are of interest as
              chemical reagents because the Ln-Te(R) bond is so readily disrupted.  A second
              area to be developed is the synthesis of Ln compounds with particularly useful
              selenium-containing leaving groups, which also impart toluene solubility that
              is useful in cluster chemistry.  Finally, volatile Ln compounds with selenium
              ligands are also targeted.  These studies are designed to provide an
              understanding of how the chemical and physical properties of Ln compounds
              evolve as a function of particle size. 

This multidisciplinary project will
              provide undergraduate and graduate students with a broad exposure to materials
              synthesis and characterization techniques and requires students to consider
              both practical and intellectual contributions to experimental design.   This
              research impacts on organic chemistry by providing a totally new class of
              potential Lewis acid catalysts, reducing agents, or polymerization initiators. 
               The proposed compounds are also useful sources for doping Ln ions into
              chalcogenido semiconductors or glasses, which have important implications in
              the manufacture of flat panel displays and optical fibers.  The chemistry can
              also be developed as a low temperature (and thus low cost) approach to
              environmentally acceptable red-orange pigments that reduce the demand for Cd/Hg
              based materials. 

