Title       : Aerosol-Cloud-Radiation Interactions in the Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0303962

Award Number: 0303962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Garrett tgarrett@met.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Mace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiquan Dong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports an investigation of the way arctic haze interacts with
              low-level clouds to affect longwave and shortwave radiative fluxes at the
              ground.  It is based on analysis of data from two observational sites near
              Barrow, Alaska.  One is the NOAA Climate Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory
              (CMDL), which measures aerosol concentrations near the ground; the other is the
              DOE Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) site, which monitors cloud and
              atmospheric radiative properties with ground-based remote sensing equipment. 
              New and existing algorithms will be used for inferring cloud microstructure,
              the net radiative flux, and the presence of precipitation from the
              observations.  From the long records available, it will be possible to study
              the annual and interannual variability of these quantities.  Concentrations of
              cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) will be estimated from measurements at the
              ground of aerosol concentration and scattered solar radiation.  This requires
              information about the cloud droplet size distribution, which will be based on
              archival data from the University of Washington LEADEX experiment conducted in
              the Arctic in the spring of 1998 and from other field experiments.  The project
              will evaluate the hypothesis that pollution-induced arctic haze causes stratus
              clouds to have smaller but more drops, leading to a higher infrared emissivity
              and increased longwave surface heating in the arctic winter and early spring. 
              In addition, it will provide new information on the composition of wintertime
              arctic clouds, about which little is known.  The results will lead to improved
              treatment of the radiative properties of clouds in climate models.
