Title       : Three problems on Gromov-Witten invariants of algebraic varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0303614

Award Number: 0303614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ionut Ciocan-Fontanine ciocan@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0303614
Ionut Ciocan-Fontanine

 
The PI proposes to pursue a program
              based on the
theory of derived moduli spaces towards calculating higher
              genus
Gromov-Witten invariants of certain Calabi-Yau threefolds, such as
              the
quintic in projective 4-space. While computations of the genus
              zero
invariants have been quite successful, leading to proofs of
              physicists'
Mirror Symmetry - based predictions in that case, there has been
              no
progress so far in higher genus. The main obstacle has been a lack
              of
concrete understanding of the virtual fundamental classes of the
              moduli
spaces of higher genus stable maps. In recent work, the PI and
              Kapranov
have developed an approach to virtual classes via differential-graded
              (dg)
manifolds. Dg-manifolds appear as derived versions of
              algebro-geometric
moduli spaces. The PI and Kapranov constructed such a
              structure on the
moduli spaces of stable maps. The greater flexibility of the
              dg-point
of view restores some of the features that facilitated the genus
              zero
computations. The ultimate goal is to prove the higher genus
              ``mirror
theorem'', as predicted by the physicists Bershadsky, Cecotti,
              Ooguri,
and Vafa. A crucial part of the program involves a novel construction
              of
a virtual class in situations outside the reach of earlier
              approaches.
This is of great independent interest in algebraic geometry, as it
              allows
to extend the theory of virtual classes to all moduli spaces, as
              opposed
to just the (rather small) subset to which it currently
              applies.
Ciocan-Fontanine also proposes to establish a relationship between
              the
genus zero Gromov-Witten theory of a GIT quotient X//G by a
              reductive
algebraic group G, and that of the associated abelian quotient
              X//T,
where T is a maximal torus in G. Precise conjectures are made on what
              the
relationship is, inspired by results obtained recently by the PI and
              his
collaborators in the case when X is a complex vector space and G is
              the
general linear group. They are  consistent with expectations on how
              the
physical theories associated to X//G and X//T are related and will be
              of
interest to physicists, as well as to algebraic geometers.
The third
              problem proposed by the PI is to give a proof of a combinatorial
formula for
              the three-point, genus zero Gromov-Witten invariants of complex
Grassmannians.
              This is the only outstanding unsolved problem remaining in
``Quantum Schubert
              Calculus.''

This is research in the field of algebraic geometry, which is
              one of the
oldest branches of modern mathematics. In recent years, the methods
              and
ideas of algebraic geometry, especially the study of moduli spaces,
              have
been employed in string theory, a very active part of theoretical
              physics.
Developments in string theory have  sparked a fruitful interaction
              between
the two communities of researchers and have led to the discovery and
              study
of many unexpected new phenomena. The theory of Gromov-Witten
              invariants
and Mirror Symmetry are particularly striking examples.

