Title       : Quantification of Unintentional Water Recycling in Surface Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0303627

Award Number: 0303627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Sedlak sedlak@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Dracup  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0303627   Sedlak   Recent advances in analytical chemistry have led to the
              detection of numerous previously ignored chemical contaminants in municipal
              wastewater effluent. While the presence of these wastewater-derived
              contaminants has led to considerable scrutiny of projects in which highly
              treated wastewater is used to augment water supplies, little attention has been
              paid to the unintentional recycling of wastewater effluent. Results of a survey
              conducted during the 1970s suggested that over 7.7 million U.S. residents
              receive water from sources that consist of more than 50% wastewater effluent
              during some portion of the year. As a result of continued population growth,
              especially in arid regions, it is likely that the current number of people
              receiving wastewater-impacted water is even higher. Because many
              wastewater-derived contaminants are not removed during water treatment, this
              pathway could result in exposure of large populations to chemicals that are
              carcinogens or endocrine disrupters.
Intellectual Merit
The objective of this
              project is to assess the current extent of unintentional recycling
              of
wastewater effluent and to develop tools that can be used to assess the
              potential presence of wastewater-derived contaminants in water supplies. These
              objectives will be accomplished through a combination of hydrologic modeling
              and field measurements. In the first phase of the project, locations where
              unintentional recycling is likely to be significant will be identified and a
              suite of conservative and reactive tracers will be evaluated under conditions
              found in surface waters. The hydrologic analysis will include estimation the
              fraction of wastewater effluent at drinking water intakes during average and
              low-flow conditions and the amount of time the water has spent in the river
              prior to abstraction. On the basis of this preliminary analysis, three sites
              will be chosen for further analysis during the second phase of the project. At
              each site, the hydrologic model will be refined using site-specific data
              including river morphology, precipitation and contaminant attenuation rates.
              Predictions from the model will be compared with measurements of conservative
              and reactive tracers made at locations throughout the contributing areas of the
              watershed. Discrepancies between model predictions and measurements will be
              used to refine the models and to obtain a better estimate of contaminant
              attenuation rates.
Broader Impacts
In addition to providing new insight into
              the risks posed by the unintentional recycling of
wastewater effluent, the
              project will have a broad impact on science and engineering by
providing new
              research opportunities for students from underrepresented groups. During the
              first phase of the research, high school students from low-performing local
              schools will assist in the collection of data needed to identify sites where
              unintentional recycling is significant. During the second phase of the project,
              undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will assist in field work
              and analysis of data.

