Title       : Theory and Computer Tools for the Analysis and Synthesis of Multi-Energy Domain
               Engineering Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9612080

Award Number: 9612080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kamal Youcef-Toumi youcef@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project develops an interactive environment  which allows a user
              to perform analysis, and synthesis of  interacting multi-energy domain systems
              (such as mechanical,  electrical, magnetic, fluidic, thermal, and hybrid
              systems  which may consist of a combination of the above mentioned  domains).
              The approach used addresses the multi-energy  domain feature by using an energy
              method for the system  representation, which is based on energy  methods and
              the  bond graph representation of physical systems. All  information pertaining
              to mass balance, momentum balance and  energy balance are included in this
              representation. The  system's structural information is also preserved under
              this  representation. Useful information is  extracted from bond  graphs
              representation of physical system. The energy method  relates the properties
              and the constraints from all energy  domains in a unified approach. The main
              results of this  research include modeling theory of multi-energy domain 
              interacting systems and a generic software package for  modeling, analysis and
              synthesis of components, machines and  processes. The tools allow the user to
              rapidly set up a  simulation for analysis and performance evaluation. This 
              interactive environment has the capability of suggesting  design alternatives
              thereby assisting in the synthesis  process and allowing the user to have a
              system's point of  view. The final product will result in an important impact 
              on both industries and academia by enhancing their efficient  analysis and
              synthesis capability.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
