Title       : Mesoscale Modeling of Precipitation in Coastal Regions of Complex Orography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1996  
File        : a9612876

Award Number: 9612876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford F. Mass cliff@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612876  Mass        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
              activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve
              the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this Program, the
              National Science  Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration (NOAA) are  jointly evaluating and supporting weather research
              of high priority to the USWRP.        The distribution of precipitation along
              the west coast of North America is  greatly influenced by the orography of the
              region, resulting in a complex pattern of  enhancement on the windward sides of
              mountains and precipitation shadows to their  lee.  The importance of
              orographic modulation of coastal zone precipitation has been  highlighted
              recently by a series of major flooding events in northern California and  the
              Pacific Northwest that have resulted in losses in the billions of dollars and 
              several deaths  The objective of this proposal is to evaluate the potential of
              high-resolution regional   atmospheric models for diagnosing and predicting
              orographically modulated  precipitation along the mountainous coastal zone of
              western North America.   Although current operational weather prediction models
              lack the resolution to  correctly forecast orographic precipitation, a growing
              collection of regional model  simulations suggests that with sufficient
              resolution, precipitation can be predicted  realistically in coastal regions of
              complex terrain.  If successful, high resolution  modeling would offer improved
              precipitation forecasts and coupling their output to  hydrological models could
              lead to more accurate prediction of stream flow, river  stages, and flooding.  
                   This research effort will evaluate the performance of a high-resolution 
              mesoscale model for a range of heavy precipitation/flooding events along the 
              orographic west coast of North America.  As part of this evaluation,
              experiments  will be made to determine the resolution, model physics, and data
              assimilation  methods r equired for producing the best possible regional model
              performance for  coastal precipitation/flooding events.  The model will be run
              both in real time to  evaluate the long-term precipitation skill of the model
              at moderate (~10-15 km)  resolution and for a series of retrospective case
              studies at very high resolution (down  to 1-3 km horizontal resolution).  These
              case studies will include California and  Pacific Northwest heavy
              precipitation/flooding events and at least one case for  southeastern Alaska.  
                   In addition to evaluating and improving the ability of high resolution 
              atmospheric models to forecast orographic precipitation, this effort will also
              involve  interfacing the model's precipitation, temperature, and wind fields
              with a watershed  hydrological model. Such model coupling has the potential to
              greatly improve short-  term forecasts of river height and flooding.  Finally,
              this project will promote active  interaction between the University of
              Washington scientists and National Weather  Service forecasts offices in
              California, Oregon, Washington, and Alaska.  ***
