Title       : INDOEX-Field Experiment in the Indian Ocean Contribution from the University of
               Maryland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9612893

Award Number: 9612893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell R. Dickerson russ@atmos.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce G. Doddridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,1309,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ATM-9612893  Dickerson , Russell  University of Maryland  "INDOEX-Field
              Experiment in the Indian Ocean Contribution for the University of Maryland"    
              The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an international field experiment with
              participation from France, Germany, India, the Netherlands, and the United
              States.  The main effort under the U.S. component focuses on assessing the role
              of sulfates and other continental aerosols in global radiative forcing and is
              being supported jointly by the Department of Energy and the National Science
              Foundation.  In addition, complementary studies involving investigations of a
              variety of related chemical and radiative processes will be undertaken by
              scientists from other federal agencies and other international partners.  The
              composite observing system consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to
              aircraft, as well as surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite
              data.  The main part of the three year effort will be a four-month intensive
              field phase which begins January 1999.     The ultimate goal of this program is
              to obtain a better understanding of the decadal and longer time scale climate
              forcing.  The equatorial Indian Ocean during the northeast winter monsoon
              season provides a unique natural laboratory for this experiment.  The
              experimental area is probably the only place in the world where an air mass
              which has been modified by intense sources of continental aerosols,
              anthropogenic trace species, and their reaction products (e.g., sulfates and
              ozone) from the northern hemisphere comes into contact with the pristine air of
              the southern hemisphere, which has been transported via cross equatorial
              monsoonal flow, at the Intertropical Convergence Zone.   The juxtaposition of
              these two very distinct air masses will allow a thorough examination of both
              the direct and indirect effects of the aerosols on the radiative properties of
              the atmosphere.     The role of Dr. Dickerson and his colleagues in INDOEX is
              to supply carbon monoxide an d ozone measurements for both the preliminary
              (1998) and primary (1999) ship cruises, to measure sulfur dioxide and
              size-segregated aerosol particle composition on the primary cruise, in
              collaboration with other INDOEX scientists, to measure carbon monoxide and
              ozone from the island site in Male.  The resulting data will be analyzed to
              obtain insights into the transport meteorology and photochemistry of the
              region.
