Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Topology of Foliations and Flows in
               3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9612317

Award Number: 9612317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio R. Fenley fenley@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     9612317 Fenley    Foliations are a fundamental tool in the study of the
              topology of 3-manifolds.  A Reebless two dimensional foliation F in a closed
              3-manifold M lifts to a foliation (F1) by topological planes in the universal
              cover.  This project proposes to study the topological structure of F1, the
              geometric properties of F1, and how these relate to the topology and geometry
              of M.  Of special interest is the study of the large scale geometry and
              asymptotic behavior (when M is hyperbolic) of leaves of F1.  A second topic to
              be considered consists of flows in 3-manifolds and the large scale geometry of
              flow lines when lifted to the universal cover.  The principal investigator has
              constructed many examples of metrically efficient (called quasigeodesic)
              pseudo-Anosov flows in hyperbolic 3-manifolds and now proposes to study the
              consequences of the quasigeodesic property for the geometry of the stable and
              unstable foliations associated to these flows and the finite depth foliations
              to which these quasigeodesic flows are almost transverse.   A foliation is a
              decomposition of an object of dimension n (called a manifold) into a disjoint
              union of objects of dimension less than n (called the leaves of the foliation),
              much the same as a book (dimension 3) is the union of its pages (of dimension
              2).  In mathematics these objects are quite common; for instance, a flow
              without fixed orbits is a foliation of dimension 1 (the leaves are the flow
              lines and they have dimension 1).  A general principle of manifold theory is
              the following: the smaller the dimension, the easier to understand.  Hence
              foliations are very useful;  understand the leaves and how they are put
              together to form the manifold and one partially understands the manifold. This
              project attempts to understand how the geometry of the leaves interacts with
              the geometry of the manifold;  in the case of a book, the leaves sit flat in
              the manifold, but in general their geometric behavior is much more complex. 
              The principal investigator hopes  to describe this geometric behavior for a
              special class of manifolds called hyperbolic manifolds.
