Title       : Scaling Approach to Hydrologic Extremes and Their Dependence on Climate and
               Basin Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9612531

Award Number: 9612531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278222             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafael L. Bras rlbras@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniele Veneziano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304020   Extreme Wind                            
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9612531  Bras  The prevalent approaches to estimating extreme precipitation  and
              flood relationships are empirical curve fitting to  historical data and
              numerical simulation also based on  empirical models.  Both methods become
              inaccurate if very  rare events or the impact of climatic variations and human 
              interventions on such extremes are estimated.  The source of  the inaccuracy is
              that, in the absence of a theoretical or  physical basis, extrapolation far
              beyond the range of the  historical data becomes highly uncertain.  A large
              number of  these empirical relations are of the power-type that reflect  the
              scale-invariant properties of the observed hydrologic  event.  This project
              will use a scaling or fractal approach  to the problem of extrapolation from
              limited data of  hydrologic extremes.  A new class of rainfall and width 
              functions models will be developed which posses the simple-  and multi-scaling
              properties observed in nature for these  quantities and that will be validated
              through extensive data  analysis.  These models will combine two basic
              approaches,  the multi-scaling and the pulse superposition.  The final  phase
              of the project will include the parameterization of  rainfall and basin
              response in terms of climate and  catchment characteristics, using them to
              assess the  sensitivity of peak precipitation and flood events to both  natural
              changes in the climate, basin characteristics, and  human intervention. 
              Improving the understanding of the  rainfall-flood relationship is of great
              benefit to areas and  people at risk and will advance the state-of-the-art. 
              ***
