Title       : Optical Coherence Microscopy in Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a9612240

Award Number: 9612240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $682121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Haskell Richard_Haskell@HMC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruye Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott E. Fraser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel C. Petersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1022,9183,BIOT,OSIE,
Abstract    :
                                         PROJECT SUMMARY                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                   An optical coherence
              microscope (OCM) will be designed and  constructed to study fundamental
              problems in developmental  biology. The microscope will be capable of imaging
              cells located  up to one millimeter below the surface of living tissue, even 
              though light scattering in the specimen would render it opaque to  a
              conventional or confocal light microscope. Depth penetration is  achieved by
              use of a near infrared superluminescent diode light  source with a coherence
              length of 20 um together with a coherence  gate based on a Michelson
              interferometer. This combination  excludes light back-scattered from
              out-of-focus planes, giving a  depth resolution of 10 ~m. Lateral resolution of
              10 um or better  is achieved by focusing the illuminating beam down to a small 
              spot. Two-dimensional lateral scanning of the beam spot produces  an optical
              section at a fixed depth in the sample. A  three-dimensional image is obtained
              by stacking successive  optical sections at different depths. Such
              three-dimensional  scans should take less than a minute.    OCM will be used to
              study two key systems in developmental  biology, the frog Xenopus laevis and
              the plant Arabidopsis  thaliana. In the frog embryo, the processes of
              gastrulation and  neurulation will be monitored in real time. Specifically, the
               relative motions of the surface cells (ectoderm) and deeper cells  (mesoderm)
              will be followed to better define the spatial  relationships between the
              responding and signaling cells during  interactions critical to neural
              patterning and to better  characterize the segmentation of the mesoderm into
              axial and  paraxial structures. These events occur several hundred  micrometers
              into the embryo, at a depth inaccessible to a  confocal microscope because of
              multiple scattering.    In Arabidopsis, embryo formation o ccurs deep within
              maternal  tissues and is therefore inaccessible to confocal microscopy. OCM 
              will be used to observe plant embryo development in vivo (in the 
              seed-containing silique) for the first time. Two specialized  embryonic
              tissues, the shoot and root meristems, somehow direct  the plant's subsequent
              embryonic and post-embryonic development.  Wild-type and mutant Arabidopsis
              plants will be used to study the  role of the shoot apical meristem in
              embryonic development.  Post-embryonically, the shoot apical meristem directs
              the pattern  of leaf initiation (phyllotaxy). The role of the meristem in 
              initiation of such patterns is hidden by overlying leaves. With  OCM it will be
              possible for the first time to observe in real  time the earliest morphological
              changes associated with  phyllotaxis. These observations of morphology will be
              correlated  with genetic analysis and other experimental manipulations to 
              probe the fundamental molecular mechanisms underlying plant  development.    A
              collaborative team of faculty with backgrounds in biology,  biophysics,
              computer engineering, optical sciences, and physics  will direct the research
              program, with extensive participation of  undergraduate students both during
              the summer and throughout the  academic year. In addition to the specific
              research goals  described in this proposal, another key objective is to engage 
              undergraduates in significant research projects that will help  prepare and
              motivate them to pursue careers in multidisciplinary  activities in science and
              technology.
