Title       : CEDAR: Arctic Observations of the Upper Mesosphere and Thermosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1997   
File        : a9612881

Award Number: 9612881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Hecht James.H.Hecht@aero.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerospace Corporation
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  90009    /   -

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of two experiments.  The first will investigate temporal
              development in the neutral composition in the E-region in response to auroral
              heating.  The PI will make quantitative measurements at two sites:  the first,
              located in the polar cap at Sondre Stromfjord, will represent an upstream site
              in the antisunward neutral flow in the midnight to dawn sector associated with
              southward IMF; the second, located equatorward of the first, represents the
              downstream site.  This experiment simultaneously measures spatial
              characteristics of compositional changes and aurorally-induced Joule and
              particle heating inputs into the E-region.  Observations of both will allow the
              investigation of the role of local versus transport processes which govern
              depletions of atomic oxygen.      The second experiment will determine if
              atmospheric gravity waves cause noctilucent cloud particles to sublimate.  The
              study will use data from a Rayleigh lidar and a Michelson interferometer,
              currently located at Sondre Stromfjord and from a newly developed UV
              spectrograph.  The PI will measure characteristics of NLC cloud particles and
              AGWs during a maximum solar depression angle between 6 and 8 degrees below the
              horizon.
