Title       : Technical Assistance to Facilitate the Development of a State Action Plan to
               Increase the Participation of Minorities in MSE Research and Teaching Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1997   
File        : a9612216

Award Number: 9612216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $512263             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley M. McBay smmcbay@qem.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : QUALITY ED FOR MIN NET
	      1818 N ST NW
	      WASHINGTON, DC  200362406    /   -

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9612216  McBay    The proposed project builds upon the Quality Education for
              Minorities (QEM) Network's Technical Assistance Project (TAP) that was funded
              by the National Science Foundation (NSF). TAP's long-term goal is to
              significantly increase the participation in mathematics, science, and
              engineering (MSE) fields of groups historically underrepresented as students
              and teachers in higher level pre-college mathematics and science courses as
              well as in MSE fields at the college and graduate levels.    Non-Asian
              minorities constitute only about five percent of the pool of highly skilled
              technical workers the country needs but represent a sizable (more than 20
              percent) and growing percentage of the U.S. population. To focus efforts on 
              this problem, both the NSF and QEM have established numerical goals for the
              year 2000 for minority MSE baccalaureate and doctoral degree recipients.    The
              proposed project seeks to strengthen the capacity of minority and nonminority
              institutions within a selected state to produce well-prepared minority
              graduates who enter MSE teaching and research careers in numbers commensurate
              with the percentage of minority students in higher education enrolled in that
              state.    A major outcome will be a state action plan, developed under the
              leadership of a state steering committee established during the prior award,
              that will enable the state to make its proportionate contribution to the
              minority MSE degree numerical goals. The plan will emphasize articulation
              agreements between two- and four-year institutions, the use of technology, and
              strengthening teacher education programs.    Various forms of technical
              assistance will be provided to the participating institutions that will be
              designed to increase institutional capacity and infrastructure as well as to
              facilitate coordination and collaboration, and information sharing.  ***
