Title       : Rate Enhancement and Microstructure Control of Copper CVD Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9612157

Award Number: 9612157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302014             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Griffin griffin@che.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew W. Maverick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Griffin - 9612157    Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of copper thin
              films is being studied as a potential technology for interconnect metallization
              in future generations of deep sub-micron integrated circuits.  As interconnect
              linewidths decrease and clock frequencies increase, the on-chip
              resistance-capacitance time delays become the major limitation in achieving
              high circuit speed.  Smaller linewidths also lead to higher current densities,
              which raises concern about reliability issues such as electromigrations and
              stress-induced void formation.  Copper offers several intrinsic property
              advantages over aluminum, the current material of choice for metallization. 
              These include lower resistivity, improved electromigration resistance, and
              increased resistance to stress-induced voidage.      This project is an
              inter-disciplinary, multi-investigator program of combined experimental and
              theoretical research aimed at further developing the process technology needed
              for the chemical vapor deposition of copper thin films for ULSI device
              metallization.  This research is aimed at developing a fundamental,
              quantitative understanding of the reaction mechanism for deposition processes
              based on Cu(II) reduction chemistry.  By studying this group of reactions, the
              PI s will be exploring an alternative to the Cu(I) disproportionation process. 
              The higher reactivity of the Cu(I) reactants used for the latter process may
              eventually lead to problems with film nucleation and grain size control, as the
              microelectronics industry moves progressively toward higher aspect ratios for
              via fills.  The bis(beta-diketonate) reduction chemistry can also provide a
              more versatile pathway for CVD of other metals (i.e., volatile beta-diketonate
              compounds exist for most transition metals, while the disproportionation
              pathway is essentially unique to copper).
