Title       : INDOEX: Field Experiment in the Indian Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9612891

Award Number: 9612891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antony D. Clarke tclarke@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John N. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9612891  Clarke     The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an
              international field experiment with participation from France, Germany, India,
              the Netherlands, and the United States.  The main effort under the U.S.
              component focuses on assessing the role of sulfates and other continental
              aerosols in global radiative forcing and is being supported jointly by the
              Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation.  In addition,
              complementary studies involving investigations of a variety of related chemical
              and radiative processes will be undertaken by scientists from other federal
              agencies and other international partners.  The composite observing system
              consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to aircraft, as well as
              surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite data.  The main part
              of the three year effort will be a four-month intensive field phase which
              begins January 1999.     The ultimate goal of this program is to obtain a
              better understanding of the decadal and longer time scale climate forcing.  The
              equatorial Indian Ocean during the northeast winter monsoon season provides a
              unique natural laboratory for this experiment.  The experimental area is
              probably the only place in the world where an air mass which has been modified
              by intense sources of continental aerosols, anthropogenic trace species, and
              their reaction products (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the northern hemisphere
              comes into contact with the pristine air of the southern hemisphere, which has
              been transported via cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at the Intertropical
              Convergence Zone.   The juxtaposition of these two very distinct air masses
              will allow a thorough examination of both the direct and indirect effects of
              the aerosols on the radiative properties of the atmosphere.     Dr. Clarke's 
              role in INDOEX is to carry out a suite of aerosol microphysical and optical
              measurements aboard the NCAR C-130 aircraft which are designed to provide
              fundamental information on aerosol properties.  These  data are needed to help
              evaluate the role of aerosols in both direct and indirect climate forcing. 
              Specialized instrumentation will provide rapid assessment of aerosol
              physio-chemistry and of aerosol processes, including nucleation, as well as
              provide a continuous characterization of the aerosol field during the aircraft
              missions.  This combination of instruments has been used to distinguish between
              marine, continentally polluted, continental dusts, and "clean regions of the
              troposphere characterized by low aerosol mass and but high concentrations of
              "new" nuclei.  These instruments also will be used obtain information on the
              aerosol size distribution and optical signatures.  An important aspect of the
              project are the validation and inter-comparison activities that will be carried
              out in conjunction with the other INDOEX PIs.
