Title       : PDS: Pursuing a Petaflop: Point Designs for 100TF Computers Using PIM
               Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1996  
File        : a9612028

Award Number: 9612028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Van Rosendale                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Kogge kogge@cse.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin H. Sha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven C. Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jay B. Brockman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Danny Ziyi Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There are two major problems with the current state of the art in
              high-performance computing.  First, the cost of the very highest end machines
              lies far beyond the point where widespread deployment is feasible, and second
              (and more critical) the software environments for these machines are awkward at
              best, and capable of eking out only fractions of the performance that the
              hardware is capable of supplying.  The thesis of this  is that much of the
              problem stems from our historical separation of memory and CPU logic parts. 
              Individual CPU clock rates and internal architectures continue to accelerate,
              and thus require ever increasing amounts of bandwidth from the memory
              subsystem.  These rates have far exceeded the bandwidth capabilities of our
              densest DRAM memory  parts (needed to control system costs), and the gap will
              widen over time.  The net effect is complex memory hierarchies, which in turn
              drives cost and software complexity in addressing these hierarchies
              efficiently.   A new technology is emerging to counter this fundamental defect:
              the combination on one chip of both dense DRAM and very significant amounts of
              logic. This capability permits new architectures termed Processing-In-Memory
              (PIM) to place computing either right next to, or even inside of, the memory
              macros, where there are huge amounts of raw bandwidth.  The first such chip,
              EXECUBE, integrated onto a 4Mbit DRAM chip 8 complete CPUs configured in a 3D
              binary hypercube, and was capable of being used as a one chip-type building
              block for MPPs of both MIMD and SIMD organization.  The objective of this
              project is to look at utilizing PIM technology potentials over the next decade
              and demonstrate that they promise efficient solution.  The approach to be used
              involves configuring and studying some "point design" MPPs with 100 tera(fl)op
              potential for several interesting classes of problems, and then utilizing the
              novel features of these architectures, along with matching system software and
              software development tools, to attack them  in ways that may permit not only
              exceptional performance, but also greatly simplified programming environments.
