Title       : Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy of Laser-Polarized Noble Gases for
               Biomedical, Geophysics, and Materials Science Investigations (Collaborative
               Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1996 
File        : a9612237

Award Number: 9612237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Walsworth rwalsworth@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy R. Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin D. Hurlimann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence M. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohan Srinivasarao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1022,5345,OSIE,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612237  Walsworth  The emerging technology of the magnetic resonance of laser- 
              polarized noble gases helium and xenon (3He and 129Xe) will be  used in a three
              year program of biomedical, geophysics, and  materials science investigations. 
                A multi-institutional and multidisciplinary investigation will be  conducted
              jointly by researchers at the Smithsonian Astrophysical  Observatory,
              Cambridge, Massachusetts and Brigham and Women's  Hospital, Boston,
              Massachusetts.  A subaward will support  materials research at the  North
              Carolina State University,  Raleigh, North Carolina; another will provide
              support to Boston  University for biomedical engineering studies associated
              with the  project.    Potential biomedical applications include the
              characterization of  lipid membrane integrity (e.g. in the diagnosis of
              multiple  sclerosis); improved in vivo lung imaging (important for early  tumor
              detection); and better measurement of blood flow to tissue  (important for
              stroke and ischemia  diagnosis).  In geophysics  and materials science,
              magnetic resonance measurements of laser-  polarized noble gas may improve the
              understanding of the  connectivity of pores in rocks, the structure, evolution,
              and  theology of foams and emulsions; and the diffusion of gases  through
              liquid crystalline polymer films.    Specific aims of the proposed research
              using laser-polarized  noble gas magnetic resonance are: I) perform biomedical
              studies  of noble gas magnetic resonance imaging as a new tool for human 
              disease diagnosis and research; ii) investigate the connectivity  of pores in
              reservoir rocks; iii) investigate the structure and  evolution of model foams
              and emulsions; iv) investigate the  rheology of model foams and emulsions under
              stress or strain; v)  investigate defects in liquid crystalline polymer films;
              vi)  train graduate and undergraduate students as multidisciplinary 
              researchers; and, vii) develop a computer-simulation teaching  module for use
              by undergraduate and high school students to  investigate  how basic principles
              of physics are applied to lasers  and magnetic resonance to yield serendipitous
              applications in  biology, medicine, geology, and materials.  ***
