Title       : Optoelectronic Properties & Applications of Mesoscopically Structured Polymer &
               Polymer/Small Molecule Heterojunctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9612281

Award Number: 9612281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Sturm sturm@ee.Princeton.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Forrest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Register  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1022,OSIE,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612281    Sturm   The PI's propose an interdisciplinary program to investigate
              the critical issues  currently confronting developments in the new and very
              promising field of  polymer-based organic light emitting devices (OLEDs). Red,
              green and blue  emitting OLEDs have recently gained worldwide attention due to
              their  promise for revolutionizing the flat panel display industry. Before
              these  devices can be used in practical low cost displays, however, many
              problems  of fundamental as well as of a practical nature must be addressed and
               solved. Among the most important issues, which are the subject of the 
              proposed investigations, are: (i) thickness and compositional control of  the
              light emitting and charge-transporting thin films; (ii) control and  reduction
              of impurity incorporation into the films, as well as assessment  of the effects
              of impurities on OLED performance, (iii) understanding and  control of electron
              and excitor transport across organic/organic and  organic/metal interfaces,
              (iv) improvement of device reliability, and (v)  device processing and
              integration. We have assembled a multidisciplinary  team of researchers from
              the Departments of Chemistry, Chemical, and  Electrical Engineering at
              Princeton University and the University of  Southern California with a long
              term track record of collaboration for  making fundamental advances in the
              field of OLEDs. We will apply a range of  novel concepts and experimental
              methods to address all four of these key  issues to the study of
              polymer/polymer, polymer/small molecule, and  organic/metal interfaces and
              devices. We anticipate that the impact of this  work will extend well beyond
              OLED science and technology, into the field of  a wide range of active
              polymeric and small molecular organic heterojunction  devices such as
              transistors and solar cells.  ***
