Title       : Analysis of Neuronal Growth Dynamics and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9612054

Award Number: 9612054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Buettner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9612054  Buettner    The growth of neuronal axons represents a fundamental step 
              in nerve  development:  axons grow out from individual neurons in or  near the
              brain  and spinal cord to make synaptic connections with  innervation targets 
              throughout the body.  Multiple axons projecting to the same  target become 
              bundled together to form a nerve supplying function to that  site.  The  remote
              location of most targets from the initiation sites of  the axons  innervating
              them, and the complex pathways along which  axonal growth  occurs, poses a
              demanding navigational challenge for the  growing axons -  one which they meet
              with remarkable success under normal  developmental  conditions.  However, the
              repair of postnatal injury to a  nerve requires  repetition of the same axonal
              growth and navigation process  for the  affected axons, and the lack of success
              of this axonal  regeneration  typically leads to incomplete recovery of nerve
              function or  paralysis.  To  better understand the principles underlying axonal
              growth  and navigation  (often referred to collectively as "pathfinding") and
              how  they may be  altered during regeneration, this investigation addresses 
              the quantitative  dynamics of the axonal growth cone, the sensory-motile 
              leading tip of the  axon which controls where and how the axon grows.  The 
              primary focus of  this study will be to develop a computer simulation model of 
              growth cone  motion based on the molecular forces generated within the  growth
              cone  during its migration.  Particular emphasis will be placed on  the role of
               actin, a major structural component of the growth cone  cytoskeleton and  long
              believed to play a central role in the motility not  only of growth  cones but
              of many other cell types as well.  Another  important factor to be  considered
              is the interaction of the growth cone with the  extracellular  environment. 
              This work should have multidisciplinary  impact, with both  biological and
              technological implications.  In neuroscience,  it will  provide a new mea ns of
              testing hypotheses about the forces  responsible for  growth cone locomotion
              and the mechanisms underlying growth  cone  pathfinding.  It will also provide
              insight into strategies  for manipulating  growth cone migration, of importance
              in nerve repair and the  formation of  biological neural networks.  In
              mathematical science and  engineering, the  simulation of growth cone
              processing of instructional cues  will be used to  suggest new paradigms for
              controlling both biological and  nonbiological  systems.
