Title       : Development, Characterization and Applications of Support Materials for HPLC,
               HPCE, CEC and SFC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9612710

Award Number: 9612710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Pesek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Research at an Undergraduate Institution project, supported in  the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the  preparation and
              characterization of stationary bonded phases on  high performance liquid
              chromatography packing material surfaces  and on the walls of open capillary
              chromatography columns.  During  this three year continuing grant Professor
              Pesek and his research  students at San Jose State University will continue
              studies on  silanization/hydrosilation reaction schemes that they have 
              developed for making these robust chromatography stationary phases.   These
              modified surfaces will be characterized using the  spectroscopic methods
              diffuse reflectance infrared spectroscopy,  cross-polarization magic angle
              spinning nuclear magnetic resonance  spectroscopy and electron spectroscopy for
              chemical analysis.   Differential scanning calorimetry and thermal gravimetric
              analysis  will also be used in this work.  This project is intended to  develop
              new, rugged, and more efficient stationary phases for use  in separation
              science.  The materials that serve as stationary phases in chromatographic 
              separation methods determine whether a chromatography procedure  will be
              successful and whether the procedure will be reproducible  over an acceptable
              period of time.  This Research at an  Undergraduate Institution project will
              involve undergraduate and  Master's level students in the preparation of
              stationary phases  that are superior in use to existing materials.  These new 
              chromatographic stationary phases can be used to separate useful  amounts of
              desired compounds and to quantify and identify the  compounds present is a
              sample.  These new stationary phases have  application in chemical process
              control, synthesis, and  biotechnology.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
