Title       : Strategies for Overwintering by Hatchlings of Northern Turtles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9612562

Award Number: 9612562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary C. Packard packard@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9612562  Packard      This is a proposal to investigate the adaptive strategies
              for overwintering by hatchlings of five species of turtles inhabiting shallow
              lakes and marshes in the central and northern Plains.  Hatchlings of two
              species (snapping turtle, Blanding's turtle) emerge from their subterranean
              nests in late summer, and then move overland to lakes or ponds where they
              establish residence and spend the winter.  Hatchlings of two other species
              (ornate box turtle, yellow-bellied mud turtle) dig down through the bottom of
              their nests and spend their first winter of life deep in the soil.  And
              hatchlings of the fifth species (painted turtle) remain inside their shallow,
              subterranean nests throughout the winter, and do not emerge from their nests
              until the soil thaws the following spring.  Why do three different adaptive
              strategies for overwintering exist in the assemblage of turtles when neonates
              of all the species presumably would benefit from being able to remain for the
              entire winter inside their nest cavity?    Research that will be performed over
              a period of 3 years will examine the roles of morphology, physiology, and
              behavior in enabling neonatal turtles to survive their first winter of life. 
              Special attention will be given the integument, because the skin seems to be a
              barrier to the penetration of ice from frozen soil into body compartments of
              neonatal painted turtles but not to the penetration of ice into body
              compartments of neonates of the other species.  Accordingly, hatchling painted
              turtles apparently survive over winter by exploiting a capacity for
              supercooling and remaining continuously unfrozen.  Hatchlings of the other
              species, however, cannot exploit supercooling because their integuments seem
              not to resist the penetration of ice into body fluids from the environment. 
              The absence of such a cutaneous barrier has caused hatchlings of other species
              to tap behavioral means for avoiding situations that could result in
              inoculation, freezing, and death.  Thus, the common thre at of cold may have
              resulted in the evolution of three different adaptive strategies for
              overwintering by hatchlings in the same assemblage of turtles.  The research
              there fore will elucidate the principle that evolution commonly produces
              multiple answers to the same general problem.  ***
