Title       : Dissertation Research: Economy, Interaction and Community in the North Highlands
               of Peru--Excavations at the Recuay Site of Chinchawas (Ancash)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9612574

Award Number: 9612574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Burger richard.burger@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger, Mr. George Lau will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork at the site
              of Chinchawas which is located in the northern highlands of Peru. Chinchawas
              lies on the western slopes of the Andes atop an isolated ridge which affords a
              strategic position over the primary pass between two major valleys. Although
              the site is relatively small, the architecture shows variability in form,
              quality of manufacture and function, including defensive, residential burial
              and ceremonial buildings. Included are high status mortuary structures and
              numbers of carved stone sculptures which, because of extensive looting, are
              rarely found in primary context. While prior work indicates that the site dates
              to the Early Intermediate period very little is known about either it or the
              Recuay culture of which it forms a part. Through excavation and analysis of
              recovered materials Mr. Lau will add significantly to understanding this
              entity. The research has five primary goals: 1. to develop a local chronology
              for the Early Intermeidate period; 2. to describe the prehistoric occupation
              and spatial configuration of Chinchawas; 3. to reconstruct the local
              subsistence system; 4. to determine the extent and character of coast-highland
              interaction; 5. to model local social organization at Chinchawas and evaluate
              hypotheses on the trajectory and complexity of Recuay political developments.
              To accomplish these goals Mr. Lau will conduct a program of both surface
              mapping and excavation. In addition to lithics and ceramics the work should
              yield both faunal and floral remains which permit dietary reconstruction.
              Through the analysis of `exotic materials` such as sea shells and non-local
              stone it will be possible to reconstruct larger interaction networks.  Peru
              provides an example of pristine development of civilization. Over the course of
              several thousand years, groups proceeded from small hunting and gathering
              societies to large units such as the Inca empire which covered thousands of
              square miles and integrated many diverse peoples into a single state. It
              appears that this process took place without influence from other parts of
              South or Middle America and archaeologists wish to understand how this
              occurred. Although much information is available on the more accessible coastal
              regions of Peru, relatively little research has been conducted in the highland
              Andean region. It is clear from the architectural material as sites such as
              Chinchawas that such highland areas played an important role is the early
              stages of this process and Mr. Lau's research will help to fill an important
              gap. The research is also important because it will help to train a promising
              young scientist.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
