Title       : Administration, Maintenance and Development of La Selva Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2001   
File        : a9612779

Award Number: 9612779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2675000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Hartshorn ghartsho@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This project will provide continued support of core programs  of the
              organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) as it takes  on an increasing role in
              global efforts to train students in  rain forest ecology and to understand,
              sustainably manage,  and conserve ecosystems in the wet tropics. In the last 17
               years training and research opportunities have increased  dramatically through
              OTS.  Spectacular biodiversity, diverse  habitats for observation and
              experimentation, classroom  space, availability of well-trained field
              technicians and  natural history guides,advanced laboratory facilitates, a 
              state-of-the-art Geographic Information/Database Management  System, and a
              welcoming sociopolitical environment have all  contributed to OTS's continuing
              growth. The National Park  adjacent to the La Selva site increases long-term
              ecological  security, and a comprehensive Master Plan and independent  advisory
              committee guide management and facilities  development.  More than 60 graduate
              and undergraduate  courses and over 250 researchers use the La Selva station 
              each year.    La Selva serves an unusually broad segment of the US  academic
              community and is playing an increasingly important  role in the development of
              science in Latin America and  beyond.  In so doing OTS merits long-term
              support.  For  economic reasons there will be only a handful of sites in  the
              humid tropics where fully equipped field stations can be  developed adjacent to
              very large protected areas with intact  ecosystems. Very few other continental
              tropical areas have  such a long, continuing history of easy access by US 
              students and scientists. La Selva--with its exceptional  facilities and
              protected habitats, location within the  democratic Republic of Costa Rica, and
              intense activity by  the US scientific academic community--is a world center
              for  the study of tropical rain forests and their associated  altered
              ecosystems. As such,the station is a valuable  element of the nation's programs
              for undergraduate and  graduate education,  biodiversity, and global change,
              and  serves a constituency that extends far beyond OTS member  institutions.
