Title       : CEDAR: Establishment of a Resonance Lidar Capability at Sondrestrom, Greenland,
               for Studies of Metallic Structures in the Upper Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1999   
File        : a9612796

Award Number: 9612796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenton J. Watkins   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Pender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The PI will perform coordinated studies with the radar facility at Sondrestrom,
              Greenland with a new resonance lidar capability.  The lidar and radar will
              permit new studies of metallic layers in the very high-latitude ionosphere, and
              complement and extend an existing observational radar program.  The radar may
              determine the occurrence of thin metallic ion layers, as well as the detailed
              spatial and temporal variations in the electric fields, which play a critical
              role in metal-layer formation.  The lidar will determine altitude profiles of
              neutral sodium and iron, as well as calcium ions.  Watkins will investigate the
              relative roles of different neutral and ionized metallic structures, and the
              relevant physical and chemical processes associated with neutral and ion
              layers.  Spatial and temporal structure in ion layers may be determined from
              antenna scanning experiments with the radar; therefore, making feasible the
              study of the sodium and iron variability in terms of ion layer structure and
              temporal behavior.  The PI will use the lidar calcium-ion measurements with the
              radar total-ion measurements and electric field data to determine the relative
              effects of ion layers with different ion masses, and make detailed comparisons
              with model simulations of ion-layer formation.
