Title       : Synthesis of Precise Unnatural Oligomers Using Well-Defined Synthetic or DNA
               Templates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9612172

Award Number: 9612172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Tour   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9612172  Tour  New routes are described for the facile construction of  organic
              oligomers of precise molecular weight, constitution,  and in some cases, even
              stereochemistry, using unnatural and  natural (DNA) templates (parents) of
              specific length,  constitution, and conformation.  Taking advantage of 
              precisely-defined synthetic templates that are rigid-rod-  like, the rapid
              construction of oligomers of nearly the same  length as the templates will be
              attempted.  Unnatural  monomers will be ionically- or hydrogen-bonded to the 
              templates via non-covalent bonding moieties (NCBMs), then  oligomerization will
              be induced chemically or  photochemically to afford a supramolecular
              parent-daughter  duplex.  The polymerizations should be kinetically favored 
              since the templated reaction is pseudo-solid state or pseudo-  topochemical in
              its monomer-monomer orientations.  Cleavage  of the ionically- or H-bound
              parent-daughter duplex would  afford a new synthetic daughter oligomer that
              retains the  specific length information of the parent template, as well  as,
              possibly, the stereochemical information such as the  helical sense.  Methods
              can be envisioned to re-use the  parent template and the daughter(s) as new
              templates, thus  making the entire process catalytic in template, and 
              ultimately natural-like or polymerase chain reaction-like  (PCR-like) in its
              productive capabilities.  %%%  These precise macromolecular systems are
              becoming important  for electronics, photonics, molecular electronics, 
              catalysis, separation science, nano-engineering, and nano-  bioengineering. 
              This project, if successful, could  significantly simplify the preparation of
              precisely defined  macromolecular architectures which are currently prepared 
              only by laborious step-wise procedures or multiple  analytical separations. 
              ***
