Title       : Prerecorded Video Over Packet-Switched Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9612781

Award Number: 9612781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237184             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Anandalingam   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith W. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent years there has been an explosion of research in   packetized VBR
              video, with the great majority of the work  addressing  live video such as
              video conference and the broadcast  of a sporting event. While this research on
              live video certainly merits  the attention it has received, we feel that the
              majority of the video carried on high-speed networks will emanate from
              prerecorded sources. These sources include full-length movies, music video
              clips, and educational material. From the perspective  of the transport
              network, prerecorded VBR video sources are fundamentally  different from live
              video sources: for live video, the exact dynamics of   the VBR traffic are
              unknown; for prerecorded sources, the   traffic is fully known before it is
              transmitted into the network.   Surprisingly, little attention to date has been
              given to the management of prerecorded video traffic in high-speed networks.  
              There is an emerging type of prerecorded traffic that will likely  dominate the
              broadband residential networks of the future   --- Video-on-Demand (VoD)
              traffic.  It is expected that the telecommunication networks of the future will
              offer a rich variety of VoD services. For example, a costly  service would
              allow the movie to instantaneously begin at the viewers  request and would
              provide full VCR control (pause, rewind, and fast-forward).  An inexpensive
              service would require the viewer to schedule the commencement  of the movie
              minutes or hours in advance and provide no VCR control.   This research will
              develop, analyze and compare a wide variety  of end-to-end traffic management
              schemes for prerecorded video.  A central theme of the research is that VoD
              traffic is prerecorded, and that  video providers, networking companies,  and
              equipment manufacturers should fully exploit this important property.  Traffic
              management schemes will be designed which allow varying degrees of VCR control,
              schemes which guarantee zero cell loss, and schemes which permit infrequent
              cell loss. Initially, the research wi ll assume that an  ATM network transports
              the video directly between the provider's server and  viewer's set-top box. But
              prerecorded traffic management schemes will also be developed for architectures
              with neighborhood caches and for architectures based on future generations of
              the Internet. This research will also investigate  how the traffic management
              schemes impact the resource management of the provider's VoD server, and how
              VoD services should be priced.  The research will lead to a comprehensive
              methodology for the analysis of prerecorded video over packet-switched
              networks.   This research is described in greater detail on the following  Web
              page: http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~ross/nsf/prerecorded.html .
