Title       : Proposal to Disseminate and Institutionalize the Successes of the Southern
               California Coalition for Education in Manufacturing Engineering.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9612145

Award Number: 9612145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: J R. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach
	      1250 Bellflower Blvd
	      Long Beach, CA  908400004    213/498-4121

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Williams  9612145    This proposal requests an award to continue the progress
              begun by the NSF/TRP award which established SCCEME and to institutionalize the
              Coalition as a close, symbiotic linkage between Southern California industries,
              the SCCEME universities, and local community colleges.  The emphasis will
              continue to be on manufacturing in the modern integrated product and process
              development environment.    The Southern California Coalition for Education in
              Manufacturing Engineering (SCCEME) proposes to disseminate and institutionalize
              the products and successes of the Coalition through a new, permanent non-profit
              (501c3) organization, the Foundation for the Advancement of Manufacturing
              Education (FAME), to continue and enhance its regional Southern California
              industry/university partnership for improving manufacturing education and
              training.  A primary mission of FAME is to continue to foster manufacturing
              excellence in the region through providing advanced manufacturing training and
              education at the factory floor through multimedia educational delivery.  The
              development of multimedia software and training programs for industry will
              continue to occur through a partnership between the California universities and
              community colleges in cooperation with industry.    FAME is controlled by a
              Board of Directors dominated by executives of industries that have participated
              with the SCCEME universities to establish SCCEME.  Under the direction of FAME,
              SCCEME will enhance manufacturing engineering education and provide engineering
              and technical training to the shop floor of manufacturing firms, primarily
              through multimedia-based courses and course modules and secondarily through
              remote classroom activities.  Multimedia delivery of manufacturing education
              and training to the factory floor will be both necessary and effective as a
              means of gaining and maintaining high quality, low cost manufacturing that is
              competitive in a global economy.  FAME will provide both industry and the
              higher educational i nstitutions in Southern California with the focus,
              capability and financing to carry out this major transformation in how
              manufacturing education and training is delivered.    The financing of FAME
              activities will be through federal and State support, industrial purchase of
              training activities, and other sources as appropriate.  The NSF is requested to
              provide support for SCCEME to facilitate the transition of SCCEME from NSF
              support to other sources of support under the direction of FAME.
