Title       : An Investigation of Visually Guided Micromanipulation Using Active Optical
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1998       
File        : a9612329

Award Number: 9612329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276637             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley J. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Naylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Hesketh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Robust  micromanipulation strategies are needed in order  to  overcome  a 
              potential technology barrier to the  commercial  development of complex
              microelectromechanical (MEMS) devics.  Development  of robust strategies
              requires an  investigation  into  two  critical issues not applicable to the
              traditional  macro  manipulation domain.  These issues include  the  much 
              higher  relative  positioning  accuracy  required,  and  the  vastly  different
              mechanics of manipulation.  Both of  these  differences   highlight   the  need
               for   micromanipulation  strategies  that  are  guided by realtime  sensor 
              feedback.  Initial  experimental results indicate  that  feedback  from  high 
              resolution optical systems with controllable intrinsic  and  extrinsic
              parameters in useful for manipulation over  a  broad  range  of 
              micromanipulation  tasks.   This  research  theoretically  and experimentally
              investigates  sensor-based  micromanipulation strategies that account for the 
              different  mechanics that govern object interactions on a micron scale.  A 
              critical  aspect  of  the approach  entails  the  use  of  realtime  vision 
              feedback from active  optical  systems  to  correct  for  micromanipulation 
              mechanics  that  are  often  difficult  to model precisely.  In addition,
              various  micro-  grippers  will  be  designed  and  analyzed,  and  promising 
              designs  will  be micromachined and tested.   This  research  will  result  in
              experimental and theoretical analyses  that  will  illuminate  the 
              similarities and differences  between  sensor-based  manipulation in macro and
              micro domains.   The  realization of successful micromanipulation strategies 
              will  aid  in  the development of automatic assembly machines  for  assembling 
              and packaging future MEMS devices  that  require  increasingly complex assembly
              strategies.
