Title       : Reconsidering Fragmentation and Reassembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9612853

Award Number: 9612853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163716             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Varghese   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Reconsidering Fragmentation and Reassembly    The Internet Protocol(IP)'s
              success for the last 15 years, during  which several new technologies emerged,
              is due to its support for  diversity.  IP's solution to the use of different
              maximum packet sizes  on different networks is to split packets that are too
              big into fragments,  and to reassemble these fragments at the destination.   
              This project reconsiders several issues related to fragmentation and 
              reassembly IP.  Reassembly is reconsidered first.  The current  reassembly
              algorithms are too slow.  A simple expected case  optimization can be used to
              improve reassembly performance to 38  instructions per fragment if the
              fragments arrive in FIFO order; a  goal for this project is to implement this
              optimization in the NetBSD  UNIX kernel.  The project also introduces the new
              idea of Graceful  Intermediate Reassembly (GIR), which is a generalization of
              the  existing IP mechanisms of destination and hop-by-hop reassembly.  In  GIR,
              fragments are coalesced at an intermediate router in order to use  the largest
              sized packets on its outgoing interface.  It can be shown  that GIR always
              outperforms the usual IP mechanism of hop-by-hop  reassembly.  A goal for this
              project is to modify existing IP router  code to show that GIR can be
              implemented economically in routers with  small processing and memory costs.   
              The project also reconsiders fragmentation.  It is shown that that  avoiding
              fragmentation has costs of its own in terms of increased  packet processing
              and/or round-trip delays.  Measurements are  described in which TCP performance
              improves after turning on  fragmentation.  For example, on Ethernet under
              NetBSD using a 536 byte  segment size for TCP results in a throughput of only
              about 6Mb/s,  whereas a throughput of 8.45Mb/s is obtained using a segment size
              of  1460 bytes (without fragmentation) and a throughput of 8.82Mb/s using  a
              segment size of 16260 bytes with fragmentation.  The project will  also
              investigate simple performance models th at can be used to  determine when
              fragmentation is beneficial.          Finally, the project address the major
              disadvantages of fragmentation.  A major problem is that when a fragment is
              lost, the entire TCP segment must  be retransmitted, resulting in reduced or
              zero goodput under loss.  A  new mechanism --- dynamic segment sizing, in which
              the segment  size is dynamically reduced after loss --- is introduced, which
              addresses  this problem.  Simulations (using a modified NetBSD kernel)  will be
              used to show that dynamic segment sizing keeps the goodput at  reasonable
              levels even under extremely lossy conditions.  All  mechanisms (reassembly
              optimization, GIR, and dynamic segment sizing)  are orthogonal and can be
              applied to other protocol suites besides  TCP/IP.  Ongoing information about
              the status of this project can be found  in
              http://dworkin.wustl.edu/~varghese/FRAG/fraginfo.html
