Title       : Ab-Initio Identification of Atoms in Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9612188

Award Number: 9612188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus Ruedenberg klausrg@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting Prof.   K.
              Ruedenberg at Iowa State University.  The research to be carried out   over the
              next two years will focus on the development of a new quantum   chemical theory
              that will result in corresponding new computational   chemistry codes.  The
              objective is the quantitative determination of   atoms in molecules within the
              framework of rigorous ab-initio theory, and   the quantitative expression of
              binding energies in terms of interactions   between such atoms.  The deformed
              atoms are determined through their   optimal wave functions in terms of
              orbitals restricted to the   full-valence-space MCSCF molecular orbital space.
              Oriented quasiatomic   orbitals,  maximally involved in specific bonds and with
              unambiguous   electron populations, are determined through a density matrix
              analysis.    The binding energy appears as the sum of contributions due to  
              intra-atomic promotion and inter-atomic non-bonded repulsion, electron  
              sharing and charge transfer.  The energy gain due to charge transfer is  
              identified by determining the optimal molecular MCSCF wave function   without
              charge transfer.  The covalent energy gain is derived from the   configurations
              representing electron migrations between atoms.  The   analysis applies to
              non-equilibrium as well as to equilibrium  geometries   and will be extended
              beyond the full valence space.    Although for two centuries chemical
              experimentation has been effectively   guided by the concept of molecules being
              built from atoms,  major   unsolved problems have persisted to this day
              regarding the theoretical   foundation of this well established empirical model
              and it has not yet   been quantified within the context of rigorous quantum
              mechanical   calculations.  This is because the atoms-in-molecules concept is,
              in   fact, not a fundamental one in basic theory. Recently, the Ruedenberg  
              research group has developed a new analysis that is able to identify   atomic
              sub-units in rigorous molecular calculations.  With the help of   this
              theoretical approach, atoms, as well as the interactions between   them, will
              be quantitatively determined in molecules. The method to be   developed is
              expected to make the results of theoretical computations   more useful for
              practical chemical work by relating them more directly to   the intuitive
              reasoning of experimentalists.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
