Title       : Magnetic Resonance Imaging with Laser-Polarized He-3 and Xe-129 of Biological
               and Non-Biological Systems Using High Power Diode Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9612244

Award Number: 9612244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $929999             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Happer happer@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Botez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Forrest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Allan Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1022,5345,OSIE,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612244  Happer  The PIs describe an interdisciplinary program to investigate  a
              revolutionary new technology employing laser-polarized  gases for greatly
              enhancing the magnetic resonance images  (MRI) of biological cavities such as
              lungs and sinuses, as  well as nonbiological systems which as voids in
              ceramics,  etc.  This technique was recently used to obtain the first  MRI
              images of the gas space of a human lung by a  collaboration between researchers
              at Princeton and Duke  Universities.  The method uses advances in optical spin 
              polarization made possible through the understanding of spin  exchange
              interactions between alkalimetal atoms and noble  gas nuclei developed at
              Princeton.  To make this a  practical, low cost and widely applied technique
              for imaging  both biological and non-biological systems, significant 
              improvements in our understanding of the physics of optical  spin polarization,
              as well as in the high power laser diodes  necessary to accomplish this task
              are needed.  In this  project, researchers at Princeton and the University of 
              Wisconsin will concentrate on the demonstration of very high  power, low cost,
              long-lifetime Al-free diode laser arrays  with linewidths sufficiently narrow
              to efficiently polarize  He-3 and Xe-129 for a wide range of MRI applications. 
              The  laser development includes fabrication of novel MQW  structures with
              improved carrier confinement, as well as  distributed Bragg reflector and
              external cavity structures  to achieve narrow linewidths, will build on
              existing  strengths at both Princeton and UW-Madison in high power  laser
              diodes.  To improve the MRI technique, the PIs will  explore the possibility of
              imaging laser polarized gases  dissolved in blood and other liquids.  Methods
              for  increasing the efficiency of the spinexchange process, and  for
              accumulating large quantities of spinpolarized gases  will be investigated. 
              ***
