Title       : Defects and Diffusion in Intermetallic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1998   
File        : a9612306

Award Number: 9612306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356320             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Collins collins@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9612306  Collins    Point defects in intermetallic compounds are investigated 
              using perturbed angular correlations of gamma rays (PAC), a  spectroscopy
              technique providing excellent resolution of  different local environments of
              probe atoms in solids.  Lattice vacancies and antisite defects belonging to
              higher-  order equilibrium defects are detected in atomic shells  close to
              indium probe atoms.  The equilibrium defect of  greatest interest is the
              high-temperature one that makes  diffusion possible, such as the Schottky
              vacancy-pair in a  binary alloy.  There are three objectives to the grant:  (1)
               Properties of equilibrium defects are determined through  measurements on
              quenched samples and samples at high  temperature.  Binary alloys selected have
              the B2 (CsC1)  structure, including high-temperature structural aluminides, 
              such as NiAl and model systems such as PdIn and AuCd in  which disturbances
              from PAC probes are minimal.  For the  first time vacancy migration enthalpies
              are determined from  nuclear relaxation of PAC signals caused by vacancy motion
               at high temperature.  (2)  A study is made of ordering among  Au and Ag atoms
              in the ternary compound AuAgCd2.   Because  the order parameter is determined
              locally, there is a much  greater sensitivity to order-parameter fluctuations
              than  found when using conventional diffraction methods.  If the  transition is
              found to be second-order, the measurements  give insight into the range of
              interactions leading to the  ordering.  (3)  The fraction of stored energy
              associated  with lattice vacancies in mechanically-milled PdIn is  examined
              using PAC to determine vacancy concentrations and  calorimetry to determine the
              stored energy.  To date there  is inadequate knowledge of how excess energy is
              stored in  materials during milling, and the goal of this study is to 
              determine the amount of energy stored in vacancies.  %%%  The material defects
              under study here affect phase stability  and diffusion in advanced materials
              used in a variety of  applic ations.  ***
