Title       : Evaluation of the Effects of Land Surface Processes on Convective Precipitation
               Using a Nonhydrostatic Version of the NCEP Eta Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9612388

Award Number: 9612388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237011             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Gallus wgallus@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moti Segal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond W. Arritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612388  Gallus        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the National Science  Foundation and the National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric Administration are jointly  evaluating and supporting research of
              high priority to the USWRP.           Variations in earth surface properties,
              such as differential heating and soil  moisture, are known to have a
              significant impact on numerical weather forecasts.   The Principal Investigator
              will evaluate the impact of land use and soil moisture on  mesoscale
              precipitation systems simulated with a high-resolution nonhydrostatic  version
              of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration s National Center  for
              Environmental Prediction (NCEP)'s Eta model.  In particular, the role of
              surface  heat and moisture fluxes in preconditioning the thermodynamic
              environment and the  dynamical effects of boundary-layer circulations caused by
              surface inhomogeneities  will be investigated, focusing on orographic and
              frontal forcing of precipitation.        The nonhydrostatic Eta model will be
              run over a 24-48 hour time period both  for historical cases and in an
              operational-like mode.  Historical cases will be chosen  where orography,
              frontal forcing or local mesoscale convection resulted in unique  precipitation
              systems whose scales were small enough that nonhydrostatic dynamics  can be
              assumed to be important.  Initialization and verification of historical cases 
              can be aided by incorporating archived hourly precipitation data. The
              operational-  like mode of the project will rely upon the operational
              initialization and verification  procedures used at NCEP.        Results of the
              research will contribute to (i) improving our understanding of  the effects of
              land use and soil moisture on small-scale precipitation systems, and  (ii)
              testing and refinement of the nonhydrostatic Eta model, which is planned to  be
               primary short-range forecasting tool of the future at NCEP.  ***
