Title       : Dynamic Properties of Misdirected Ligand Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1998  
File        : a9612869

Award Number: 9612869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Ashby mtashby@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Michael T. Ashby, Department of Chemistry, University of Oklahoma, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division for a study of metal complexes containing ligands   that are
              geometrically constrained so that they cannot donate pi   electrons to the
              metal. Because their orientation precludes them from   utilizing their maximum
              number of electrons in bonding with the metal,   these ligands are termed
              `misdirected.` The project will address the   fundamental questions of how can
              a ligand be `misdirected,` but still be   firmly attached to a metal; the
              effects of `misdirected` ligands on the   ground-state and transient properties
              of transition metal complexes; and   the possibility that ligand `misdirection`
              and `redirection` can have   practical application. To address these questions
              a series of complexes   will be synthesized  utilizing ligands that can be
              forced to shuttle   between a conformation that allows pi interaction with the
              metal and one   that is `misdirected.` The dynamic conformational properties of
              these   complexes will be studied and the influence of ligand `misdirection` on
                the chemical properties of the complexes will be assessed.   Many chemical
              reactions carried out in the laboratory, in industry, and   by biological
              systems involve the participation of metal ions. Much of   the unique
              reactivity of the metals is a reflection of variations, during   the course of
              reactions, in the number of electrons surrounding the   metal. This project
              will probe fundamental questions of how complexes can   be designed so that
              groups attached to metal ions can be forced to   provide variable numbers of
              electrons. Systems will be studied to   determine both how to obtain such
              compounds and how controlled   alterations in the metal electron counts can
              change chemical reactivity.   This will set the ground work both to understand
              existing processes and   to rationally design new ones.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
