Title       : Planning Activities: Development of the University of Mississippi Biological
               Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9612187

Award Number: 9612187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24170              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie M. Holland mholland@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucile M. McCook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luther A. Knight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                For a number of years, The University of Mississippi  Biological Field Station
              (UMBFS) has been a research site  for the study of toxicology and human impacts
              on aquatic  organisms and ecosystems. This Field Station is a site  where
              scientists from the University and other  institutions representing many
              disciplines, including  biology, geology, engineering, toxicology, and 
              pharmacology, can participate in interdisciplinary basic  ecological research,
              as well as applied research that will  affect human health, the environment,
              and agriculture.  Due to recent administrative changes, UMBFS  is now poised 
              to broaden its scope of ecological research and its  educational mission.    
              UMBFS is located in northern Mississippi approximately 18  kilometers northeast
              of the Oxford campus. Acquired by The  University of Mississippi in 1985, UMBFS
              includes an area  of approximately 296 hectares, and encompasses pine and 
              mixed hardwood forest, bottomland forest, open fields,  springs, ponds, and
              mesocosms offer unique opportunities  for experimental research on aquatic
              ecosystems.    A comprehensive programmatic educational educational and 
              research plan developed to best utilize the UMBFS to reach  the broadest
              constituency possible.  The UMBFS is a multi-  faceted facility  that will,
              when fully developed, provide  the infrastructure for educational and research
              activities  concerned with terrestrial, aquatic, and wetlands ecology.  Current
              research projects focus on impacts to the  environment from interactions of
              agrichemicals,  toxicological investigations, fish genetics and behavior, 
              avian and herpetological population dynamics, and studies  of agricultural
              water use and conservation.  Recently,  UMBFS's mission has been broadened to
              provide enhanced  opportunities for both research and education in aquatic  and
              environmental sciences.  To further this mission, this  project will help
              support planning and program  development.
