Title       : University of Alaska's Participation in INDOEX (Indian Ocean Experiment)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9612889

Award Number: 9612889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn E. Shaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM 9612889  Shaw, Glen   University of Alaska  Title: University of
              Alaska's Participation in INDOEX (Indian Ocean Experiment)     The Indian Ocean
              Experiment (INDOEX) is an international field experiment with  participation
              from France, Germany, India, the Netherlands, and the United States.   The main
              effort under the U.S. component focuses on assessing the role of sulfates  and
              other continental aerosols in global radiative forcing and is being supported 
              jointly by the Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation.  In 
              addition, complementary studies involving investigations of a variety of
              related  chemical and radiative processes will be undertaken by scientists from
              other federal  agencies and other international partners.  The composite
              observing system consists of  a wide range of platforms, from ships to
              aircraft, as well as surface-based and balloon  measuring systems, and
              satellite data.  The main part of the three year effort will be a  four-month
              intensive field phase which begins January 1999.    The ultimate goal of this
              program is to obtain a better understanding of the decadal  and longer time
              scale climate forcing.  The equatorial Indian Ocean during the  northeast
              winter monsoon season provides a unique natural laboratory for this 
              experiment.  The experimental area is probably the only place in the world
              where an  air mass which has been modified by intense sources of continental
              aerosols,  anthropogenic trace species, and their reaction products (e.g.,
              sulfates and ozone)  from the northern hemisphere comes into contact with the
              pristine air of the southern  hemisphere, which has been transported via cross
              equatorial monsoonal flow, at the  Intertropical Convergence Zone.   The
              juxtaposition of these two very distinct air  masses will allow a thorough
              examination of both the direct and indirect effects of the  aerosols on the
              radiative properties of the atmosphere.    Dr. Shaw's role in INDOEX is to
              measure the concentration and supersaturation  spect rum of Cloud Condensation
              Nuclei (CCN) aboard the Indian research vessel  ORV Sagar Kanya in the spring,
              1998 INDOEX science cruise.  The purpose is to  test the hypothesis that
              aerosols transported from the Indian Subcontinent affect the  number
              distribution and therefore the albedo of clouds in the Indian Ocean.
