Title       : Short-Range Ensemble Forecasting of Quantitative Precipitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9612487

Award Number: 9612487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Mullen mullen@atmo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9612487  Mullen        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the National Science  Foundation and the National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric Administration are jointly  evaluating and supporting research of
              high priority to the USWRP.           It is well known that the atmosphere is a
              chaotic system.  As a consequence,  small errors in the initial conditions of
              any numerical weather prediction model  amplify as the forecast evolves. 
              Because the atmospheric state can never be  measured exactly, initial
              conditions will always contain errors whose magnitude and  structure can only
              be estimated.  Hence an infinite spectrum of plausible initial  conditions
              exists, all of which are consistent with analysis uncertainty.          A
              procedure for defining the scope of forecasting uncertainty and improving 
              forecasts is known as ensemble forecasting (EF).  EF involves running multiple 
              forecasts starting at the same time, but from different, equally-likely initial
               conditions.  The Principal Investigator will address four fundamental aspects
              of  short-range EF of quantitative precipitation forecasting (QPF) at the
              mesoscale:    Estimate limits of predictability for QPF by current operational
              forecast models;       Investigate minimum number of ensembles needed to
              robustly estimate forecast     evolution of probability density function of
              QPF;       For QPF forecasts, determine relative importance of model
              differences verses     uncertainties in initial conditions;        Determine
              the relative merit of using short range ensemble forecast at a lower    
              resolution verses a single, high resolution deterministic forecast.    The
              Principal Investigator will collaborate in this effort with scientists within
              the  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.  Successful completion of
              this  research could lead to substantial improvements in abili ty to forecast
              precipitation.  ***
