Title       : EcoSim: A Proposal for Null Models Software (SGER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9612109

Award Number: 9612109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Gotelli ngotelli@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   This  proposal  will fund the initial development,  testing,  and 
              distribution of ecological simulation software (EcoSim).  In  the  study  of 
              ecology  and evolution, simulations are  an  important  analytical  tool.  They
              allow an investigator to  ask  "what  if"  questions, and to test patterns
              against stochastic models.  "Null  models" are simulations that deliberately
              exclude a mechanism  of  interest, and provide benchmark tests for patterns in
              nature.    In  spite of their popularity, null models require a good deal of 
              computer   expertise   to  construct.  Many  biologists   without  programming
              skills have been unable to use null models  in  their  work..  For biologists
              who are also computer programmers,  it  is  still very time-consuming to build,
              test, and de-bug null models.    EcoSim is a set of stand-alone software
              modules that will satisfy  the  needs  of  biologists  for  null  models.  
              EcoSim  will  be  developed specifically for personal computers, and will
              initially  be  written  for the Windows 95 operating system.  Data  will  be 
              easily  imported and exported, providing full compatibility  with  other  
              graphics  and  statistics  software.   Pull-down   menus,  checkboxes,  and a
              powerful data editor will allow  the  user  to  select  a  variety of
              simulation options, including power  tests.  Output  will  be  fully documented
              with on-screen  graphics.  The  modules  and  the  interface  will be 
              programmed  in  Delphi,  a  powerful new programming language.    The  primary
              audience for EcoSim will be community ecologists and  biogeographers.  However,
              the modules will be widely used by many  kinds    of    biologists.   College  
              laboratory    instructors,  demographers,   review  authors,  paleontologists, 
               conservation  biologists,  environmental consultants, fisheries biologists 
              and  many  others will find useful tests in EcoSim.  The modules  will  provide
               analytical tools applicable to both  basic  and  applied  ecology.    EcoSim 
              will  be  thoroughly doc umented  and  tested  before  its  release  to the
              scientific community.  EcoSim will be distributed  free-of-charge  through 
              Internet and  a  World  Wide  Web  site.  EcoSim will be a standalone program
              that includes on-line help, a  user's manual, sample data sets and advice on
              using null models.    Funding from a SGER will allow us to build the user
              interface and  two  modules:  (1) species diversity and (2) niche overlap.
              These  models  are  likely to used by the greatest number of  ecologists  and 
              educators.  Future implementations of  EcoSim  will  include  modules  for  (3)
               body  size  ratios,  (4)  co-occurrence,   (5)  incidence  functions, (6)
              species-area relationships,  (7)  range  overlap, (8) shared species, and (9)
              cluster formation.  A  tenth  module  will  allow the user to construct
              customized  null  model  tests with a minimum of programming.  This tenth
              user-module will  greatly  expand the utility of EcoSim for problems in 
              population  genetics, demography, and behavior.    EcoSim  has  the potential
              to affect a large number of ecologists  by  providing them with analytic tools.
               A similar problem in the  history  of  cladistic  analysis  points  to  the 
              importance  of  software  availability on the development and  infrastructure 
              of  science.
