Title       : Scientific Collaboration Between The Catholic University of America and Delft
               University of Technology: Engineering Research on Shoulder Biomechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9612549

Award Number: 9612549
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12219              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack M. Winters   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tanja M. Pieters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612549  Winters  The long-term objective of this project is to establish a
              closer  relationship of collaboration between the Catholic University of 
              America (CUA) and the Delft University of Technology (DUT) in the  Netherlands.
               Many of the research interests of the Man-Machine  Systems Group at DUT and
              the Biomedical Engineering Program at  CUA are similar and complementary to
              each other.  This  complementarity is a natural incentive for both groups to
              expand  interaction, and to establish more formal collaboration.    The
              proposed bidirectional collaboration between the universities  is envisioned to
              include the development of sister facilities for  in-depth biomechanical and
              neuromotor study of the human  shoulder, and a continuing exchange program of
              students and  researchers from both institutions.  The research universities, 
              CUA and DUT, provide engineering expertise, while corresponding  clinical
              expertise is provided by the National Rehabilitation  Hospital in Washington,
              DC and the University Hospital in Leiden,  the Netherlands.  The two facilities
              would have the capability of  collecting and analyzing data for the same
              battery of shoulder  function tests.    Another important component of the
              project is the proposed  student exchange program.  In the first exchange, a
              doctoral  student at CUA will spend several months with the Dutch Shoulder 
              Group (comprised of DUT and two other Dutch universities).  The  student will
              document DUT's procedures and methodologies, and  participate in the research
              activities of the Shoulder Group.  Upon returning to CUA, the student will
              spend several weeks  helping to replicate the Dutch capabilities at CUA, and to
               coordinate subsequent research plans.  During the second year,  the principal
              investigator and a student will return to Delft for  two weeks to share
              findings, refine common methodologies, and  plan future activities.  Two
              doctoral students from DUT will also  conduct short-term research at CUA.   
              The expanded scientific collaboration b etween CUA and DUT will be  beneficial
              to both institutions and to the field of biomedical  engineering as a whole. 
              Some of the more outstanding benefits  include intellectual development of
              researchers at both  institutions, advancement of research projects, and the
              resulting  increase in knowledge for the wider community of biomedical 
              professionals, with its concomitant potential improvements in  health care. 
              ***
