Title       : Prediction of Pre-Landfall Intensity and Post-Landfall Precipitation in
               Hurricanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1999  
File        : a9612485

Award Number: 9612485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216108             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance F. Bosart bosart@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Molinari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612485  Bosart        The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an
              interagency activity  designed to perform and implement the research necessary
              to improve the delivery  of weather services to the nation.  Under this
              Program, the National Science  Foundation and the National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric Administration are jointly  evaluating and supporting research of
              high priority to the USWRP.           The objectives of this research are to
              understand the mechanisms controlling  two difficult forecasting problems:
              intensity changes in hurricanes prior to landfall,  and the precipitation they
              produce after landfall.  These two problems often have a  conceptual
              connection, in that interactions of the hurricane with middle latitude 
              phenomena (fronts and/or synoptic scale mobile troughs) can produce sudden 
              intensification of a hurricane prior to landfall, or heavy precipitation after
              landfall.   It is these middle latitude interactions that will be the focus of
              this research.  Of  particular interest are (i) the processes by which upper
              tropospheric troughs interact  with hurricanes, with the goal of describing
              what determines whether an interaction  will intensify or weaken the hurricane;
              and (ii) the dynamic and thermodynamic  characteristics that control the amount
              and distribution of precipitation after landfall.           In addition to
              increased fundamental understanding of the nature of  landfalling hurricanes, a
              potential outcome of the work will be an identification of  common signatures
              of the potential for sudden deepening or localized flooding by  tropical
              cyclones in time to give adequate warnings.  ***
