Title       : Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9612886

Award Number: 9612886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100764             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Coakley coakley@ats.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9612886  Coakley     The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an
              international field experiment with participation from France, Germany, India,
              the Netherlands, and the United States.  The main effort under the U.S.
              component focuses on assessing the role of sulfates and other continental
              aerosols in global radiative forcing and is being supported jointly by the
              Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation.  In addition,
              complementary studies involving investigations of a variety of related chemical
              and radiative processes will be undertaken by scientists from other federal
              agencies and other international partners.  The composite observing system
              consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to aircraft, as well as
              surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite data.  The main part
              of the three year effort will be a four-month intensive field phase which
              begins January 1999.     The ultimate goal of this program is to obtain a
              better understanding of the decadal and longer time scale climate forcing.  The
              equatorial Indian Ocean during the northeast winter monsoon season provides a
              unique natural laboratory for this experiment.  The experimental area is
              probably the only place in the world where an air mass which has been modified
              by intense sources of continental aerosols, anthropogenic trace species, and
              their reaction products (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the northern hemisphere
              comes into contact with the pristine air of the southern hemisphere, which has
              been transported via cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at the Intertropical
              Convergence Zone.   The juxtaposition of these two very distinct air masses
              will allow a thorough examination of both the direct and indirect effects of
              the aerosols on the radiative properties of the atmosphere.     Dr. Coakley
              will be responsible for the analysis of the AVHRR satellite data to produce the
              aerosol and cloud properties.  Specifically, he and his colleagues will (1)
              extract aerosol burdens and size indices over oce ans from satellite radiances,
              and (2) extract visible optical depths, cloud top temperatures, and cloud
              droplet effective radii from radiances at 0.63, 3.7 and 11 microns as observed
              by the NOAA AVHRR satellite.  The retrievals from the AVHRR will also be used
              to aid with the deployment of research vessels and help plan aircraft missions
              during INDOEX.
