Title       : Extending Fuzzy Reasoning to General Knowledge Base Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9612171

Award Number: 9612171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie V. Cross crossv@phoenix.sas.muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9218,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a Research Planning Grant.  The research goal is to increase the domain
              of applicability of fuzzy reasoning by developing a methodology to advance the
              use of fuzzy reasoning in applications very different from control.  Although a
              consensus has developed on the most useful fuzzy reasoning methods for fuzzy
              control, these methods do not have widespread applicability to general
              knowledge based systems.  The success seen in fuzzy logic control can be
              extended to general knowledge base applications by tackling the limitations of
              the conventional fuzzy reasoning methods.  Two of these limitations are the
              restriction that base rules must be compact for fuzzy reasoning to succeed and
              the focus on rule-based knowledge representation.  It is intended that the
              first limitation will be eased  by developing and testing a new method of fuzzy
              reasoning based on geometric principles, utilizing the proximity of the input
              and the rule antecedent to produce an output that has the same proximity with
              the consequent, and thus can operate in both compact and sparse rule bases.  To
              deal with the second limitation, methods of shifting fuzzy  reasoning from
              rule-based to object-based or frame-based knowledge representations will be
              explored.   Based on the results of this work, further projects will be
              designed to realize the goal of extending fuzzy logic to general knowledge
              based systems.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
