Title       : Constrained Concatenated Codes for Noisy Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9612354

Award Number: 9612354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Khaled A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The primary goal of this research is to develop efficient codes for noisy 
              modulation channels such as those encountered in magnetic and optical 
              recording devices.  In these channels, it is often required to map the data  to
              a sequence with special modulation properties;  since most devices are  noisy,
              the recorded sequence should have some error control capability as  well.
              Coding techniques are used to transform arbitrary data to sequences  that
              satisfy the modulation and error control requirements. Coding  technology is
              one of the critical factors that has contributed to the  astounding capacity of
              today's magnetic recording devices.   The most commonly used coding scheme is
              based on  concatenating an outer  code for error control with an inner code for
              modulation. Although each of  the two component codes may be optimal with
              respect to its function, the  overall concatenated scheme may  not be optimal.
              It is recognized now in  industry that the coding gain achieved using this
              approach is close to  reaching a saturation point. This research aims at
              optimizing the overall  concatenated coding  scheme rather than optimizing the
              component codes. It  is expected that  this approach will significantly improve
              the overall  coding gain. To accomplish this task, the two component codes
              should not be   independently designed and implemented. Instead, any error
              control  capability in the inner code should be optimally exploited by the 
              outer  code for better performance.   Funding for this project will be used to
              support graduate students in an  area with many applications in data storage
              and communications, which are  interdisciplinary in nature. There is a need for
              more researchers in the  coding aspects of these applications.
