Title       : A Robust Concept Exploration Method for Configuring Engines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a9612365

Award Number: 9612365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farrokh Mistree farrokh.mistree@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet K. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitri N. Mavris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9612365  Mistree   This award provides funding for the research on and
              implementation of a method for determining initial, top-level specifications of
              designed-to-order and made-to-order systems such as aircraft, ships, and
              aircraft engines.  The approach will focus on the delineation of regions of
              design configurations that satisfy design goals but that retain freedom in the
              design until sufficient information is obtained to pick a single configuration
              for further design definition.  The research approach will bring together
              existing analysis tools and robust design principles, generally implemented
              only in later design stages, and incorporate them in the early stages of a
              product realization time line. Effective application   of these tools will be
              achieved through the integration and implementation of experimental and
              statistical techniques (design of experiments, analysis of variance, and
              response surface methodology) and robust design techniques.   If successful,
              the results of this research will enable designers to explore and identify many
              alternative design configurations and subsequently focus on a single
              configuration for further analysis and delineation.  The resulting method
              should facilitate cost-effective studies associated with (1) comprehensive
              design (design from a multidisciplinary, systems perspective), (2) robust
              design (designs that are relatively insensitive to changes along a product
              realization time line), (3) flexible design (allow relatively small changes to
              be examined inexpensively), (4) modifiable design (allow designs to be adapted
              to large changes in overall requirements cost-effectively).  The capability to
              perform such studies in the early stages of a product realization time line
              should be of value to both the commercial and defense sectors of US industry.
