Title       : Modeling and Stability Analysis of Prototype Mixed Kinematic Bulk, Free Surface,
               and Interfacial Flows of Viscoelastic Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a9612499

Award Number: 9612499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bamin Khomami bam@poly1.che.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger D. Chamberlain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This is a grant to address problems related to polymeric and polymer matrix
              composite materials that have been identified as being key to the security of
              the U.S.  The basic part of most polymer and composite materials manufacturing
              processes involves flow of polymers in cavities of arbitrary shape with or
              without reinforcement.   Process throughput and product quality are often
              limited by the onset of flow instabilities.  The existence of purely elastic
              instabilities suggest that all polymer processing operations, however slow they
              may be, are prone to instabilities.  For this reason understanding the
              influence of fluid elasticity on flow and stability of representative bulk,
              free surface and interfacial flows is crucial.    Fully parallelized,
              higher-order finite element techniques will be used to study a number of
              prototype two and three-dimensional free surface and interfacial flows of
              viscoelastic fluids.  Specifically, the work will focus on investigating flow
              modifications due to fluid elasticity in mixed shearing/elongational flows as
              well as examining the role of fluid elasticity and non-equilibrium energetic
              effects on stability of this class of flows.  Of particular interest is to
              identify the mechanism(s) that are responsible for viscoelastic instabilities
              in mixed kinematic flows which are routinely encountered in processing of
              polymers and composite materials.
