Title       : Mechanism of Enhanced Phosphorus Removal in Suspended GrowthBiological Reactors
               for Treatment of Wastewaters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9612840

Award Number: 9612840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399277             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Jenkins jenkins@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay D. Keasling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This in an award to provide support for research on a  modification to a
              suspended growth biological process used for  treatment of wastewater to
              enhance its ability to reduce the  phosphorus content of the process effluent. 
              The objective of  this project is to elucidate the mechanism of the enhancement
               process.  This is planned to be accomplished by isolation of pure  cultures of
              organisms that have been identified as capable of the  enhancement process,
              study of their growth characteristics,  metabolism and genetic control.  The
              procedures to be used in  this project include enrichment techniques for
              isolation of the  organisms from suspended growth reactors exhibiting
              significant  phosphorus removal, verification of their ability to enhance 
              phosphorus removal in pure culture and determination of their  growth
              characteristics, metabolism and genetic control.  Specific  objectives include
              determination of growth characteristics of  isolated organisms and their
              ability to shift from completely  aerobic conditions to aerobic/anaerobic
              cycling and back to  completely aerobic culture conditions.  The investigators
              plan to  determine the influence of phosphorus, carbon substrates and 
              anaerobic shifts on gene expression, the interactions between an  energized
              cell membrane and transport of phosphorus and acetate,  and the importance of
              intracellular storage materials.  The project is expected to provide a better
              understanding than  now exists of the fundamental microbial mechanisms involved
              in  enhanced biological phosphorus removal by suspended growth  biological
              reactors.  This improved understanding is expected to  improve the engineering
              design of suspended growth biological  reactors used for treatment of
              wastewaters that contain  phosphorus including adequate control to improve the
              efficiency  with which they meet their design objectives.***
