Title       : Large-Scale Experimental Evaluation of the Lateral Load Response of Unbonded
               Post-Tensioned Precast Walls with Horizontal Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9612165

Award Number: 9612165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Pessiki spp1@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Le-Wu Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Sause  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Recent experimental and analytical research has shown the benefits of using
              unbonded post-tensional to improve the seismic behavior of precast
              beam-to-column joint subassemblages.  Compared with current industry practice,
              the use of unbonded post-tensional in a seismic structural system is a
              significant innovation.  The seismic behavior of unbonded post-tensioned
              precast concrete walls with horizontal connections has been investigate
              analytically.  However, the experimental evidence needed to verify the wall
              analytical model is not currently available.  This project is to experimentally
              evaluate the lateral load behavior of multi-story unbonded post-tensioned
              precast concrete walls.  The research has two specific objectives: (1) to
              verify the wall analytical model that has been developed to predict the
              flexural wall behavior under seismic loading; and (2) to qualify the shear
              capability of the horizontal connections of these walls.  Cyclic and monotonic
              lateral load tests will be performed on half-scale models of eight walls.  Two
              lateral load profiles, based on nonlinear dynamic analyses, will be used.  The
              first lateral load profile produces a large base-moment-to-base shear ratio. 
              Five walls will be tested under this load profile.  The second lateral load
              profile produces a small base-moment-to-base-shear ratio.  Three walls will be
              tested under this load profile.  Experimental results will be compared with
              predicted behavior to identify improvements that need to be made in the models
              and methods for predicting flexural and shear slip behavior.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
