Title       : INDOEX - Field Experiment in the Indian Ocean: Continuous Measurements of
               Aerosol Chemical, Physical, and Optical Properties in the Marine Boundary Layer
               at Male,Indian Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9612895

Award Number: 9612895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Prospero JPROSPERO@RSMAS.MIAMI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hal Maring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Savoie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612895  Prospero     The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an international
              field experiment with participation from France, Germany, India, the
              Netherlands, and the United States.  The main effort under the U.S. component
              focuses on assessing the role of sulfates and other continental aerosols in
              global radiative forcing and is being supported jointly by the Department of
              Energy and the National Science Foundation.  In addition, complementary studies
              involving investigations of a variety of related chemical and radiative
              processes will be undertaken by scientists from other federal agencies and
              other international partners. The composite observing system consists of a wide
              range of platforms, from ships to aircraft, as well as surface-based and
              balloon measuring systems, and satellite data. The main part of the three year
              effort will be a four-month intensive field phase which begins January 1999.   
               The ultimate goal of this program is to obtain a better understanding of the 
              decadal and longer time scale climate forcing. The equatorial Indian Ocean
              during the  northeast winter monsoon season provides a unique natural
              laboratory for this  experiment. The experimental area is probably the only
              place in the world where an air  mass which has been modified by intense
              sources of continental aerosols, anthropogenic  trace species, and their
              reaction products (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the northern  hemisphere
              comes into contact with the pristine air of the southern hemisphere, which has 
              been transported via cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at the Intertropical
              Convergence  Zone. The juxtaposition of these two very distinct air masses will
              allow a thorough  examination of both the direct and indirect effects of the
              aerosols on the radiative  properties of the atmosphere.     Dr. Prospero and
              colleagues will develop a climatological data set of the chemical, physical,
              and radiative characteristics of aerosols in the INDOEX region through a
              continuous sampling program over two and a half yea rs at an island site in the
              Maldives. With the expected range in atmospheric conditions over this time, the
              characteristics of and concentrations in species of aerosols will also vary
              greatly. The PIs will attempt to associate these chemical and physical
              variations with changes in atmospheric radiative properties.
