Title       : Topics in Signal Design and Signal Analysis for Wireless Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9612864

Award Number: 9612864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay P. Kumar vijayk@ceng.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Some signal design/analysis problems relevant to wireless  communication are
              under investigation.  Problems in the first class  relate to a code-division
              multiple-access (CDMA) communication scheme  in which the receiver makes
              optimum multi-user decisions.  The effect  the selection of a particular
              sequence family has on the performance  of the system is under study.  One
              measure of performance is the  capacity, i.e., the number of active users that
              the system can  support.      Signature sequences influence this number through
              their periodic and  aperiodic correlation properties.  These correlation values
              tend to  diminish performance by reducing the minimum Euclidean distance 
              between distinct multi-user signal sets.  Preliminary investigations  turned up
              an interesting example involving Gold sequences of small  length in which
              correlations reduced the Euclidean distance between a  multi-user signal and
              its nearest neighbour to zero.       The obvious upper bound on capacity
              obtained by replacing each  aperiodic correlation by the maximum over the
              entire sequence family  provides much too conservative an estimate.  Thus
              improved upper  bounds are currently being sought.      This requires a better
              understanding of the distribution of aperiodic  correlation values obtained by
              picking a randomly-delayed random  subset of the entire family of signature
              sequences. This distribution  is under study both for a family of signature
              sequences in general as  well as for specific families known to be efficient
              with respect to  periodic correlation measures.      The understanding gained,
              will be used in the design of improved  signal sets. For example, preliminary
              investigations suggest that when  communicating data using phase-shift keying,
              improved performance will  result if each user's phase transitions never exceed
              90 degrees   since this has the effect of distributing the aperiodic
              correlations  across the real and imaginary axes as opposed to simply the real
              axis.     The second class of problems  under investigation deals with the 
              IS-54/IS-136 North American digital cellular standard.   Here the goal  is to
              come up with an efficient forward error-correction (FEC) scheme  well matched
              to the IS-54/136 channel.   The motivtion came from  previous work in which a
              nonlinear binary FEC code identified by the  author (the Nordstrom Robinson
              code) turned out under soft-decision  decoding, to improve uniformly upon the
              performance of the  convolutional code used in the current IS-54 standard. 
              This was to  the surprise of many in both industry and academia as the binary
              code  is of short block length (16) and has a small minimum distance (6), 
              whereas the IS-54 employs a rate 1/2 convolutional code of contraint  length
              (6).         The reason for this improved performance is under  investigation
              and attempts are under way to identify the code best  matched to this channel. 
              Some other problems of a miscellaneous  nature, all relevant to improved
              wireless communcation are also being  studied.
