Title       : Theoretical Studies of Dynamical Processes in the Ionosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9612638

Award Number: 9612638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Schunk schunk@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan J. Sojka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project continues studying the theoretical effects that plasma and neutral
              gas transport processes have on the ionosphere.  Spanning three years, this
              research involves model/data comparisons, theoretical studies of ionospheric
              dynamics and electrodynamics, polar wind studies, and high-resolution
              thermosphere studies.  The PI will consider the ionosphere as an integrated
              system, interacting with both the magnetosphere and thermosphere.  Almost all
              of the major ionospheric regions will be studied:  E-region, F-region, and
              topside ionosphere at equatorial, middle and high latitudes.  Using mainly
              current models, the PI will use data from several ionosondes, incoherent
              scatter radars and satellites.  Specifically, the research involves:  (1)
              modeling/data comparisons in support of the CEDAR/PRIMO initiative to explain
              storm enhanced densities, model the plasma density cliff observed in the
              southern hemisphere, and validate the predicted climatology for the topside
              F-region; (2) modeling ionospheric dynamics studies, emphasizing global
              ionospheric response to gravity waves, problems associated with coupling global
              ionospheric and MHD magnetospheric models, and interpretation of incoherent
              scatter radar spectra with neutral networks when ion distributions are
              non-Maxwellian; (3) studying ionospheric electrodynamics of polar cap arcs,
              emphasizing on the cross-flow and time delay associated with the formation and
              decay of arcs; and (4) studying polar wind the effects of centrifugal
              acceleration, polar rain electrons, precipitating magnetospheric ions, and
              ionospheric molecular ions on temporal behavior of the flow; and (5) studying
              the high-resolution thermospheric response to flux-transfer events, with
              consequent cusp convection jets and plasma patch formation.
