Title       : Language Generation for a Speech Prosthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1999       
File        : a9612682

Award Number: 9612682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $780953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan A. Sag Sag@CSLI.Stanford.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert H. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  project is developing a novel approach to natural  language  generation, 
              applying  it  to  computer-aided  text  and   speech  generation  for people
              with physical disabilities.   Many  people  who  cannot speak because of
              physical disability utilize text-to-  speech  generators  as  prosthetic
              devices.   However,  users  of  speech  prostheses often have more general loss
              of motor control,  and  despite aids such as word prediction, text entry is
              slow and  difficult.   For  typical users, current speech  prostheses  have 
              output  rates  less than a tenth of the speed of  normal  speech.  This 
              prevents  natural social conversation, since it  completely  disrupts  the 
              usual processes of turn-taking, and  can  lead  to  negative  effects  on the
              listener's attitude to  the  prosthesis  user.   The  main focus of this
              research is the investigation  of  techniques which can improve rates
              sufficiently for more  natural  conversation  to be possible, without
              sacrificing flexibility  of  content.  This  new  approach employs a
              combination  of  a  wide-  coverage   grammar,   corpus-based  word  frequency 
               data,   and  conversational  templates.   Applied  to  speech  prosthesis,  it
               enables the production of full sentences from minimal user  input  in  a 
              context-sensitive way.  The approach can also  be  applied  more  generally for
              efficient production of formulaic  text  like  the structured reports used
              widely in business and government.
