Title       : Exploratory Synthesis of Inorganic Solids Containing Nanosize
               Transition-Metal-Oxide Frameworks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9612148

Award Number: 9612148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shiou-Jyh Hwu shwu@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9612148          Hwu        The aim of this research is to explore a
              new class of extended solids that contain nanosize,  transition-metal-oxide
              frameworks and to investigate the behavior of the delocalized electrons  of
              oxide-bridged, transition-metal (TM) magnetic centers in a confined lattice.
              The  anticipated structures consist of TM-oxide chains (wires), layers (sheets)
              and oligomers (dots)  that are structurally separated and electronically
              isolated by closed-shell, non-magnetic  oxyanions, i.e., silicates, phosphates
              and arsenates. Efforts in exploratory synthesis will  focus on (1) homologous
              series containing sheets and wires of rutile and perovskite  frameworks and (2)
              silicate compounds containing nanosize frameworks of late TM oxides. 
              Molten-salt methods, using alkali and/or alkaline-earth metal halides, will be
              employed, since  it is a proven technique for the crystal growth of these
              refractory oxides. Compound  characterizations will be directed toward
              understanding the bond strength, spin-spin and  spin-lattice interactions, band
              structures, and the onset of metallic properties associated with  finite
              TM-oxide structures. This proposed research is significant because the
              anticipated  TM-oxide fragments with different lengths and geometries will
              provide a library of structural  models for studying the behavior of the
              delocalized electrons in a confined space. Also,  compounds containing TM-oxide
              frameworks with finite structures may possess novel  electronic and/or magnetic
              properties, which are incompatible with the properties of extended  oxides and
              will be of both scientific and technological interest. Finally, the research
              outlined  in this proposal will provide invaluable fundamental knowledge
              necessary to continue  advancing technology for materials that are of
              electronic and magnetic importance.   %%%    Recent advances in technology and
              the need for new materials in device applications have  driven the rapid growth
              of solid-state science. Understanding fundamen tal parameters that  govern the
              performance of a material has played a crucial role in every area of this 
              multi-disciplinary science, which includes solid-state chemistry and physics,
              as well as  interdisciplinary areas such as electrical and materials science
              engineering. Solid-state  chemistry is concerned with the synthesis of
              materials with extended structures and their  related properties. The variety
              and complexity of these solids' structures, and the evaluation  of the factors
              that influence and control structural and physical properties, are the elements
               that have made solid-state chemistry a dynamic area of study. As a result,
              attempts to modify  known structures and explore new ones with novel properties
              are made with the aim of  revealing parameters that may be used to fine tune
              the physical properties and to ultimately  synthesize the desired materials. 
              Currently, the ability to predict the composition and  structure for extended
              solids is not yet possible and synthetic discoveries that have led to  landmark
              advances in solid-state science have nearly always been made through
              exploratory  synthesis, rather than by design. The research outlined in this
              proposal will provide  invaluable fundamental knowledge necessary to continue
              advancing technology for materials  that are of electronic and magnetic
              importance. The aim is to explore new class of extended  solids that contain
              nanosize, transition-metal-oxide frameworks.
