Title       : ImageFlow: Real-Time Image-Based Rendering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9612643

Award Number: 9612643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Foster                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2113620            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Fuchs fuchs@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Poulton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Depth images are used as rendering primitives in the high-performance graphics 
              engine that is being constructed in this project.  A depth image is a two- 
              dimensional image that includes depth relative to a viewpoint, in addition to 
              color and other properties.  From a small number of depth images, each of which
               represents an arbitrarily complex scene from a single viewpoint, an image can
              be  computed for any viewpoint within the neighborhood of the original
              viewpoints.   This image-based rendering approach offers advantages in realism
              and distributing  the rendering computation among processors that generate
              depth images and those  that reproject them to new viewpoints.    The project
              is using the existing PixelFlow graphics engine to test the image-  based
              rendering ideas.  During the first part of the project, algorithms for 
              acquiring and pre-processing depth images will be investigated.  At the same 
              time, the PixelFlow machine will be enhanced for image acquisition and storage.
                This will permit software for image-based rendering to run in real-time on
              the  PixelFlow machine, performing the following operations:  determination of 
              reference images to be used as sources of depth pixels, warping of reference 
              image pixels to the screen space, evaluation color, area, and other parameters 
              for each pixel, and blending of pixels to form the final reference image.  In 
              later stages of the project, hardware support may be developed and evaluated
              for  some of these operations.
