Title       : Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX): Meteorological Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9612894

Award Number: 9612894
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223950             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. N. Krishnamurti tnk@met.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9612894  Krishnamurti     The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an
              international field experiment with participation from France, Germany, India,
              the Netherlands, and the United States.  The main effort under the U.S.
              component focuses on assessing the role of sulfates and other continental
              aerosols in global radiative forcing and is being supported jointly by the
              Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation.  In addition,
              complementary studies involving investigations of a variety of related chemical
              and radiative processes will be undertaken by scientists from other federal
              agencies and other international partners.  The composite observing system
              consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to aircraft, as well as
              surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite data.  The main part
              of the three year effort will be a four-month intensive field phase which
              begins January 1999.     The ultimate goal of this program is to obtain a
              better understanding of the decadal and longer time scale climate forcing.  The
              equatorial Indian Ocean during the northeast winter monsoon season provides a
              unique natural laboratory for this experiment.  The experimental area is
              probably the only place in the world where an air mass which has been modified
              by intense sources of continental aerosols, anthropogenic trace species, and
              their reaction products (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the northern hemisphere
              comes into contact with the pristine air of the southern hemisphere, which has
              been transported via cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at the Intertropical
              Convergence Zone.   The juxtaposition of these two very distinct air masses
              will allow a thorough examination of both the direct and indirect effects of
              the aerosols on the radiative properties of the atmosphere.     Dr.
              Krishnamurti and his colleagues will have principal responsibility for
              producing the meteorological analyses for INDOEX.  These analyses will be done
              for planning purposes as well as for the experiment.  Docu menting the local
              and regional circulations is critical for understanding the aerosol and
              pollutant transports and distribution and their impact on the radiative profile
              at any given location.  A wide variety of satellite and in situ measurements
              will be assimilated with a state of the art high resolution global model.
