Title       : Defects and Impurities in Optical Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9612267

Award Number: 9612267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $949789             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan N. Houde-Walter shw@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Turan Erdogan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas P. Bigelow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1022,1774,9165,AMPP,OSIE,
Abstract    :
              9612267  Houde-Walter  The proposed research is a multidisciplinary effort
              involving  University of Rochester and Stanford University, along with 
              industrial collaborators from Eastman Kodak and Corning, to  study the
              environments of rare-earth dopants and defects in  optical glasses.  The PIs
              propose to carry out spectroscopic  analyses of impurities and defects in
              optical glasses to  determine the nature of rare-earth environments.  These 
              analyses include optically detected magnetic resonance, nuclear  magnetic
              resonance , x-ray absorption fine structure, electron  spin resonance, and
              Raman spectroscopy.  An understanding of  the properties of these defects is
              critical to the production  of glasses that exhibit higher gain and
              photo-induced index  changes per induced absorption.  These glasses, in turn,
              will  make possible the development of new types of devices for  optical
              telecommunications.  %%%  The proposed research is a multidisciplinary effort
              involving  University of Rochester and Stanford University, along with 
              industrial collaborators from Eastman Kodak and Corning, to  study the
              environments of rare-earth dopants and defects in  optical glasses.  The PIs
              propose to carry out spectroscopic  analyses of impurities and defects in
              optical glasses to  determine the nature of rare-earth environments.  Optically
               detected magnetic resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance , x-ray  absorption
              fine structure, electron spin resonance, and Raman  spectroscopy will be used
              to study defects in rare-earth doped  glasses.  An understanding of these
              defects will enable  materials researchers to produce glass with improved 
              optoelectronic properties, which in turn will make possible the  development of
              new types of devices for optical  telecommunications.  ***
