Title       : FASEB: Summer Research Conference: Signal Transduction in Plants to be held at
               Copper Mountain, Colorado, June 16-21, 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9612960

Award Number: 9612960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph S. Quatrano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-12960  Quatrano    This Summer Research Conference on "Signal Transduction in
              Plants" is the second  in a series of FASEB conferences. This conference occurs
              every other year, alternating with the "Plant Genetics/Gene Expression" FASEB
              conference. The conference is chaired by three of the leading experts in the
              field: Terri Lomax, Ralph Quatrano, and Keith Roberts. The conference will
              highlight recent progress in signal transduction mechanisms in plants. Specific
              sessions include: signaling between the cytoskeleton, plasma membrane, and cell
              wall; signaling molecules in plant growth and development (two sessions);
              environmental signaling in plant pathogen and plant/microbe interactions (two
              sessions); cell:cell communication, and perception and transduction of light
              signals. This conference will bring together scientists (150) who are
              approaching plant signaling from different and complementary conceptual and
              technical approaches and will generate an interdisciplinary synthesis in this
              fast moving research area. This conference format will provide a unique forum
              for sustained, focused, in-depth discussions of emerging topics that are
              critical to our understanding of the underlying mechanisms controlling plant
              growth, development, and environmental responses.  %%%   This Summer Research
              Conference on "Signal Transduction in Plants" is the second  in a series of
              FASEB conferences. This conference occurs every other year, alternating with
              the "Plant Genetics/Gene Expression" FASEB conference. The conference is
              chaired by three of the leading experts in the field: Terri Lomax, Ralph
              Quatrano, and Keith Roberts. The conference will highlight recent progress in
              signal transduction mechanisms in plants. Specific sessions include: signaling
              between the cytoskeleton, plasma membrane, and cell wall; signaling molecules
              in plant growth and development (two sessions); environmental signaling in
              plant pathogen and plant/microbe interactions (two sessions); cell:cell
              communication, and perception and trans duction of light signals. This
              conference will bring together scientists (150) who are approaching plant
              signaling from different and complementary conceptual and technical approaches
              and will generate an interdisciplinary synthesis in this fast moving research
              area. This conference format will provide a unique forum for sustained,
              focused, in-depth discussions of emerging topics that are critical to our
              understanding of the underlying mechanisms controlling plant growth,
              development, and environmental responses.  ***
