Title       : CYBERCHASE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9612533

Award Number: 9612533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth A. Burns rabuns@wnet.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educ Broadcasting Corp
	      450 West 33rd Street
	      New York, NY  100012605    212/560-6608

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  AWARD NUMBER:  96-12533  Ruth Ann Burns    ABSTRACT: WNET is conducting a
              six-month development phase to engage a lead mathematics consultant, an
              advisory committee, and producers to develop more fully the format, individual
              program content, and outreach components for a television-based project called
              Cyberchase, a multi-component project designed to excite, inspire, and involve
              9-11 year olds in mathematics.   The project currently is planned to include a
              weekly half-hour television series, a variety of educational print materials,
              and on-line activities.   The series concept revolves around a multi-ethnic
              group of friends who are hooked on a riveting computer game call Cyberchase. 
              At the start of the show, cast members are pulled into the computer and, with
              the program's viewers, become protagonists on intriguing missions that
              demonstrate real world applications of mathematics.  A host confronts the
              players with challenges that must be met in order to progress onto the next
              adventure.       During the planning phase, the project staff will bring
              scholars, educators, and programmers together in planning sessions to develop
              and refine program ideas and outreach strategies.  The scope of work will
              include research in three primary areas:  Program Content; Program Design
              (graphics, animation); and Interactivity, Multi-media, and Educational
              Outreach.     The PI will be Ruth Ann Burns, Vice-President and Director of
              WNET's Educational Resource Center, and Executive Producer of  the PBS Mathline
              Middle School Math Project.  The Lead Math Consultant will be Carey Bolster,
              Director of the Middle School Math Project, a service of PBS Mathline.   Sandra
              Sheppard, WNET's Director of Educational Video Services, will serve as Project
              Director and supervise all aspects of the research and development phase for
              the inter-related educational media components of the project. They will work
              with an advisory committee that includes Solomon Garfunkel, Iris Carl, Jimmie
              Rios, and Eve Hall.
