Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Aspects of Discrete Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9612077

Award Number: 9612077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor T. Herman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Herman  9612077       The investigator studies how to determine functions
              defined  over three-dimensional space from physically measured (and hence  only
              approximate) values of their line integrals, using ideas  from discrete
              tomography.  In discrete tomography there is a  domain --- which may itself be
              discrete (such as a set of ordered  pairs of integers) or continuous (such as
              Euclidean space) ---  and an unknown function whose range is known to be a
              given  discrete set (usually of real numbers).  The problems of discrete 
              tomography have to do with determining the function (perhaps only  partially or
              approximately) from weighted sums over subsets of  its domain in the discrete
              case and from weighted integrals over  subspaces of its domain in the
              continuous case.  The essential  aspect of discrete tomography is that knowing
              the discrete range  of the function may allow determining its value at points
              where  without this knowledge it could not be determined.  Discrete  tomography
              is full of mathematically fascinating questions (e.g.,  what shapes are
              uniquely determined by their x-rays?) and it has  many interesting applications
              (e.g., electron microscopy and  nondestructive testing).       The investigator
              studies how to determine three-dimensional  objects from physically measured
              (and hence only approximate)  values of what are essentially averages along
              one-dimensional  slices of the objects.  Mathematically, this is the problem of
               determining functions defined over ordinary three-dimensional  space from
              approximate values of their line integrals.  Such  physical measurements may be
              taken of biological macromolecules  using an electron microscope or of
              industrial objects using high  energy x-rays.  What is shared by these two (and
              many other)  applications is that the object to be determined may be known to 
              have only finitely many possible values.  The distinguishing  feature of
              discrete tomography is that by making use of such  knowledge we may succeed in
              determining the structure of th e  object from data that is not in itself
              sufficient for determining  the structure without the prior information.  While
              the emphasis  of the project is on the development of an appropriate 
              mathematical theory (including computational procedures for the  solution of
              specific instances of the general problems under  investigation), these will be
              developed so that they can be  applied in the field of recovering the structure
              of biological  macromolecules from sets of electron microscopic images by
              making  use of the truly discrete nature of the objects to be  reconstructed. 
              What this boils done to is the following: certain  methods of data collection
              do not allow us to determine the  structure of a totally unknown object (e.g.,
              the electron  microscopes destroys a macromolecule before sufficient data can 
              be collected).  Discrete tomography allows us to overcome such a  technical
              difficulty in those cases when the object is known to  have only finitely many
              values.  The project has applications to  imaging problems in medicine,
              biology, and chemistry.
