Title       : Impact of Extent of Wetting in Arid Region Geotechnical Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9612073

Award Number: 9612073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Houston sandra.houston@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Houston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramon Arrowsmith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher O. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9612073  Houston    Eight of the ten fastest growing cities in the U.S. are 
              located in the arid  or semi-arid regions of the southwest.  With the expected 
              growth, there is  a need for supporting infrastructure including surface and 
              subsurface  structures.  For civil engineers, there is also a growing 
              appreciation for  the different mechanical behavior of arid soils, including 
              problems with  soil expansion, collapse, and wetting-induced slope 
              instability.  Some of  the associated failures can be catastrophic.  Recent 
              evaluations of  existing unsaturated flow models demonstrate that, although 
              rates of  infiltration can be simulated fairly accurately with  appropriate
              model  calibration, the degree of saturation and the in situ  stresses are not
              well  predicted.    This research addresses the need for improving arid-region 
              geotechnical  practice in estimating the degree and extent of wetting, and 
              quantifying  the effect of that wetting on soil behavior.  The result of  work
              will  include practical design envelopes of degree and extent of  wetting, 
              allowing the assessment of changes in saturation due to  urbanization or 
              increased irrigation.  The multidisciplinary team includes  PI's from 
              geotechnical engineering, construction, and geology.  The  methodology 
              includes:  (1) large-scale, deep field lysimeters, (2)  collection,  analysis,
              and presentation of the extensive existing  geotechnical and  geoenvironmental
              data assembled from reported information  and practitioners  files, and (3)
              unsaturated soil testing for shear strength  and  compressibility in
              response-to-wetting, including pore-air  and pore-water  pressure control and
              measurement.  ***
