Title       : Development of Novel Optical Techniques for Cleaning Contaminated Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1997    
File        : a9612274

Award Number: 9612274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Y. Walz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan D. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1022,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612274  Walz  Removal of particulate contamination from solid surfaces is a
              major concern in the fabrication of integrated circuits (IC's), high density
              magnetic storage, large area displays, high power laser and astronomical
              optics, and other electronic and optical devices.  With the trend toward
              smaller scale device technology, the need for improved particle removal
              techniques has become critical.  In previous work, Allen developed an
              innovative technique called Laser Assisted Particle Removal (LAPR) to remove
              particulates from solid surfaces using a laser and a medium to transfer energy
              from the laser beam to kinetic energy in the particles.  In this project, a
              two-prolonged-effort will be used to identify experimentally the important
              variables in controlling the LAPR process and to integrate the resulting
              information into a physically meaningful model to predict and optimize LAPR for
              different particle/substrate/ambient systems.  This combined empirical and
              mechanistic approach will allow efficient technology transfer to, for example,
              semiconductor process equipment manufacturers.    The primary objective is to
              develop a model of the LAPR process that can be used to optimize the design of
              a particle removal process module for cleaning critical surfaces.  Toward that
              end, collaborations with industrial partners will be continued.  An important
              step in reaching this objective is to develop a model for predicting the
              strength of the adhesion force binding specific contaminants to surfaces.  This
              will be accomplished using the novel optical techniques developed by Walz to
              measure colloidal interaction forces.  Also proposed is the development of a
              new technique for removing adhered particles based on the principle of
              radiation pressure.  Here, a tightly focused laser beam will be used to "push"
              particles off transparent substrates.  The  technique would be especially
              useful for cleaning high energy optical devices.  A major advantage of the
              technique is that it should be possible to perform the  cleaning without the
              use of any liquids.  Since the applied radiation force can be measured
              independently, the technique could also be used for measuring directly the
              adhesion force, which would be an extremely useful research tool.  ***
