Title       : Resampling Methods for Quantitative Genetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9612469

Award Number: 9612469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick C. Phillips   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  The  solution  to  many  questions in  evolutionary  biology  and 
              agricultural  science depend on the accurate  estimation  of  the  level  of 
              genetic  variation  and  covariation  present  in  the  populations  being
              studied. Estimation and testing of  the  these  so-called  quantitative genetic
              parameters has been traditionally  based   on   restrictive  assumptions  and 
              a  limited   set   of  experimental procedures. The work proposed here aims to
              eliminate  many  of  these  restrictions  by  utilizing  recently  developed 
              resampling methods (primarily the jackknife and bootstrap)  as  a  means  of 
              providing a more general approach to  the  statistical  hypothesis  testing of
              quantitative genetic parameters.  Software  for  streamlining  parameter
              estimation and  for  performing  the  resampling analysis will be developed and
              tested.    A  primary concern regarding the use of resampling techniques  is 
              that  they must be revalidated for each application in which they  are  used. 
              A  great deal of time will therefore  be  devoted  to  testing   the  
              statistical  properties  of  the  newly   devised  resampling  procedures.
              Monte carlo simulations of data  sets  of  known  distribution will be analyzed
              using the resampling methods  developed above, and the error estimation and
              power properties of  these  methods tested for accuracy against the expected 
              results.  Once developed and validated, this software will greatly simplify 
              the  analysis  of  quantitative genetic data,  and  provide  many  biologists
              with greater confidence in the conclusions they reach.    Although quantitative
              genetics has been used for many decades  in  agricultural  systems, it is only
              in the last fifteen  or  twenty  years  that  evolutionary biologists have
              begun to  make  use  of  quantitative  genetic methodology. One of the  central
               questions  that  has  arisen during that time is nature of the  evolutionary 
              change  in  the pattern of genetic variance and covariance  among  traits. This
              line of questio ning is usually developed in terms of  asking  whether  the
              genetic variance-covariance  matrix  remains  unchanged through time. Software
              to be developed in this proposal  will  allow  a  much  broader  set  of 
              questions  regarding  the  evolution  of  genetic  covariance  structure  to 
              be  asked.  By  utilizing    recent    developments   in    the    analysis   
              of  variance-covariance  methods, biologists  employing  the  methods 
              developed  here  will be able to address an entire  hierarchy  of  hypotheses  
               regarding   the   relationship   between    genetic  variance-covariance
              matrices from two or more  populations.  Once  these hypotheses are addressed,
              the net pattern of selection that  led to the divergence of the two populations
              can be reconstructed  and tested.    In  all,  a  coherent  set  of methods 
              and  procedures  will  be  developed  that will free those doing quantitative
              genetics  from  the  tedium  of analysis and allow them to pursue  many  new 
              and  exciting avenues of research.
