Title       : EUROPA Ocean Workshop; November 12-14, 1996, San Juan Capistrano, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1997        
File        : a9612530

Award Number: 9612530
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Nash   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Juan Capistrano Rsch
	      31882 Camino Capistrano
	      San Juan Capistrano, CA  926753216    949/240-2010

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OCE-9612530    This NASA and NSF sponsored conference will explore ideas related
               to Europa's possible ocean, submarine volcanism, and biological  activity.   
              Europa is one of the four large Galilean satellites of Jupiter.   Data and
              theory have suggested (though not proven) that Europa has  an ocean of liquid
              water beneath its icy crust.  Europa undergoes  tidal heating similar to that
              driving the spectacular volcanism on  the Jovian moon Io, and this heating may
              have been sufficient to  melt the ice and maintain an ocean.  Among the topics
              the  conference will address are geologic and geophysical evidence  concerning
              an ocean, and what its physical state might be.    If an ocean exists on
              Europa, the question of whether it could  support life immediately arises.  The
              first detailed examination of  Europa by the Voyager spacecraft (in 1979)
              coincided very closely  with the first detailed investigation by oceanographers
              of volcano-  hydrothermal sites on the Earth's seafloor.  That work has shown 
              that in the presence of liquid water, volcanoes can sustain life  without
              energy from the sun.  Submarine volcanism is also a  possibility on Europa.  A
              major purpose of the conference, then,  will be to examine critically the
              arguments for and against  submarine volcanism on Europa, and the likelihood
              that such  activity could support biological activity there as well.  A 
              related and controversial topic is the issue of whether life can  have
              originated at submarine volcanic systems, on Earth and on  planets in general. 
              The conference will bring together the  planetary science, oceanography, and
              exobiology communities to  explore these topics.    The conference, jointly
              supported by NASA's Solar System  Exploration Division (Exobiology Program
              Office) and NSF's Ocean  Science Program, will also deal with ongoing and
              future robotic  exploration of Europa.  The Galileo spacecraft is now in orbit 
              around Jupiter, and will make multiple flyby examinations of Europa  during its
              mission.  Follow-on missio ns could be flown to Europa  that would address the
              existence of an ocean in detail, and that  would explore the ocean the ocean if
              it were found to be present.   The conference will address the measurement
              techniques that could  be used on such missions, and their implications for
              further solar  system exploration.
