Title       : A Responsive Process Planning System in Agile Manufacturing Using Case-Based
               Reasoning Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9612067

Award Number: 9612067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110789             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen F. Lu wflu@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoqing Frank Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9612067  Lu   This award provides funding for research to develop a model of the
              responsive process planning system in agile manufacturing with a focus on
              automated determination of the sequence of machining operations in agile
              manufacturing environments for axisymmetric machined parts.  An approach using
              case-based reasoning to support learning capability will be employed.  The
              methodology to accomplish various issues in case-based operation sequencing
              will be formalized.  In particular, the following issues will be tackled. 
              First, a feature-based representation will be used for operation sequencing
              case representation.  Then, a method called model-based similarity measurement,
              based on a domain-specific hierarchical model, will be applied for case
              indexing and case retrieval.  Furthermore, the adaptation of an operation
              sequencing case including case modifier, plan   simulator, and plan repairer
              will be developed.  The system model will be implemented to demonstrate the
              learning functions of the system in response to rapidly changing markets and
              manufacturing environments.  The generated process plans will be evaluated.  
              If successful, this research will lead machine learning into the realm of
              practical application in agile manufacturing and provide a way to guide a
              computer-aided process planning system towards the level of human intelligence.
               It also offers to capture best practices through industry interaction and thus
              prevent the loss of knowledge through the attrition of experienced personnel. 
              Furthermore, the proposed process planning system,   with enhanced intelligence
              through learning, should respond rapidly to fast changing demands and enable
              the realization of the agile manufacturing concept of shorter time-to-market
              and the increase of product quality.  It is expected that this model could be
              extended to other activities, such as product design, metal forming planning,
              and assembly planning, in the industry.
