Title       : A Community Based Approach to Technology Infusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9612905

Award Number: 9612905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1785366            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Feldman Alan_Feldman@TERC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth McNamara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Spitzer  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Feldman  9612905    The goal of  the Hanau Model  Schools Partnership is to
              infuse technology throughout the Model Schools so that learning with technology
              becomes a deeply accepted part of daily  school life. Our two-year
              implementation plan will  focus on these three schools of the Partnership. We
              will also develop strategies to assist Department of Defense Education
              Activities (DoDEA)  in scaling up technology infusion from   one set of schools
              to the entire system and thereby shed light on the process of technology
              infusion for school districts nationally.      The implementation plan for
              technology infusion was developed through an intensive seven-month  planning
              process that involved the staff at TERC and members of the Hanau school
              community, the Hessen District Office, and the DoDEA office in Washington DC.
              This plan focuses on four key principles that we believe to be essential if a
              technology initiative is to be successful.    * Community-based planning. 
              Successful technology infusion efforts must be strongly grounded in the
              communities in which they occur. Community-based planning anchors the vision
              and the process of  identifying and aligning resources for the initiative.  *
              Sustained professional development.  Technology infusion efforts must provide
              teachers with sustained support for making deep-seated changes to their
              practices.  Such support must include formal and informal professional
              development opportunities, as well as on-site support for day-to-day classroom
              implementation.  * Access to new technologies. Technology infusion must provide
              students and teachers with equitable access to the new technologies  *
              Contiuous evaluation.  Communities  successfully engaged in technology infusion
              continually reflect upon their practice as they change and grow.    These
              principles derive from what we have learned from our partners in Hanau,
              investigation of the literature on technology integration and educational
              reform, and discussions with national experts in these fields. Weaving t hese
              principles together as components  of a comprehensive initiative is a powerful
              strategy for educational improvement.    In this proposal we describe the work
              accomplished during the planning phase of the project-what we did and what we
              learned. Next we outline the implementation plan, describing the major
              activities and the ways in which we aim to fulfill them over the two years of
              the project. We discuss the significance of this project for DoDEA and others
              concerned with scaling up from model schools to the full system. Finally, we
              conclude with a discussion of what we envision teaching and learning may look
              like in the model schools at the end of the project.  ***
