Title       : Vanguard II: Supporting Systemic Innovation in DoDEA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9612906

Award Number: 9612906
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1807214            (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly C. Hunter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bolt Beranek & Newman Inc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9612906  Hunter    Vanguard will create and evaluate a model process for
              systemic reform and ongoing innovation within a large school system. The
              essential elements of the Vanguard model are as follows:    * An entire K-12
              school community builds its capacity to serve as a testbed for  innovation for
              the overall school system.    * A structure and culture become
              institutionalized in the testbed school community that encourages voluntary
              groups of teachers and others to initiate, investigate, plan, implement, and
              evaluate innovative practices that take into account new standards of student
              performances, as well as new opportunities offered through technologies.    *
              Computer-based technology, LAN/WAN Internet access, and electronic resources
              are ubiquitous across the school community and the members of the community are
              fluent in the use of such resources.    * The processes of building local
              capacity (e.g. professional development) are carried out in a manner that
              operationalizes and tests emerging policy initiatives of the school system
              leadership.    * Linking across the curriculum, linking across the community,
              and linking across the entire school system, are leveraged strategies for
              creating new environments for learning and teaching in the modern age.    * The
              linkages between the testbed school community and the rest of the system (e.g.
              in teacher-led professional  development forums or student work groups across
              schools) - made possible through the technology infrastructure and
              applications-promote rapid diffusion of the innovations across the system.    *
              Innovations in curriculum, instruction, collaboration, assessment, and school
              restructuring are evaluated using a wide range of assessments of student
              learning as well as costs, possible cost-displacements, and scalability across
              the system .    * The processes by which the school system supports and learns
              from the testbed  schools become institutionalized across all levels of the
              school system, thereby creating a school system in whic h innovation is a way
              of life rather than an occasional add-on activity.    Vanguard builds upon past
              and current research on educational reform and technology.  The success of
              Vanguard  could have a significant impact on our understanding of how school
              systems can make the transition from the industrial age to a knowledge-based
              society.  ***
