Title       : Femtosecond Optical Interactions in Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9612255

Award Number: 9612255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $590955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank W. Wise fwise@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Sievers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander L. Gaeta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas F. Borrelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1022,OSIE,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9612255    Wise   A multi-disciplinary investigation of the interactions of
              ultrashort light  pulses with optical glasses is proposed by a team of
              scientists from  Cornell University and Corning, Incorporated. The primary goal
              is to  develop a thorough and systematic understanding of the  fast optical 
              nonlinearities that are the physical basis for a wide variety of optical 
              devices and systems. Third-order nonlinearities excited by laser pulses 
              consisting of only a few cycles of the electromagnetic field will be  studied
              in a variety of experimental glasses. Since glasses are typically 
              Raman-active, the nuclear contribution to the nonlinear optical response  must
              also be considered. The absorptive and refractive third-order  nonlinearities
              will be measured with 10-fs pulses, with the specific goal  of isolating the
              electronic and nuclear contributions to the nonlinear  response. Using the
              knowledge of individual processes gained in these  studies, the nonlinear and
              dispersive propagation of ultrashort pulses in  glasses will be investigated
              theoretically and experimentally. Experiments  will utilize pulse durations
              ranging from 10 to 200 femtoseconds in a  variety of glasses to study the
              effects of group velocity dispersion,  stimulated Raman scattering, multiphoton
              absorption, the finite relaxation  time of the electronic nonlinearity, and the
              breakdown of the  slowly-varying envelope approximation.    A secondary theme
              of the proposed work is the relation between the local  structure of a glass
              and the relaxation of vibrational and electronic  excitations in the glass. The
              dephasing of vibrational modes and the  relaxation of electronic impurities
              excited by short optical pulses will be  studied using both time- and
              frequency-domain experiments; in each case the  results will be correlated with
              the local structure.    Graduate students involved in this work will
              participate in an innovative  education program that includes a
              multi-disciplinary course curriculum and  assignments to work on t he synthesis
              and characterization of glasses at the  Corning location for one month each
              year. This experience will provide the  students with a broad foundation in the
              optical physics and material  science of glasses as well as giving them
              substantial exposure to  industrial research.  ***
