Title       : CEDAR Post-Doc: The Electron Energy Balance over Millstone Hill Using Combined
               Optical and Incoherent Scatter Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9612817

Award Number: 9612817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip G. Richards richards@cs.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This post-doctoral grant examines the thermal balance of ionospheric electrons
              through combining optical and incoherent scatter measurements.  He will
              accomplish measurements with ground-based observations that utilize CEDAR
              developed instrumentation at Millstone Hill Observatory.  Optical measurements
              supplement the ongoing CEDAR NETE campaign, and are designed to provide
              conjugate hemisphere photoelectron flux information.  This flux of
              photoelectrons is the heat source for thermal electrons in the nighttime
              ionosphere.  Hence, optical measurements of the conjugate hemisphere
              photoelectron flux will provide an important constraint for the radar
              investigation of ionospheric behavior.  In addition, he will perform a modeling
              study of mechanisms responsible for enhanced nighttime electron temperature and
              densities over Millstone Hill.  The Field Line Interhemispheric Plasma (FLIP)
              model calculates plasma density and temperature above 80 km from one hemisphere
              to another.  One aspect of the modeling to be addressed is plasmaspheric
              heating through pitch angle trapping of ionospheric electrons, which is
              estimated by assuming a fraction of the photoelectrons trapped in the
              plasmasphere depositing a whole of their energy there.  Ongoing radar
              measurements coupled with the proposed ground-based optical measurements of
              photoelectron flux will constrain this estimate of the fraction of
              photoelectrons trapped in the plasmasphere.
