Title       : Coding and Modulation for Digital Recording and Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9612802

Award Number: 9612802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Siegel psiegel@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                        In the past 15 years, there have been several  major conceptual and 
              practical advances in coding, modulation, and signal processing for digital 
              data  transmission and storage. These have resulted in the realization of  data
              rates approaching theoretical limits  for voiceband data modems; areal 
              densities approaching  one gigabit per square inch in disk-drives for  desk-top
              computers;  and, most recently,  end-to-end data transfer  reliability 
              achieved at signal-to-noise ratios only slightly beyond the  Shannon lower
              bound.  These advances include: the development of  trellis-coded modulation
              for bandwidth-limited channels;  the application  of  communication theory  to
              digital recording channels ; the emergence of  a  theory of  code design for
              input-constrained channels; and the  development of iterative, "turbo"-
              decoding techniques for long "random"  codes.  Despite this progress,  there
              remain many fundamental and practical  problems  that must be addressed, both
              to better our understanding of  existing approaches and their applicability, as
              well as to offer new tools  for use in building future data communications and
              storage and  communication systems.          This project will focus on
              problems in coding and modulation,  particularly  for application to  high
              density digital recording and  multi-user wireless communications.  The
              objective is to develop  coded-modulation techniques for efficient data storage
              and transmission in  the presence of various channel impairments, including: 
              input constraints,  inter-symbol interference (ISI), co-channel  interference
              (CCI),  additive  noise,  and signal fading.  A component of the research will
              be the  investigation of the complexity of algorithms and  architectures  that
              implement these techniques.          Another goal of the project  is  to
              enhance the educational  infrastructure by integrating the research results and
              relevant background  material  into existing and new  engineering courses at
              UCSD. Courses  will  be developed  on the topics of 1) Coded-Modulation for
              Data Transmission and  Storage, and 2) Symbolic Dynamics and Constrained
              Coding.    --
