Title       : Indian Ocean Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9612887

Award Number: 9612887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1219075            (Estimated)
Investigator: Veerabhadran Ramanathan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9612887  Ramanathan, V.  University of California, San Diego 
              Title: Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX)    The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX)
              is an international field experiment with  participation from France, Germany,
              India, the Netherlands, and the United  States.  The main effort under the U.S.
              component focuses on assessing the role  of sulfates and other continental
              aerosols in global radiative forcing and is  being supported jointly by the
              Department of Energy and the National Science  Foundation.  In addition,
              complementary studies involving investigations of a  variety of related
              chemical and radiative processes will be undertaken by  scientists from other
              federal agencies and other international partners.  The  composite observing
              system consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to  aircraft, as well
              as surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite  data.  The main
              part of the three year effort will be four-month intensive field  phase which
              begins January 1999.    The ultimate goal of this program is to obtain a better
              understanding of the  decadal and longer time scale climate  forcing.  The
              equatorial Indian Ocean  during the northeast winter monsoon season provides a
              unique natural laboratory  for this experiment.  The experimental area is
              probably the only place in the  world where an air mass which has been modified
              by intense sources of continental  aerosols, anthropogenic trace species,a nd
              their reaction products (e.g.,  sulfates and ozone) from the northern
              hemisphere comes into contact with the  pristine air of the southern
              hemisphere, which has been transported via cross  equatorial monsoonal flow, at
              the Intertropical Convergence Zone.  The  juxtaposition of these two very
              distinct air masses will allow a through  examination of both the direct and
              indirect effects of the aerosols on the  radiative properties of the
              atmosphere.    C4's Principle Responsibilities    * Male site, including
              deployment of radiometric, chemical and aerosol  i nstruments and data
              collection (Refer to the proposals INDOEX, pp 29, 42-44;  and, INDOEX:
              Resilient and Streamlined Implementation Plan, p. 4)  * Developing CIDS,
              integrate data sets (INDOEX, p. 23; Resilient & Streamlined,  p.3) including
              those from US, European and Indian platforms.  * Home institution for the
              International Project Office (INDOEX, p. 59)    C4 Personnel with Principal
              Responsibility:  The above responsibilities are to be carried out by the
              following personnel:    A. Direct support for the following personnel are not
              being requested via the  INDOEX grant proposal, their time spent will be as a
              resource to this project:  * V. Ramanathan: Chief scientist, chairs
              International Steering Committee,  coordinates US programs on Indian ships. 
              *H. Nguyen: coordinates C4 and European programs, and the pe-INDOEX Cruises.  
              Coordinates administrative-related issues of the Male site.  * Jurgen Lobert:
              Male site scientist, coordinates the scientific issues related  to the site.   
              B. Direct support for the following personnel is being requested:  * Project
              Director, TBN, who will report to V. Ramanathan, coordinates all  scientific
              interactions between the Project Office, the International Steering  Committee,
              and the US Steering Committee.
