Title       : Electron Correlation Effects in the Nickel-Sulfide-Selinide System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9612130

Award Number: 9612130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jurgen M. Honig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      9612130          Honig         This project is the continuation of
              research completed under terms of the predecessor grant  on the physical
              characteristics of the NiS2-x SeX system. As x is increased there is a 
              continuing shift away from the strongly insulating characteristics of NiS2
              toward the strongly  metallic properties of NiSe2. One thus anticipates a
              compositional region in which the system  exhibits interesting electrical
              anomalies. This is indeed the case for 0.3 < x< 0.5. Further,  over the entire
              x range, the cation sublattice is left intact. Moreover, there is almost no 
              change in the crystal structure except for the continuing increase of lattice
              parameter with x.  Thus, the system lends itself very well to a study of
              changes in electron correlation effects in  a system with essentially the same
              structure and with fixed valency of the cation. Using  single crystals that
              have been grown from a Te flux and annealed for control of  stoichiometry, it
              is proposed to conduct detailed X-ray and neutron scattering studies, 
              magnetization measurements, AC conductivity investigations, specific heat
              studies, optical  refectivity measurements, and studies on the effects of
              applying pressures sufficient to alter  the phase transformations that are
              encountered in this system. The experimental results, as  well earlier
              measurements obtained under terms of the predecessor grant, are to be 
              rationalized in terms of existing theories dealing with electron correlation
              phenomena.  %%%  There is continuing interest in the characterization of
              metal-insulator transitions and related  phenomena. What sets the NiS2Sex
              system apart from almost all others in the category is the  remarkable
              alterations and neardiscontinuities in electrical properties that can be
              achieved by  changes of composition in the anion sublattice while keeping the
              cation sublattice intact. This  comes about because NiS2 is a very good
              insulator whereas NiSe2 is a metal; these materials  can be mixed in all
              proportions. T hus, it is anticipated that interesting electrical anomalies 
              might be encountered over some intermediate composition range of the alloy.
              This is indeed  the case for the range 0.3 < x < 0.5. It was on this basis that
              funding was requested for  initiation of research in this area. The above
              variations occur in the absence of significant  alterations in crystal
              structure when the material passes through various phase transitions with 
              changing temperature in the relatively complex phase diagram. Any
              crystallographic changes  that might become detectable in very careful studies
              devoted to this topic are not likely to  play a significant role in the various
              electronic phase changes that are the object of the  proposed study. One can
              thus investigate the effect of changing electron correlations without  the
              complications of large scale concomitant structural alterations or of any
              compositional  changes in the cation sublattice array.  It is important to
              search for and study singlevalent  system that display transitions from a
              weakly to a strongly correlated electron regime - a  problem that is generally
              conceded to be of fundamental importance. These requirements are  met by the
              proposed system.
