Title       : Architectural Design Exploration for Real-Time Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1996    
File        : a9612298

Award Number: 9612298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaobo Hu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Advances in both hardware and software design have enabled system designers to 
              develop large, complex embedded systems. Such systems may contain a mixture of 
              software programs running on general purpose or special-purpose processors, 
              high-speed memory systems, and application specific hardware devices. One of
              the  key tasks in designing these systems is to find a "best" system
              architecture  including determining the "right" partition between hardware and
              software  components and selecting the "right" hardware components. The focus
              of this  project is to develop a viable methodology as well as a set of tools
              to assist  system designers in this architectural design exploration task.  The
              research  proposed performs design exploration at the system level. At this
              level, a system  is specified as a collection of task graphs and an
              implementation is described  by an interconnection of hardware components and
              an assignment of processes to  the hardware components. Though the problem
              shares some similarities with the  hardware synthesis problem, many different
              issues need to be addressed in order  for this approach to be effective.  One
              of the issues is identifying and  estimating appropriate parameters to be
              included in the exploration process such  that system timing performance can be
              adequately predicted. The project  emphasizes design exploration for embedded
              systems with real-time constraints.  Such systems can be found in many
              applications, such as navigation and landing  control of aircraft, networks and
              communications. Attributes that are useful for  guiding design exploration will
              be devised so as to efficiently analyze the  timing behavior of a large number
              of implementations with respect to the system  timing specifications and hence
              permit exploration of a wide range of design  options. Other issues including
              sensitivity analysis and component reuse will  also be addressed. To properly
              handle conflicting performance requirements  including both functional and
              non-functional attributes,  an approach based on  imprecise value functions
              from utility theory will be pursued. Furthermore, the  design exploration
              problem is formulated as a multi-attribute optimization  problem. Techniques
              from the evolutionary computation field will be investigated  in order to
              tackle the exponential nature of the optimization problem.
