Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Loop Space Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9612651

Award Number: 9612651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce K. Driver driver@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Driver    The principal investigator proposes to continue the
              development of integral and differential analysis on pinned and free loop
              groups. This proposal is centered around the investigation of the "heat kernel"
              measure on the loop group rather than the more standard pinned Wiener measure. 
              However, the P.I. does plan to investigate the relationship   between these two
              measures.  The specific issues proposed to investigate by the P.I. are:  (i) 
              analytic properties of the differential operator on forms on the loop group
              (relative to the heat kernel measure) (ii) the Hodge-de Rham theorem for the
              loop group, iii) the relationship between the heat kernel measures on the loop
              group and pinned Wiener   measure, iv) the relationship between the heat kernel
              logarithmic Sobolev inequality and Gross' pinned Wiener measure logarithmic
              Sobolev inequality, v)  Meyer type inequalities on the loop group with the heat
              kernel measure, and vi) the loop group analogue of the "Taylor series"
              isomorphism considered by the P.I. and the P.I. and L. Gross.    The P.I.'s
              work is centered on integral and differential analysis of "infinite"
              dimensional spaces consisting of closed curves in a finite dimensional space. 
              Roughly speaking, the sort of questions studied by the P.I. are analogous to
              the following "more" familiar examples in every day life:  what are the
              frequencies you hear when plucking a   guitar string, what is the temperature
              of a bent metal plate at some time given knowledge of the temperature at an
              earlier time, and how do substances diffuse inside regions with varying
              permeability and shape? One of the motivations for studying the infinite
              dimensional versions of these questions comes from the study of quantum field
              theories, a   certain class of mathematical theories used by physicists to
              describe sub-atomic particles. Quantum field theories deal with the same issues
              alluded to above and are closely related to the mathematical theories studied
              by the P.I..  The P.I.'s work may in fact ha ve future   ramifications for
              quantum field theories and hence particle physics.
