Title       : Workshop on Future Research at Treasure Island, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9612339

Award Number: 9612339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro A. De Alba padealba@hypatia.unh.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9612339  De Alba  This action is to support a small workshop to examine how the 
              value of the full-scale earthquake engineering experiment at  Treasure Island,
              California, might further be enhanced.  Treasure Island, an artificial island
              in San Francisco Bay,  California, approaches ideal conditions for a full-scale
              field  experiment to study the response of soft ground during strong 
              earthquake shaking. It is located between the San Andreas and  Hayward faults,
              on which a magnitude 7 or greater earthquake is  expected to occur within the
              next thirty years, with a  probability greater than 67%. The major instrumented
              site on the  island, which is one of the National Geotechnical Experimentation 
              Sites, is located on 300 feet of soil, including 40 feet of  hydraulic fill
              sand, underlain by soft to hard clays. It is  adjacent to Yerba Buena island, a
              rock outcrop, thus permitting  motions of the rock outcrop, deep bedrock, and
              soil to be  measured and compared.    Currently, instrumentation at the "fire
              station" site on Treasure  Island includes six accelerometers in a vertical
              array between  bedrock and the ground surface, as well as six piezometers in
              the  upper potentially-liquefiable hydraulic fill. The installation of  these
              instruments (completed in 1993) was accompanied by an  extensive site
              characterization program. Support for the Treasure  Island National
              Geotechnical Experimentation Site has been a  collaboration between the U.S.
              Navy, National Science Foundation,  Federal Highway Administration, U.S.
              Geological Survey,  California Division of Mines and Geology, Electric Power
              Research  Institute and the University of California at Davis.    The major
              questions to be addressed by this workshop are: What is  the best use of strong
              motion information so as to improve or  create models to predict the behavior
              of soft soils under strong  ground motion? What additional site information is
              required?    The goal of this workshop is to assure that all the major pieces 
              of information are in pla ce at the time of the next major  earthquake, so that
              the data obtained can quickly and efficiently  be used by researchers, and thus
              lead to rapid development of  improved techniques for predicting the behavior
              of soft soils  under strong ground shaking.  ***
