Title       : INDOEX for NOAA/CMDL: Measurements of the Dependence of the Aerosol Light
               Scattering Coefficient on Wavelength, Scattering Angle, Particle Size, and
               Relative Humidity During INDOEX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a9612888

Award Number: 9612888
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Ogren jogren@cmdl.noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Sheridan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NOAA-Environ Research Lab
	      325 Broadway
	      Boulder, CO  803033328    /   -

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ATM 96 12888

John A. Ogren and Patrick J. Sheridan* (co-PI's) 
NOAA Climate
              Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory,

*also at University of Colorado,
              Cooperative Institute for Research in  Environmental
              Sciences.


Measurements of the dependence of the aerosol light scattering
              coefficient  on wavelength, scattering angle, particle size, and relative
              humidity  during INDOEX

Abstract.  Dr. Ogren and Sheridan's role in INDOEX
              is to measure the aerosol light scattering coefficient and characterize its
              dependence on  wavelength, scattering angle, particle size, and relative
              humidity.  The  measurements will be made from the NCAR C-130 using two
              integrating  nephelometers operated in series, and the results will be used in
              a number  of closure experiments, as well as for evaluating the direct
              radiative  forcing. Specifically, the directly measured values of the aerosol
              total  scattering and hemispheric backscattering coefficients, at 40% and 85% 
              relative humidity, will be compared with values calculated from measurements by
              other INDOEX researchers of the size distributions of aerosol number
              concentration and chemical composition.  The nephelometer  measurements, when
              combined with the measured light absorption coefficient,  will allow evaluation
              of the vertical profiles of aerosol light scattering  coefficient, asymmetry
              parameter (or upscatter fraction), and  single-scattering albedo;  the total
              aerosol optical depth and aerosol  radiative forcing will be calculated from
              these vertical profiles and  compared with the measured values of these
              parameters.


