Title       : Problems in Analysis at the Interface with Geometry and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0245371

Award Number: 0245371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $588656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duong H. Phong phong@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Duong H. Phong, Columbia University
DMS-0245371

ABSTRACT


It is
              proposed to address several problems at the interface of analysis with geometry
              and physics. A first problem is the development of stable analytic methods.
              Stable methods have emerged as essential for the study of singularities and
              oscillatory integrals, and for the basic problem of finding canonical metrics
              in differential geometry. Canonical metrics are expected to be equivalent to
              the notion of stability in the sense of geometric invariant theory, and the
              relation between this global notion and stable estimates is to be investigated.
              The second problem in the proposal is the development of Feynman rules for
              string scattering amplitudes. Feynman rules had been unavailable due to a
              geometric difficulty encountered for two-loops or higher, namely
              ``supermoduli". But the situation is now much more promising, thanks to the
              recent success of Eric D'Hoker and the PI in overcoming this difficulty in the
              simplest case of two-loops. The third problem in the proposal is the
              construction/identification of integrable structures in supersymmetric gauge
              and string theories. A basic tool is a new Hamiltonian approach to soliton
              equations developed by the PI in collaboration with Igor Krichever.

These
              are core problems in theoretical physics and applied mathematics. The search of
              natural laws at their most fundamental level relies more and more on geometric
              principles and symmetry.
The problems addressed in the present proposal -
              stability and canonical metrics, Feynman rules for string theory, soliton
              equations - are essential to the understanding of the two theories which have
              led research in both mathematics and theoretical physics for the last two
              decades, namely string theory and supersymmetry, together with their underlying
              geometric structures.

