Title       : Asymptotic and algorithmic properties of groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0245600

Award Number: 0245600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark V. Sapir msapir@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Y. Olshanskiy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0245600
Sapir, Mark V.

Abstract


Title:  Asymptotic and algorithmic
              properties of groups

The PIs propose to study asymptotic and algorithmic
              properties of groups.
The topics include a  torsion free non-amenable finitely
              presented group
without free non-abelian subgroups, a finitely presented
              infinite torsion group,  
Dehn functions of  groups including Dehn functions
              of residually finite and 
Metabelian  groups, isoperimetric functions of
              aspherical manifolds, residually 
finite  hyperbolic groups, structure
              properties of hyperbolic groups (is every
torsion-free hyperbolic group
              free-by-finite exponent?),  n-dimensional
diagram groups.

Algorithmic
              properties of groups have been a subject of intensive study
since the
              beginning of the 20th century (Dehn and Tietze). Novikov, Boone
and Higman
              showed deep connections between logic (especially the theory of
recursive
              functions) and group theory. A more recent work by Gromov and
others showed a
              connection between algorithmic and asymptotic properties
(especially
              isoperimetric and  growth functions) of groups and the related
topological
              objects. The PIs found even more intimate connections between
complexity of
              algorithms and asymptotic properties of groups. In particular,
they have
              characterized groups whose word problem is in NP in terms of Dehn
functions
              and Higman embeddings, found an NP-complete group, etc.. The PIs
propose to
              further study these connections, and their applications to some
outstanding
              Burnside-type problems.  In particular, they propose to use
Higman embeddings
              to construct finitely presented torsion groups and in the
study of Dehn
              functions of metabelian groups. Another direction of their
research deals with
              connections between geometry and structure of groups. In
particular, they
              propose to study the class of finite dimensional diagram
groups,  for
              dimension greater than two  which, they believe, include a large 
class of
              groups acting ``nicely" on cubical complexes. Structural properties of
              
hyperbolic groups will also be under investigation.


