Title       : Synthesis of Melt Pumps & Brakes for Polymer Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0245309

Award Number: 0245309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213508             (Estimated)
Investigator: David O. Kazmer david_kazmer@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to create and validate new methods of
              controlling the flow of plastic melts in polymer processes such as extrusion
              and injection molding. This research is motivated by lack of
controllability
              common in polymer processing, which prevents the efficient and consistent
              production of high quality products. To overcome existing constraints related
              to size and power consumption, the
research will investigate design approaches
              that are powered predominantly by the polymer melt and require little or no
              control energy.  Furthermore, the size of the devices will be reduced until
              dominating mechanical and rheological constraints are identified. The research
              will be conducted at both theoretical and applied levels with close interaction
              with industry. Theoretical models will be developed to simulate the polymer
              flow through the melt control devices, thereby enabling the rapid development
              and optimization of improved designs. At the the applied level, extensive
              industrial collaboration is providing the opportunity to implement and validate
              the research relative to industry requirements.

This project will provide
              fundamental advances towards improved characterization the polymer processes as
              well as enabling technologies for improved manufacturing processes. Finally,
              the research will enhance the existing educational infrastructure, and be
              transferred to industry through improved undergraduate, graduate, and
              continuing education courses.

