Title       : L-values, Galois Representations, and Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0245387

Award Number: 0245387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226502             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Skinner cskinner@ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0245387
Skinner, Christopher

Abstract:

This proposal investigates
              connections between L-functions and
Galois representations. More precisely,
              the investigator connects
special values of L-functions of varieties or
              motives to the orders of
associated Selmer groups. In joint work with E. Urban
              the investigator
showed that if the L-function of a modular form of weight 1
              vanishes to
odd order at its central critical point then the rank of the
              corresponding
Selmer group is infinite. The investigator is exploring
              extensions to
representations of higher dimension and to pursuing a ``mod
              p''
version of this result relating the p-adic order of the L-value
              (if
finite) to that of its Selmer group. Additionally, the investigator
              is
completing work in collaboration with M. Harris and J.-S. Li
              that
constructs p-adic anti-cyclotomic L-function for
              automorphic
representations on unitary groups U(n) and which makes progress
              towards
anti-cyclotomic ``main conjectures'' for these groups. Doing so
              involves
relating these L-functions to congruences between endoscopic and
              stable
automorphic forms on U(n). The investigator is also pursuing an
              approach
to the ``main conjecture'' for modular forms on GL(2) by studying
              the
arithmetic of certain Eisenstein series on U(2,2).


Number theory is
              often divided into two branches: analytic and algebraic.
The investigator is
              studying the connection between many seemingly
unrelated objects from these
              two branches. The primary focus of the first
branch is the study of
              L-functions - complex functions built of
number-theoretically interesting data
              (such as the Riemann zeta function
which is built out of the prime numbers).
              The other branch focuses on
algebraic objects such as class groups. But it is
              now expected that these
are not unrelated: values of certain L-functions at
              special points
(generally integers) should be the orders - the sizes - of
              certain of the
algebraic objects. Such connections are generally very
              signifigant.
One instance was a crucial ingredient in Andrew Wiles' proof of
              Fermat's
Last Theorem, for example. Drawing from the theory of automorphic
              forms,
the investigator's work establishes new instances of these
              conjectures.
This work is motivated by the fact that special values of
              L-functions
appear in the fourier coefficients of modular forms.




