Title       : Ordering/Lithography in Glasses/Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0245702

Award Number: 0245702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332450             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Spence spence@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nan Jiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Uwe Weierstall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses fundamental atomic level characterization, alloy
              ordering, and direct-write lithography. These activities are relevant to
              superconducting, semiconducting and optical nanos-tructures. The lithography
              approach utilizes a direct-write, inorganic process which uses the high-energy,
              0.5nm diameter beam of a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) to
              convert doped silicate glass films to nanostructures, such as nanorings.
              Silicon nanodots and nanowires may also be formed. Patterned Ge and Nb
              nanorings in silicate glass (about 20nm in diameter) have been demonstrated.
              Arrays of nanorings (of various elements) will be fabricated in silicate films
              on silicon nitride membranes, and their semiconducting, superconducting and
              optical prop-erties measured.  Calculations of optical properties of nanorings
              are in collaboration with F. Gar-cia de Abajo. The project also addresses
              formation of Josephson arrays and weak link fabrication via STEM. The general
              intellectual merit of the project lies in prospects for understanding,
              char-acterizing and forming atomic structures within thin films by new means in
              order to obtain wanted novel properties. These include electrical currents
              which circulate forever, media with negative optical refractive index,
              semiconductor quantum nanorings for computing and improved intermetallic
              alloys.
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental materials science research
              issues associated with electronic materials having technological relevance. An
              important feature of the project is the strong em-phasis on education, and the
              integration of research and education. The project includes support of
              students, a planned exhibit at the Arizona Science Museum, visits to elementary
              and high schools in a specially equipped minibus, and laboratory tours for high
              school students (http://www.asu.edu/clas/csss/csss/).
***  

