Title       : SGER: Light Scattering Manometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0245667

Award Number: 0245667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80515              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter I. Goldburg goldburg@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project to develop and
              calibrate a novel manometer that senses small, rapid pressure fluctuations in
              turbulent and almost laminar fluids (e. g., air or water), while introducing
              minimal perturbations in the flow.  If successful, the instrument may find
              additional use in studying small pressure variations in the circulatory system,
              the heart, and in other biomedical settings.  The new and unique technique
              employs a small volume of a soft clear gel containing micron-size particles
              chosen for their light scattering properties.  Pressure fluctuations
              elastically compress the gel.  Measured time correlations in the inter-particle
              separations can be directly related to the pressure experienced by the gel
              sensor.  The manometer will be sensitive to pressure fluctuations at the
              sub-Pascal level (1 mm Hg = 130 Pa), and with a frequency range from dc to
              higher than 10 KHz.   Existing (strain-gauge) pressure sensors are confined to
              wall regions.  The proposed sensor can monitor the bulk fluid region, a great
              advantage for turbulence measurements.  One graduate student will be supported
              to work on the project.  The project is co-funded with the Fluid Dynamics and
              Hydraulics Program in the Division of Chemical and Thermal Systems in the
              Engineering Directorate.

This a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER)
              project to develop and calibrate a novel manometer that senses small, rapid
              pressure fluctuations in turbulent and almost laminar fluids (e. g., air or
              water), while introducing minimal perturbations in the flow.  If successful,
              the instrument may find additional use in studying small pressure variations in
              the circulatory system, the heart, and in other biomedical settings.  One
              graduate student will be supported to work on the project.  The project is
              co-funded with the Fluid Dynamics and Hydraulics Program in the Division of
              Chemical and Thermal Systems in the Engineering Directorate.

