Title       : Gaussian Curvature, Geometric Combinatorics and the Fourier Transform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0245369

Award Number: 0245369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Iosevich iosevich@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Alex Iosevich, University of Missouri,
              Columbia
DMS-0245369

Abstract:

The main theme of this proposal is
              interaction between analytic, combinatorial and number theoretic methods. The
              specific problems discussed in the proposal include the distribution of lattice
              points in convex domains, analysis and combinatorics of distance sets, decay
              properties of
the Fourier transform of characteristic functions of bounded
              domains, the existence and non-existence of Fourier bases, and bounded-ness of
              maximal averages over hypersurfaces. Each category has an important geometric
              combinatorial component. In addition, the distribution of lattice points in
              convex domains, the problems involving distance sets, and the study of Fourier
              bases have interesting number theoretic aspects. Finally, these problems have
              an impact on each other. For example, decay properties of the Fourier
              transforms of characteristic functions of sets are used in the study of all the
              aforementioned problems. Similarly, the geometric combinatorial techniques
              developed in the study of the existence of Fourier bases have also been applied
              to the study of the distribution of lattice points and properties of distance
              sets.

While many of the issues described in this proposal are quite
              theoretical, they are closely connected with widely applicable concepts and
              problems. Many of techniques used to study the existence of Fourier bases are
              strongly related to concepts used in data transmission and coding. The
              techniques developed in the study of maximal averages over surfaces have been
              applied
over the years to obtain regularity results for the linear and
              non-linear wave equations, highly useful in physics and engineering. It is
              quite interesting is that these results, in turn, have deep combinatorial
              applications, creating a cycle of useful and beautiful applications.

