Title       : Invariant Subspaces in Spaces of Analytic Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0245384

Award Number: 0245384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefan Richter richter@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Sundberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Richter and Sundberg will continue their research on spaces of analytic
              functions with their naturally associated operators. The best and most
              completely understood example in this field is the unilateral shift, which
              simply takes every element in an orthogonal basis of a Hilbert space indexed by
              the nonnegative integers and "shifts" it to the element with one higher index. 
              This operator is the simplest example of a nonnormal operator with genuinely
              infinite dimensional properties and its study has been of major importance in
              Operator Theory. The unilateral shift is modelled by the operation of
              multiplication by the coordinate function z on the Hardy space of complex
              analytic functions on the unit disc in the complex plane. It is this modelling
              that has been at the heart of the study of the unilateral shift and that has
              led to our remarkably thorough understanding of it, and also to important
              results in the theory of general contraction operators. There has been much
              research since the 1980's that has shown that the ideas used in connection with
              the study of the unilateral shift have interesting and important extensions to
              the study of operators modelled in function spaces other than the Hardy space. 
              Among the important examples of such spaces are the Dirichlet Space, the
              Bergman Space, and the weighted Bergman spaces. Richter and Sundberg will
              continue to study these and other spaces with a view especially to a better
              understanding of their lattices of subspaces invariant under the operation of
              multiplication by z, as well as related questions concerning zero sets,
              nontangential limiting behavior, and polynomial approximations.

The proposed
              work involves several areas of Pure and Applied Mathematics.  Operator Theory
              as a branch of Functional Analysis, arose in the 1880's in the study of Partial
              Differential Equations arising in Physics and Engineering, and became
              increasingly important in the twentieth century with the advent of Quantum
              Mechanics. Complex Analysis is a subject with a long and distinguished history
              and a wide applicability - it has in fact important applications in almost
              every area of Mathematics as well as many areas of Physics. In particular,
              Complex Analysis has been of importance in Operator Theory from its inception
              and the investigations and connections between these areas continues to be a
              very fruitful area of research. One important source of connections is the
              modelling of operators by natural operations on spaces of analytic functions.
              The study of such operators on a space called the Hardy space has been of great
              importance in both Pure and Applied Mathematics. It is at the heart of a
              certain useful approach in Control Theory, and area of importance in electrical
              Engineering and the design of guidance systems. Work by a number of researchers
              since the 1980's (including the present authors), has shown the ideas involved
              in these studies have important applicability to an extensive class of function
              spaces and operators.
