Title       : Variational Methods in Hamiltonian Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0245336

Award Number: 0245336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John N. Mather jnm@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: John N. Mather, Princeton University
DMS-0245336

Abstract


The aim
              of this project is to construct orbits of Hamiltonian systems by variational
              methods.  The focus is on questions related to Arnold diffusion.  For small
              perturbations of strictly convex integrable systems in 2   or  3 degrees of
              freedom, Mather has recently succeeded in proving a strong form of Arnold
              diffusion.  For perturbations in a cusp residual set, there are orbits whose
              action varies in a fairly arbitrary prescribed way. A major goal of this
              project will be to generalize these results to small perturbations of strictly
              convex systems in >3 degrees of freedom.

This project deals with fundamental
              mathematical questions that arise in various physical application, e.g. the
              containment of a plasma in a tokomak (for the production of energy through
              nuclear fusion) and the question of the stability of orbits in planetary
              systems.  In each case, it has to do with whether certain orbits of dynamical
              systems wander.  In the case of the tokomak, the mathematical questions is
              related to the physical question of whether the hydrogen atoms in the plasma
              collide with the walls of the container; in the case of the solar system it is
              related to the question of whether the planets remain orbiting the sun for all
              time, or whether the mutual gravitational attraction of the planets could cause
              one of the planets to wander away from the sun over a very long period of time.
               It needs to be pointed out, however, that this project deals with a
              fundamental mathematical problem that originated in the study of physical
              problems of this sort; it does not address these problems directly.

