Title       : Non-linear Partial Differential Equations and Applications to Problems in
               Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0245266

Award Number: 0245266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $845000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sun Yung A. Chang chang@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul C. Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Sun-Yung Alice Chang/ Paul Yang, Princeton
              University
DMS-0245266

Abstract:

The analytic part of the proposal is
              concerned with two questions concerning nonlinear differential equations
              arising from conformal geometry. The first is to formulate a general notion of
              weak solutions for a family of fully nonlinear equations containing the
              equations to prescribe the symmetric functions of the Weyl-Schouten tensor, and
              to provide criteria for removal of singularities of such equation. This would
              open the way to find solutions to these equations by a more traditional
              variational method. The second is to find Sobolev inequalities for fourth order
              equations that arise in conformal geometry in dimensions three and four. The
              geometric part of this proposal is concerned with applications of our recent
              work in prescribing the second symmetric functions of the
Weyl-Schouten tensor
              on a four-dimensional manifold to the diffeomorphisms classification of a class
              of four-dimensional manifolds, as well as applications to the study of Kleinian
              groups in higher dimensional manifolds.

This proposal is concerned with new
              methods to solve a family of nonlinear differential equations that is
              associated with conformal geometry in which the primary data is the knowledge
              of angle measurements. The ability to solve these equations gives us new
              numerical invariants that will eventually allow us to classify these geometries
              in three and four dimensions a subject that is of wide interest in the geometry
              and topology community. The differential equations are highly nonlinear and
              appear among a family of such equations that have only recently yielded to a
              geometric approach. Such development will generate a set of new tools to
              analyze the structure nonlinear partial differential equations a subject also
              of wide interest in general.
  


