Title       : Structure and Algorithms, Between Logic and Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0245622

Award Number: 0245622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph N. McKenzie mckenzie@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Ralph McKenzie
Proposal Number: 0245622
Institution:
              Vanderbilt University


Abstract: Structure and algorithms, between logic
              and algebra

McKenzie will investigate, on the one hand, algorithmic
              questions which involve properties of finite algebras determined by the
              varieties and quasi-varieties they generate, and, on the other hand, structural
              questions which involve the necessary algebraic properties that must be true
              throughout a locally finite variety or quasi-variety as a consequence of that
              class possessing some natural property defined through logical or set-theoretic
              means.  The outstanding algorithmic questions: Is there an algorithm to
              determine whether the quasi-equations valid in a finite algebra F are finitely
              based?  Is there an algorithm to determine if the quasi-variety generated by F
              possesses a natural duality?  Is the class of finite algebras possessing a
              finite equational basis recursively enumerable?  Is the class of finite
              algebras generating a residually large variety recursively enumerable?  Among
              the important structural questions: What collection of algebraic properties is
              necessary and sufficient for a finitely generated variety to be finitely
              decidable, or to have few models?  

Purely theoretical research in this
              branch of general algebra is driven today not by the likelihood of supplying
              any pressing practical needs, but rather by the sheer difficulty of the
              intellectual challenge and the tremendous sense of satisfaction that
              accompanies success.  However, this work, like all of algebra, spawns a
              constant stream of algorithms, many of which, though feasible, are extremely
              difficult to implement efficiently on a computer, providing a severe test of
              the state-of-the-art in hardware and software and programming skills.  The
              current theorem-proving programs for equational logic are a good example of
              this phenomenon.  There appears to be a growing realization in the theoretical
              computer science community that general algebra is the mathematical language in
              which they most need to be fluent.  The principal investigator believes that
              research into the interplay between, on the one hand, the existence or
              nonexistence of algorithms to recognize fundamental properties of finite
              algebras, and on the other hand, the levels of structural complexity manifested
              in the algebras---what this project is all about---has the potential not only
              to expand our understanding of the structural possibilities in finite algebraic
              systems (which it has already done), but to produce, some day, superior codes
              and ciphers for secure information transfer.



