Title       : Collaborative Research: Operational Strategies for Price and Service Quality
               Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0245382

Award Number: 0245382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tava M. Olsen olsen@olin.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for an analysis of how to use operational strategies
              to improve a firm's long-run profit and its ability to attract and retain
              customers through improved service quality.  Several classes of novel models
              will be developed for the structural analysis of optimal pricing, production,
              and service quality selection in a competitive make-to-order marketplace. Once
              initial analysis is completed, these models will be extended to a variety of
              complex environments, including models featuring multiple quality attributes,
              general demand settings, multi-class demand, and oligopoly settings.  To
              account for the impact of operational strategy in a more complex environment,
              the research team will study models under which the firm offers products on
              both a make-to-order and make-to-stock basis.  

If successful, the results
              of this research will lead to a deeper understanding of the impact of dynamic
              operational strategy in a competitive market place, and in particular, will
              help to explain how the firm's ability to choose the "right" price and quality
              will affect the firm's long-run profit and market-share. With the cooperation
              from industry partners, the research team will develop a methodological
              foundation that will ultimately lead to more efficient and effective decision
              support systems to help managers to choose a "right" combination of price and
              service (product) quality.  Finally, the insights developed in this research
              will be incorporated into a case study and a teaching module.  This research is
              collaborative work between the PIs at the University of Berkeley and Washington
              University in St. Louis.   Both the PIs and their graduate students will
              regularly travel between the two locations to further facilitate the
              collaboration.

