Title       : Novel 1- and 2-Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0245423

Award Number: 0245423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar E. Vilches vilches@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry B. Sorensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate novel thermodynamic and structural properties of
              atoms and molecules deposited (adsorbed) on single-wall carbon nanotube (SWNT)
              bundles and other surfaces.  Nanometer-size, low dimensionality systems are at
              the forefront of research on new states of matter.  SWNT bundles and other
              uniform substrates have made possible the fabrication of one- and
              two-dimensional (1d, 2d) forms of matter by adsorption of atoms/molecules on
              their surface.  Heat of adsorption, heat capacity and X-ray scattering
              measurements are used to study several systems: (a) 1d helium, expected to
              remain in a single fluid phase down to absolute zero, (b) 1d molecular
              hydrogen, which may remain fluid to very low temperatures, (c) 1d and 2d
              crystals formed by Ar, Kr, and Xe, (d) 1d and 2d oxygen expected to show a
              crossover from 2d to 1d magnetic properties, and (e) quantum effects on the 2d
              phases of helium isotopic mixtures.  SWNT bundles show promise for hydrogen
              storage, a matter of high technological importance addressed in this program. 
              Participating graduate and undergraduate students learn a broad range of modern
              experimental techniques that position them well for future employment.
              

Nanometer size, low dimensionality systems are at the forefront of research
              on novel fluid and solid states of matter.  This experimental work focuses on
              measurements of the one- and two-dimensional (1d, 2d) properties of simple
              gases and molecules deposited (adsorbed) on single-wall carbon nanotube (SWNT)
              bundles, and the 2d properties of helium isotopic mixtures adsorbed on very
              small flat surfaces.  Thermal and X-ray measurements characterize the phases
              and phase changes of the adsorbed substances as a function of temperature and
              density.  Fascinating novel systems are: 1d helium which should remain in a
              single fluid phase at all temperatures, 1d molecular hydrogen which may remain
              fluid to very low temperatures, 1d and 2d Ar, Kr, and Xe which show solid
              structures being formed on the bundles, 1d and 2d oxygen with possible
              crossover from 2d to 1d magnetic properties, and the 2d properties of helium
              isotopic mixtures and their pronounced quantum effects.  Bundles show promise
              for hydrogen storage, a matter of considerable technological importance. 
              Participating graduate and undergraduate students acquire an array of modern
              experimental skills that position them well for future employment in any
              sector. 

