Title       : Atomic Level Surface Studies of Carbon Nanotube Field Emission Cathodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0245682

Award Number: 0245682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239514             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Schwoebel pauls@chtm.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Carbon nanotubes have the potential to contribute substantially to many aspects
              of nanoscience including the enabling of new technologies such as molecular
              electronics, miniaturized sensors, and unique materials. Carbon nanotube (CNT)
              field emission electron sources are of particular interest because of their
              unique physical, electrical, and chemical properties. The stability and
              reliability of these sources is governed by the chemical composition and
              morphology of their surface. This research project will correlate the field
              emission characteristics of carbon nanotubes with the chemical composition and
              morphology of the nanotube surface. The chemical and morphological composition
              will be investigated at the atomic level using the Imaging Atom-Probe, a
              technique that provides atomic resolution, morphological imaging, and the
              chemical identification of surface and near surface species. The resulting
              information will provide, for the first time, a correlation between fundamental
              CNT emission processes and details of surface morphology and chemical
              composition.

The program will impact the way CNT characterization is
              performed in the future and facilitate the incorporation of CNT sources into
              practical devices thereby impacting nanoelectronics, vacuum microelectronics,
              and molecular electronics. The program also presents a unique opportunity for
              blending the educational experience of minority students at the University of
              New Mexico with nanoscience and technology by acquainting a culturally diverse
              student population with a scientific program that complements on going research
              at Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories.


