Title       : Micromachined Infrared Sensors on Flexible Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0245612

Award Number: 0245612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zeynep Celik-Butler zbutler@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The increasing sophistication of automated systems has allowed more complex
              unmanned tasks to be performed. However, robotic instruments lack the ability
              to perceive and interact with their environment in the same way humans can.
              Simultaneously, humans operating remote instruments are limited by the "lack of
              feel" they are accustomed to in their own activity. Robotic instruments
              currently use localized-sensors to measure their environment. This has been
              necessitated by the inflexibility of microelectronic devices. Recently
              innovations in flexible substrates, polymer semiconductors, and thin film
              transistors have occurred. The PIs propose to investigate the development of a
              flexible skin that incorporates distributed monolithic sensor arrays to provide
              a greater measurement of the environment. Micromachined sensors are capable of
              measuring pressure, flow, temperature, and radiant energy. This investigation
              will focus on the development of micromachined sensors over the surface of a
              polymer substrate or "artificial skin". The Pls will utilize micromachined
              infrared microbolometers and thermal emitters as a test bed towards the
              development of micromachining techniques on flexible polymer substrates that
              are relevant to a broad base of applications. Integrating distributed, staring
              microbolometer arrays over the surface of a flexible skin can allow a robot to
              remotely measure temperature and avoid hot objects that can cause damage. The
              distributed arrays of detectors spaced with a millimeter pitch will provide
              "insect-like" vision. The motion of hot objects such as people can be tracked.
              Microlensed optical detectors will measure the optical radiation flux; thin
              film reference thermometers will measure the substrate (skin) temperature,
              while the thermal emitters will be used for display purposes or may be combined
              with detector arrays and gratings to produce a micro-spectrometer. The ability
              to flex would allow the devices to be incorporated and distributed over
              compliant surfaces such as the fabric of gloves for humans and machines to
              provide operators a remote sense of touch and feel of temperature both
              in-contact and in-proximity to the skin. In addition, chemical analysis is
              possible using these micro-spectrometers. Wearable infrared spectrometers using
              flexible substrates would allow people to monitor physiological parameters such
              as glucose and insulin levels, scan for bacteriological agents and toxic gases.
