Title       : Workshop: Modernizing The National Power Grid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0245638

Award Number: 0245638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mladen Kezunovic kezunov@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will organize a national workshop entitled: Modernizing the
              National Power Grid. The practical and fundamental problems associated with
              operating the existing grid are widely known while there are still strong needs
              to identify an adequate research agenda that will address the solutions. This
              workshop will address some of the most critical areas where future research may
              bring some fundamental breakthroughs reflecting in a more secure, efficient and
              reliable power grid operation.   
 
The stakeholders in addressing the grid
              modernization issue are the public, government, 
academia, various research
              organizations and industry. The workshop attendees will include researchers
              from academia, policy makers, research managers, and industry representatives.
              Special invitation will be extended to DOE, FERC, NERC and EPRI to address the
              background issues related to the grid modernization. Representatives from some
              foreign countries (Canada, Europe and Africa) will be invited to share their
              experiences in modernizing the grid. The workshop will result in a discussion
              of the strategic approaches to pursuing the grid modernization. The research
              needs and directions will be identified as a result. The following grand
              challenges are selected as the 
focus of the workshop: 
 
o    Improving
              Planning and Reliability 
o    Enhancing Security and Vulnerability 
o   
              Developing New Tools (Engineering and Market) and Technology 
   
Modernizing
              the national power grid is of interest to every citizen of this country. The
              organizer will make sure that the attendance diversity, proper dissemination of
              the results to the other researchers and public at large, and the economic
              impacts of the workshop discussions on the well being of each member of our
              society are kept as a focus. The quality of our lives is profoundly affected by
              the energy supply. The security, efficiency and reliability of the national
              power grid are the issues of concern not only to the professionals closely
              related to the subject matter but also to the public at large.  This workshop
              will have much broader impact than just serving, as a vehicle for identifying
              the research needs; it will also serve as a vehicle for enhancing public
              awareness and confidence regarding the electric energy supply.  
    


