Title       : The Problem of Evolution in General Relativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0245368

Award Number: 0245368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergiu Klainerman seri@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Sergiu Klainerman, Princeton University
DMS-0245368

Abstract:

The
              main goal of the proposal is to investigate the regularity properties of the
              Einstein field equations of General Relativity as well as those of other
              important physical systems. Most emphasis be given to the `` Bounded square
              integrable curvature conjecture'' according to which the initial value problem
              for the Einstein-vacuum equations is well posed with only square integrable
              bounds on the curvature of its initial data set. The PI believes that this is
              an essential foundational step towards a general
regularity theory of the
              Einstein equations. By concentrating on the issue of minimal regularity
              assumptions for which the equations can be uniquely continued it is hoped that
              we can find, at least, some of the   tools needed in understanding the onset of
              singular behavior.

One of the fundamental tasks of mathematical physics is
              to provide a full, qualitative, description of black holes and singularities of
              solutions to the Einstein equations in General Relativity. The principal
              investigator has established a program
which he hopes that will provide the
              rigorous mathematical foundations of such a theory. The main goal of this
              present proposal is to establish the minimal regularity assumptions
 that
              needs to be verified by the initial conditions such that one can still make
              sense of a physical solution to the Einstein field equations. The proposal also
              envisages research in connection to other important equations of mathematical
              physics such as those governing the behavior of collisionless particles in an
              electromagnetic field.


