Title       : Novel Control of Doubly-Fed Induction Generators for Wind Energy Systems
               Connected to Weak Grids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0245550

Award Number: 0245550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned Mohan mohan@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wind energy is the fastest growing renewable resource, much of it located in
              remote areas with weak transmission grids, where wind turbines are disconnected
              from the grid for their own protection, for example, beyond an unbalance of six
              percent in phase-phase voltages.

The objective of this project is to develop
              a robust controller for wind generation systems capable of operating reliably
              on weak electric grids by riding through voltage abnormalities in a wide range.
               Doubly-fed induction generators allow an excellent opportunity to minimize
              torque pulsations due to voltage unbalances, and reactive power control for
              under/over voltage conditions by an integrated control over the currents
              injected by the rotor-side converter, and on the currents drawn by the
              line-side converter.  This will be demonstrated by a hardware laboratory
              prototype.  Wind measuring equipment will be installed at tribal colleges and
              data would be collected on the grid conditions.  Yearly seminars will
              disseminate information regarding wind resources.  

Intellectual merits of
              this project are the novel control of doubly-fed induction generators that
              integrates minimization of torque pulsations and compensation of reactive
              power, and new discoveries are entirely possible.  

In terms of broader
              impacts, the proposed research will directly benefit other applications, such
              as in utility-scale inertial energy storage systems.  This will be the PhD
              research of a graduate student interested in a teaching career.  A strong
              component is to establish ties with tribal colleges to promote collaboration
              and dissemination of information, helping tribal communities regard wind as a
              significant economic resource.  

