Title       : Research on Enumerative and Probabilistic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0245526

Award Number: 0245526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Huafei C. Yan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for Yan DMS-0245526



The proposed project focuses on a series of
              interrelated problems in enumerative and probabilistic combinatorics. In recent
              years deep and unexpected connections have been seen between algebraic
              combinatorics and probability theory, in particular, stochastic processes. It
              is the primary objective of the investigator to explore such connections and to
              develop new methods and techniques based on algebraic-combinatorial principles,
              as well as analytic methods of probability and random processes. The project
              focuses on four main areas. The first is to apply the theory of branching
              processes and stochastic analysis to the enumeration of combinatorial objects,
              and to analyze the distributive asymptotics for families of random structures,
              including random trees, random forests, random sequences, and various random
              walks. The second is to investigate the enumeration of statistics with an Airy
              type oflimit distribution.  The third is to study the algebraic properties and
              the applications of sequences of polynomials in enumerative combinatorics,
              which would extend the classical theory of binomial enumeration. Finally,
              several problems on geometric random graphs and various combinatorial games
              will also be investigated.

This research is in the general area of
              combinatorics. One of the goals of combinatorics is to find efficient methods
              for arranging, enumerating, and manipulating discrete collections of
              objects.
The proposed research addresses these goals with a combined algebraic
              and probabilistic approach. There are far-reaching applicationsto other areas
              of pure mathematics, including algebra, analysis, number theory, statistics,
              and topology, as well as to areas of applied sciences such as computer science,
              electrical engineering, and management science. Continuing research in
              combinatorics and its applications will contribute advances in bioinfomatics,
              internet traffic routing, network communications, and operations research,
              which would bring significant benefits to industry and society. 


