Title       : Development and Application of Oligonucleotide Synthesis Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0245625

Award Number: 0245625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13709              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc M. Greenberg mgreenberg@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research involves the synthesis of novel `orthogonal` solid   phase
              supports. These will be used for the preparation of protected  
              oligonucleotides, and oligonucleotide conjugates with functional groups   or
              peptides attached at defined positions.  Related oligoribonucleotides   will
              also be prepared.  The research  will extend the types of reactions   that can
              be used to cleave the oligonucleotides from the solid support to   include
              reductive and enzymatic reactions, and extend the scope of   chemistry
              available for conjugating protected oligonucleotides.  With this renewal award,
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports the research of Dr.
              Marc M. Greenberg of the Department of   Chemistry at Colorado State
              University.  The research focuses on   developing solid phase supports from
              which protected fragments of DNA and   RNA can be cleaved under mild
              conditions, and on expanding the repertoire   of reactions available for
              extending the number of nucleotides linked  to   form the oligomers.  The work
              will provide useful approaches to others   attempting to synthesize
              oligonucleotides, and will have practical   biomedical applications.  Graduate
              students and post-doctoral fellows   will receive training in the synthesis of
              small molecules and   biopolymers, and get the kind of training needed in the
              growing   biotechnology area.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
