Title       : Nonlinear partial differential equations arising in differential geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0245208

Award Number: 0245208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101084             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Brendle sbrendle@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Simon Brendle, Princeton University
DMS-0245208

The proposed project is
              concerned with the use of analytical tools to understand the qualitative
              behavior of nonlinear partial differential equations arising in both
              differential geometry and mathematical physics. For example, we intend to study
              harmonic maps from higher dimensional 
Riemannian manifolds into general
              target manifolds. We also plan to study nonlinear wave equations, using methods
              from harmonic analysis as well as vector field methods originating in
              differential geometry. In addition, we aim for a general convergence result for
              the Yamabe flow in conformal geometry. All known results in this direction
              either assume the manifold to be locally conformally flat (such as the work of
              R. Ye), or they require a rather restrictive bound on the initial energy (such
              as the recent work of M. Struwe and H. Schwetlick). It is known that shortly
              before a singularity the solution must look like a superposition of "peak
              solutions", whose asymptotic profile is explicitly known. A careful analysis of
              the interaction between different peaks suggests that it costs energy to make
              the peak higher, i.e. to concentrate the energy on a smaller region. Since the
              evolution equation is designed to decrease the energy, this indicates that no
              singularities should form. While the result is known for initial energy less
              than two peaks, the general case offers a more interesting picture.

The
              questions to be studied in this project are mainly motivated by differential
              geometry. However, it may seem surprising that many of these equations also
              play an important role in applied sciences. For example, harmonic maps into the
              two-dimensional sphere are closely related to the Landau-Lifschitz equation for
              a macroscopic ferromagnetic continuum. 
Moreover, the Yamabe flow in conformal
              geometry can be reduced to the fast diffusion case of the porous medium
              equation. In the case of positive scalar curvature, the effect of the reaction
              term is opposed to that of the diffusion term, and it is a non-trivial issue to
              decide which of these 
effects will prevail.





