Title       : Local Cuts in Discrete Optimization and Mixed-Integer Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0245609

Award Number: 0245609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374959             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Cook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Solution algorithms for difficult discrete optimization problems often rely on
              problem-specific cutting-planes to improve the associated linear-programming
              relaxations.  It is standard practice to look for cutting planes that match
              prescribed templates, where the templates are drawn exclusively from the set of
              linear inequalities that induce facets of the convex hull of the solution set
              for the problem.  In the traveling salesman problem (TSP) research of
              Applegate, Bixby, Chvatal, and Cook, an alternative to this template paradigm
              for cutting planes was proposed.  The new procedure is called local cuts and it
              played a crucial role in the solution of a set of large-scale TSP instances,
              including a 13,509-city example and a 15,112-city example.  The goal of this
              project is to extend the local-cut procedure to other classes of discrete
              optimization problems and to general mixed-integer programming models.  The
              local-cut procedure consists of selecting a family of linear mappings taking
              the original solution space down to one of low dimension, and selecting a
              super-set of the image that is accessible, that is, it is easy to optimize
              linear functions over the super-set.  Using delayed column-generation, cutting
              planes for the accessible set are determined; these cuts are then mapped back
              to cutting planes in the original set of variables.  This project will continue
              the investigation of local cuts for the TSP, but a major part of the work will
              be to develop the methodology for other classes of problems, including
              mixed-integer programming models, vehicle routing, steiner trees, and stable
              sets.

Broader Impact.  Discrete optimization is used to solve practical
              problems that involve choosing the best alternative from a field of
              possibilities; it has broad applications in nearly every segment of the
              economy. The local-cut techniques developed in the proposed project will permit
              the solution of larger, more-complex problem instances, allowing users to be
              more aggressive in building models to represent the details of their
              applications.

