Title       : Studies in Classical and Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0245511

Award Number: 0245511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27729              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Thomas let@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Lawrence Thomas, University of Virginia
DMS-0245511 

ABSTRACT:

The
              investigator will work primarily in two areas of mathematical physics.
              

1)	Models in Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics. A typical model
              consists of a chain of coupled anharmonic oscillators (or a non-linear field)
              coupled to two linear fields. The linear fields are given Gaussian distributed
              random initial conditions with, in general, different covariances corresponding
              to different temperatures. Depending on the couplings, the resulting equations
              for the oscillators or wave equations for the non-linear field are stochastic
              ordinary or partial differential equations. The goals of the research include
              showing the existence of invariant measures for the system of equations and
              elucidating the steady state thermodynamics of these measures, e.g., that there
              is heat-flow and entropy production. An ultimate goal is to understand the
              thermodynamic limit of such measures.
2)	Dynamics of an Elastica and Related
              Models as Problems in Wave-Maps. An example of a dynamical elastica is a curve
              (e.g., a thin but massive inextensible wire), moving in space, having both a
              non-relativistic kinetic energy and an internal potential energy given by the
              integral of the curvature squared over the curve. The Euler-Lagrange equations
              governing the elastica include a wave equation, 4th order in the spatial
              variable, and an auxiliary equation for the curve tension. The elastica
              equations are closely related to those for wave-maps such as the
              Landau-Lifshitz equations of ferromagnetism, and their respective analyses
              share commonalities such as use of the Hasimoto transformation. In previous
              work with a collaborator, the investigator has shown local existence for the
              elastica for initial data in suitable Sobolev spaces. His immediate research
              goal is to resolve the question of whether there is global existence or whether
              in some circumstances the elastica actually tears itself apart in a finite
              time.

General description: 
  1) Models in Non-Equilibrium Statistical
              Mechanics. Non-equilibrium but steady state phenomena are familiar and
              ubiquitous in nature.  Good examples are steady heat flow through a material
              body with fixed thermostated temperatures over its surface, and an electrical
              current through a wire with different fixed voltages at its ends. 
              Surprisingly, there is no satisfactory mathematical theory or formalism for
              describing these phenomena, at least none starting from
the level of particles
              and fields making up the material body. By contrast, equilibrium phenomena, for
              example the specific heat and the magnetic susceptibility of a material and
              their dependence on temperature and pressure, are well understood from the
              microscopic point of view.  The investigator will consider specific models
              described by differential equations, the goals being to provide formalism for
              non-equilibrium phenomena and to develop the mathematical tools necessary to
              apply it.
  2) The Dynamics of an Elastica and Related Models as Problems in
              Wave-Maps.  A dynamical elastica can be thought of as a thin inextensible wire
              (a curve) which is massive and which can flex in space. The differential
              equations of motion for the elastica are closely related to those for
              wave-maps, which describe, for example, the dynamics of ferromagnetic materials
              or more exotic sigma-models from particle physics.  The investigator is
              studying the long-time behavior of the elastica with the objective of
              determining whether it vibrates indefinitely or can in fact tear itself apart
              in a finite time.  A better understanding of the elastica behavior and related
              problems would be useful in applied settings including continuum mechanics and
              even the mechanics of large biological molecules. 

