Title       : Precision Molding of Metallic Micro-Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0245589

Award Number: 0245589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace G. Sawyer wgsawyer@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Ziegert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project involves an interdisciplinary interaction between researchers with
              expertise in tribology, materials, and precision engineering. Bulk metallic
              glasses are materials that may permit the mass production of high strength
              micro-components of arbitrary geometry at extremely low cost.  The successful
              development of micro-molding technology with these materials will revolutionize
              micro-systems and enable numerous wholly new classes of micro-devices. The PIs
              have shown that certain bulk metallic glasses can be molded to produce micron
              sized or potentially sub-micron sized features at low temperatures (350C-400C),
              and retain their high strengths. The ability to flow the bulk metallic glasses
              in the supercooled liquid state appears to be ideally suited for mass
              production using a micro-molding process.
During the project, the material
              properties relevant to processing of bulk metallic glasses will be
              characterized.  This will be used to determine the processing parameters for
              forcing this metal glass into molds for micro-components. Accuracy of molded
              micro-component features will be assessed using an embossing technique with
              three primary processing parameters varied: pressure, temperature, and
              embossing rate.  
As part of this project, some of the undergraduate students
              in the Integrated Product and Process Design (IPPD) group will work on the
              design of specific devices and systems. The IPPD students are from 7 different
              engineering and business departments and typically work on industry-submitted
              projects. The University of Florida has one of the largest populations of
              Latino students, and the PIs intend to utilize the close interaction in the
              IPPD program to recruit these minority students into research and the graduate
              program. 
At the conclusion of this project, a knowledge base will have been
              created to enable a whole new class of products with applications in a wide
              range of micro and meso-scale systems.  


