Title       : Tunable High Dielectric Constant Materials Based Phase Locked Loops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0245132

Award Number: 0245132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191984             (Estimated)
Investigator: T S. Kalkur kalkur@eas.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,7238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0245132
Kalkur

Phase Locked Loops are one of the most important building
              blocks used in a wide variety circuits in communication systems as well as
              systems as well as clock recovery circuits. Voltage controlled oscillators
              (VCOs) are one of the most sensitive components in PLLs. LC
              (inductance-capacitance) type VCOs are used at high frequencies because of
              their low phase noise and stable oscillation frequency which is determined by
              the natural frequency of the LC circuit. The most widely used tunable elements
              in these oscillators are varactor diodes. As the frequency of operation
              increases, the capacitance and inductance decreases. The diodes fabricated on
              silicon substrates have significant parasitic capacitance. This results in
              reduced variation of total capacitance (including self capacitance of the
              inductor) with voltage and poor tunability for reverse biased diodes. For
              forward biased diodes the tunable voltage is limited to a few tenths of a volt
              and it should not exceed the barrier height of the p-n junction. Since the
              diodes are fabricated within the silicon substrate, the substrate noise changes
              its capacitance which results in jitter in the VCO output.

Now is the time
              to investigate if there are other tunable elements that can be integrated in to
              VLSI
technology (CMOS and BiCMOS) with better characteristics than diodes. The
              PI proposes to use high dielectric constant (K) ferroelectric material
              capacitors like BST (barium strontium titanium oxide) and the newly discovered
              BCTZ (barium titanium zirconium oxide) as a tunable element. These elements can
              be isolated from silicon substrates and therefore have lower parasitics and do
              not have a significant substrate noise problem. The proposed research involves
              fabrication of high K based capacitors using BST and BCTZ and optimizing their
              properties to obtain maximum tunability and figure of merit. He proposes to
              develop a circuit model for these tunable elements and extract the model
              parameters by electrical characterization. The VCOs, loop filters, phase
              frequency detectors (PFD) and buffers will be designed and fabricated using
              standard
CMOS technology through MOSIS. In order to reduce cost, he will
              attach the high-K tunable elements to CMOS chip by flip-chip technology. These
              modules will be tested to verify tunability, the jitter of VCOs and
              characterize the performance of PLLs in terms of jitter versus frequency lock
              range, lock range versus power supply and lock range versus
              temperature.

Intellectual Merit: Developing a tunable element will require
              significant research on the fabrication and modeling of their electrical
              characteristics. The optimization of tunability and figure of merit requires
              understanding of variation of composition, thickness and grain size in thin
              high-K thin films with process parameters. The development of circuit model
              parameters is also complex because the elements of the equivalent circuit are
              themselves functions of applied voltage and frequency. The integration of these
              tunable elements with a CMOS circuit and the testing of subsystems at high
              frequencies are also challenging tasks.

Broader Impact: This proposal
              addresses all of the NSF evaluation criteria relating to broader impacts.
              Graduate students will be involved in the basic research and under graduate
              students will be sought to perform senior design projects. The knowledge
              learned in this project will be imparted to students in their related classes.
              The research will result in a novel tunable element for present and future VLSI
              technology. The research results will be published in world wide web, journals
              and conferences. Preference will be given for the recruitment of minority
              students.

