Title       : Magneto-optical imaging of nanomagnetic structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0245425

Award Number: 0245425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holger Schmidt hschmidt@soe.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, research on the use of magnetic properties of materials for
              electronics (spintronics) and data storage has grown tremendously. In both
              areas, spintronics and magnetic storage, size and operational speed are
              defining properties of a device. As the size of a magnetic element is reduced
              below a few hundred nanometers, another qualitative change occurs as the magnet
              can only sustain a single domain. This has severe consequences for dynamic
              properties, which do not depend on domain wall motion anymore. To this day, the
              time scales over which magnetization changes on the single-domain levels occur
              are not known. It is therefore essential to develop the capabilities to measure
              these fundamentally and technologically relevant quantities that present the
              ultimate intrinsic limit for the speed of nanoscale magnetic devices. 

We
              will study the magnetization dynamics of nanoscale magnetic structures with
              high temporal and spatial resolution as an area of research with large impact
              on (nano)-magnetic applications. Ultrafast optical methods such as
              magneto-optical Kerr spectroscopy will be used to provide the time resolution
              required to resolve changes in the magnetization direction of single-domain
              particles. Based on an integrated ultrafast spectroscopy system with near-field
              scanning microscopy capabilities, a setup for the magneto-optical measurement
              of the magnetization dynamics of single single-domain (nano)-magnetic
              structures will be built. Subsequently, measurements on nanomagnetic structures
              of varying sizes and shapes will be carried out to gain a qualitative and
              quantitative understanding of the magnetization reversal time scales and
              mechanisms.

In addition, highly sensitive magneto-optical spectroscopy
              methods will be developed. The detection of small magneto-optic reflection
              signals from individual nanostructures requires exquisite sensitivity.
              Therefore, cavity enhancement of the magneto-optical Kerr effect will be
              studied to extend this technique to the ultrafast single-particle regime. In
              the course of the project, cavity enhancement will first be investigated in
              larger samples or arrays of nanomagnets before then being applied to individual
              single-domain particles.  

The work proposed here is expected to have
              significant broader impact. As magneto-optics and spintronics evolve and device
              dimensions shrink further, sensitive methods to measure magnetic properties
              will play an important role in determining the limitations of such devices.
              Over the course of the program, graduate students will be trained in two key
              areas of experimental research, ultrafast spectroscopy and scanning microscopy.
              In addition, undergraduates will be actively involved in the project and
              aspects of this research will be incorporated into a multidisciplinary graduate
              class in nanotechnology currently being developed at UC Santa Cruz.

