Title       : Dynamics of Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0245578

Award Number: 0245578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72795              (Estimated)
Investigator: Grozdena Todorova todorova@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Grozdena Todorova, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
DMS-0245578

The
              proposed project intends to investigate current issues in nonlinear wave
              equations 
involving the topics of asymptotic behavior of solutions,
              development of singularities, and
instability. We intend to study problems
              that deal with the dynamics in the vicinity of the least energy standing waves,
              investigate the question of stability and instability of bound states and bound
              states standing waves for fundamental equations of Mathematical Physics:
              
Nonlinear Klein-Gordon (NLKG), Nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS), Nonlinear Damped
              Wave (NLDW). 

The interaction between the variational structure of
              stationary equations associated with hyperbolic problems and the evolutionary
              nature of the process makes this type of problems a very interesting area in
              nonlinear analysis. We also intend to study the stability/instability of the
              trivial equilibrium, i.e., the behavior of the small amplitude solutions of
              various important hyperbolic equations, with the purpose to derive sharp
              criteria for blow--up and global existence. 

Further questions of interest
              are: the asymptotically parabolic structure of the hyperbolic equations due to
              the presence of damping terms; the influence of damping on the principal
              support of solutions; the influence of damping on the decay rate of the energy;
              and the asymptotic behavior of solutions in external domains where the delicate
              interaction between the geometrical
condition on the boundary and the
              dissipation has to be taken into account.

In all of the proposed problems,
              the underlying balance between different kinds of forces, which affect the
              solution, will be considered. It is important to add that the solution of many
              of the problems in the proposal requires the development of new techniques as
              well as the refinement of more classical methods. 

Nonlinear Klein-Gordon,
              Nonlinear Damped Wave and Nonlinear Schroedinger equations arise in fluid
              dynamics, classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, plasma physics and nonlinear
              optics.
In particular nonlinear optics is a main tool in telecommunication
              technology, mainly based on the large use of fiber optics. There is no need
              here to emphasize the relevance of the fiber optics in 
large capacity
              connection nets, which are crucial in high-speed Internet applications. Since
              the Nonlinear Schroedinger equation is a useful design tool for realistic fiber
              communication systems, it is important to understand the stability/instability
              phenomena of its solutions.

The solutions of the problems outlined in the
              proposal will develop our understanding of the physical phenomena related with
              the above fundamental equations. Given the crucial role of these equations in
              many areas of technology, understanding the principles governing them is of
              basic importance for a society built on technology.

