Title       : Distributed Processing of Rule-Programs in Knowledge Bases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1993     
File        : a9296140

Award Number: 9296140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 26,  1992       
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ouri Wolfson wolfson@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on performance issues in rule-based                      
              knowledge bases that have to manage large amounts of rules and                 
              data. An effective implementation of such systems, particularly                
              if they are distributed, has proven to be a major stumbling block              
              in the way of their efficient performance. In this project,                    
              parallel processing for solving the performance problem is                     
              investigated. The goals of the research are: (1) to establish a                
              theory of parallel and distributed rule processing; and (2) based              
              on the theory, to devise processing strategies and criteria for                
              comparing them, so that an optimal strategy can be selected for a              
              given rule-based program, data structures, and a                               
              parallel/distributed architecture. The results of the research                 
              will be experimentally evaluated in Net-mate, a system for                     
              management of very large communication networks (hundreds of                   
              thousands of interconnected computers), that is currently under                
              development at Columbia University.  An important issue in                     
              network management is automatic detection of fault conditions.                 
              Rule-based programming is ideal for this purpose, but it requires              
              the analysis of very large amounts of statistical and                          
              configuration data that is distributed, leading to the type of                 
              performance problems that this research aims to solve. Hence, the              
              Net-mate system is an ideal testbed for this research, and both                
              projects are expected to benefit from the cooperation and provide              
              results applicable to distributed and parallel computing.
