Title       : REU: Cell Wall Polysaccharides and Systematics of Rhodophyta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9296252

Award Number: 9296252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Gretz mrgretz@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Cell wall polysaccharides of red algae include the                        
              commercially important carrageenans and agarocolloids as well as               
              cellulose, xylans, mannans, and complex heteropolysaccharides.                 
              Due in part to the commercial significance of these compounds and              
              their derivatives as gelling, emulsifying, and sizing agents,                  
              much is known of the chemistry of these polymers from selected                 
              organisms.  Relatively little is known, however, about the                     
              taxonomic distribution of these and related natural products                   
              among major groups of the red algae (Rhodophyta).  Drs. Gretz and              
              Sommerfeld are undertaking an extensive chemical survey to                     
              address this problem.  Cell wall polysaccharides are also                      
              potentially useful biochemical markers that may be valuable in                 
              the assessment of natural evolutionary affinities between algal                
              groups.  Efforts in this project will be directed toward                       
              biochemical analysis of cell walls of "key" groups in the                      
              Erythropeltidales, Compsopogonales, Rhodochaetales,                            
              Achrochaetiales, Nemaliales, Batrachospermales, and                            
              Bonnemaisonales using modern techniques such as methylation                    
              analysis (gas chromatography/mass spectrometry), nuclear magnetic              
              resonance and x-ray diffraction analysis.                                      
                   In addition to the scientific information generated and the               
              potential for discovery of sources of novel natural products,                  
              this project is designed to encourage undergraduate students to                
              participate in original research.  Students will be exposed                    
              directly to the application of the scientific method and to                    
              modern analytical techniques and apparatus, which will stimulate               
              their interest in careers in science.
