Title       : Mechanisms of Heterogeneous Transport of Monoclonal Antibodies in Tumors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1992      
File        : a9296003

Award Number: 9296003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dov Jaron                               
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rakesh K. Jain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this work is to measure experimentally and to         
              analyze mathematically the relative contributions of various                   
              mechanisms of transport of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) in a tumor.            
              Experiments will involve direct measurement of spatial distributions           
              of (i) blood perfusion rate, (ii) interstitial pressure, (iii)                 
              antigen, and (iv) antibody at various times post-injection in a tumor.         
              The tumor will be grown as a standard implant subcutantously, and as           
              an "isolated-tumor" connected to the host with a single artery and a           
              single vein.  The latter preparation will permit direct measurement of         
              interstitial fluid velocity at the tumor periphery.  To discern the            
              role of binding, two types of antibodies will be used:  a non-specific         
              antibody and a hepatoma specific antibody.  The resulting data will be         
              analyzed by developing two physiologically-based distributed parameter         
              models:  (i) a fluid transport model and (ii) a solute transport               
              model.  The former will permit calculations of interstitial pressure           
              and interstitial velocity in a tumor, and the latter will permit               
              calculations of the spatial and temporal distribution of MAbs in a             
              tumor.  Extensive simulations and sensitivity analyses will be carried         
              out to suggest ways of improving MAb delivery and distribution in              
              tumors.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              If MAbs are to fulfill their promise, methods must be developed to             
              deliver them selectively and in adequate quantities to their                   
              target in the body.  Unfortunately, MAbs have shown limited or no              
              success in cancer treatment primarily due to their inability to                
              penetrate solid tumors uniformly.  In particular, when MAbs are                
              injected into the blood stream, very low amounts accumulate in                 
              the center of a solid tumor.  There is a preferential                          
              distribution of MAbs in areas closest to the functional blood                  
              vessels and, in many cases, on the tumor periphery.  An abundance              
              of antibody at the tumor periphery may be helpful in the tumor                 
              detection using radioimaging techniques, but it has no                         
              therapeutic effect against cells in the center.  After the outer               
              cells have been killed, the residual tumor grows back again.  The              
              engineering approach used for identifying and understanding the                
              mechanisms governing the heterogeneous distribution in tumors may              
              suggest novel approaches to deliver antibodies and other                       
              macromolecules to all regions of a tumor.
