Title       : Routing of Dictyostelium Beta-Hexosaminidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1992  
File        : a9296030

Award Number: 9296030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold Kaplan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long range goal of this research is to discover the                        
              biochemical mechanism of the regulation of lysosomal enzyme                    
              sorting.  One of the most important steps toward this goal is to               
              determine the underlying sorting mechanism in the organism.  This              
              laboratory has recently cloned and sequenced a complete cDNA copy              
              of the Dictyostelium mRNA which encodes beta-hex, a lysosomal                  
              enzyme.  The organism has been transformed with a vector designed              
              to express the beta-hex and other coding sequences, and                        
              transformants overproduce active enzyme.  Mutational analysis has              
              begun and a beta-hex-invertase fusion has been prepared for use                
              in testing candidate signals.  These clones and vectors will be                
              used to determine the sorting signal which directs the protein to              
              lysosomes.  The most likely signal is either a modified N-linked               
              oligosaccharide, which is the signal for sorting of lysosomal                  
              enzymes in mammalian cells, or an amino-terminal polypeptide                   
              sequence which is the sorting signal for yeast vacuolar proteins.              
              The immediate aims of this proposal are:  1. To evaluate the role              
              of N-glycosides in the sorting of beta-hex.  Potential                         
              glycosylation sites in the coding sequence will be altered, the                
              mutated insert will be expressed in Dictyostelium, and the                     
              sorting of the altered protein will be determined.  2. To                      
              evaluate the role of amino-terminal domains in the sorting of                  
              beta-hex.  Two approaches will be taken.  In one, selected                     
              protions of the amino-terminal coding sequence will be deleted                 
              and the deleted insert will be subjected to the analysis                       
              described above.  In another, a signal-reporter fusion system                  
              will be developed to search for or to confirm potential signals.               
              The amino-terminal region may also contain information which                   
              directs intercalation of the protein into membrranes.  Removal of              
              this information may have indirect effects on sorting.                         
              Therefore, the planned analysis will include an evaluation of the              
              effect of deletions and fusions on the membrane intercalation of               
              the protein.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The study of mechanisms by which lysosomal enzymes are sorted is               
              a topic of intense scientific interest because of what it can                  
              teach us about the relationship of protein structure to protein                
              transport into specific cellular organelles.  Also, in complex                 
              organisms, lysosomal enzyme sorting is closely regulated during                
              development because these enzymes serve a key role in molding of               
              embryonic shape.  Dictyostelium discoideum is the simplest                     
              organism in which such regulation is known to occur. Study of                  
              this organism thus offers a particularly interesting system in                 
              which to study the molecular mechanisms of lysosomal enzyme                    
              sorting in  cells.
