Title       : CRB: Conservation Genetics and Inbreeding Depression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1992       
File        : a9296256

Award Number: 9296256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Hedrick hedrick@hedricklab.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The conservation of endangered species often hinges on the                
              avoidance of inbreeding depression or the retention of genetic                 
              variation.  Therefore, it is of fundamental importance for                     
              conservation biology to understand and characterize inbreeding                 
              depression.  In the proposed research, inbreeding depression in                
              Drosophila melanogaster as a model for endangered species in                   
              which such experimentation would not be possible.  The influence               
              of inbreeding on all components of fitness will be examined.  In               
              addition, the effect of inbreeding in the normal laboratory                    
              environment and two stress environments will be examined to                    
              obtain a more realistic view of the impact of inbreeding on                    
              endangered species.                                                            
                   In a second component of the study a computer simulation                  
              program will be developed to analyze pedigree populations.  Both               
              genetic linkage and natural selection will be incorporated.  As a              
              result, the effect of different rates of inbreeding on inbreeding              
              depression and the conditions for purging a population of lethal               
              alleles will be determined.  Furthermore, this technique will be               
              applied to known pedigrees of endangered species to determine the              
              expected inbreeding depression.
