Title       : A Comparative Multichannel Seismic Investigation into the Structure of Two
               Polynesian Volcanic Chains: Marquesas and Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1993    
File        : a9296016

Award Number: 9296016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bilal U. Haq                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Detrick rdetrick@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a project involving a two-ship and single ship multichannel            
              seismic survey of the Society and Marquesas hot spot chains in the             
              Pacific ocean.  It is a collaborative project with the French.                 
              Work will include wide angle and expanding spread two-ship profiles            
              and single ship MCS.  The study is aimed at understanding the                  
              nature of zero age volcanism at the southeast end of the chains,               
              the factors contributing to the onset of volcanism at the northwest            
              end of the chains, and the relationship of the hot spots to the                
              Marquesas Fracture Zone.  A particular objective is to understand              
              hot spotlithospheric interaction in two different setting--normal              
              lithosphere and weak lithosphere.                                              
                                                                                             
              Mid-plate volcanism and its interaction with oceanic lithosphere is            
              a process of fundamental importance in understanding the structure             
              and evolution of ocean basins.  Active source seismic studies such             
              as this one will provide important detailed information regarding              
              the structure of the lithosphere beneath and surrounding volcanic              
              loads that is currently lacking.  Dr. McNutt and her co-workers are            
              among the leaders in the study of mid-plate volcanism and                      
              lithospheric structure, as well as multichannel seismics.
