Title       : Role of Ca2+/Calmodulin-Dependent Phosphatase in the AdrenalMedulla
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1994   
File        : a9296220

Award Number: 9296220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64500              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Ann Tallant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Neural stimulation of the chromaffin cells of the adrenal gland                
              results in the secretion of catecholamines (epinephrine and                    
              norepinephrine) into the blood stream.  Circulating                            
              catecholamines are subsequently involved in the regulation of                  
              many processes in the cardiovascular, respiratory and digestive                
              systems.  Although the cellular events which respond to neural                 
              stimulation and result in catecholamine secretion are poorly                   
              understood, an increase in the intracellular level of calcium                  
              (Ca2+) plays a central role in this process.  Many of the                      
              intracellular activities regulated by the Ca2+ are mediated by                 
              the Ca2+ receptor protein calmodulin and various Ca2+/calmodulin-              
              dependent enzymes which it controls.  One of these is a Ca2+-                  
              dependent phosphatase, which regulates the activity of other                   
              proteins and enzymes by removing a phosphate group from them and               
              altering their structure and subsequently their activity.  The                 
              objective of this project is to investigate the role of the                    
              phosphatase in the chromaffin cells of the adrenal gland.  The                 
              adrenal phosphatase will be purified and characterized, for                    
              comparison  to the well characterized Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent                
              phosphatase from brain.  Chromaffin cell proteins which are                    
              dephosphorylated by the phosphatase in response to stimulation                 
              will be identified and characterized and their dephosphorylation               
              correlated with increases in intracellular Ca2+ and catecholamine              
              secretion, in order to understand their role and that of the                   
              phosphatase in catecholamine release.  The results of this study               
              will provide insight into cellular mechanisms by which Ca2+                    
              regulates  catecholamine release from chromaffin cells as well as              
              the role of the phosphatase in stimulus-secretion coupling in the              
              adrenal gland and other secretory organs.  The Ca2+/calmodulin-                
              dependent phosphatase is a major calmodulin-dependent enzyme in                
              the brain and may represent a primary target for Ca2+ in the                   
              cellular events resulting in neurotransmission.
