Title       : Functional Approaches to Kin Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1992    
File        : a9296201

Award Number: 9296201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 31,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14200              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Gold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Frogs and toads recognize their close kin, and behaviorally               
              discriminate between close kin and non-kin.  In this study, the                
              investigators will examine the ecological and evolutionary                     
              ramifications of kin discrimination in populations of tadpoles                 
              and adults of the American toad, Bufo americanus.  Kin                         
              recognition may enable breeding adults to avoid incest by                      
              choosing an unrelated partner for a mate.  Kin discrimination is               
              also evident in the schooling behavior of tadpoles, which show                 
              preferences to aggregate with their siblings.  To examine how                  
              these preferences are expressed both in natural and experimental               
              populations, the investigators will determine the genetic                      
              relationships among individuals by conducting analyses of DNA                  
              extracted from the nuclei and mitochondria using two techniques:               
              restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP's) and analyses                
              of hypervariable nuclear sequences (DNA "fingerprinting").                     
                   Frogs and toads are model organisms for studying questions                
              of how and why animals recognize their kin.  The results should                
              offer new insight into the ecology and evolution of kin                        
              recognition in vertebrates.  The results should also have                      
              practical ramifications.  Deleterious effects on growth and                    
              survivorship are often attributable to high levels of inbreeding.              
              As endangered populations decrease in size, inbreeding depression              
              can lead to extinction.  Kin-recognition mechanisms may function               
              to ensure optimal levels of outbreeding.  Hence, an understanding              
              of these mechanisms may be important for the development of                    
              effective plans of conservation.  Experimental analyses of the                 
              effects of genetic diversity on growth rates offer the promise of              
              leading to new theoretical insights that may ultimately improve                
              harvesting yields, both in agricultural and fisheries projects.
