Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stable Homotopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1991  
File        : a9296037

Award Number: 9296037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chun-Nip Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The research projects to be undertaken are in the following               
              two areas of algebraic topology: the stable homotopy groups of                 
              spheres, and the homotopy limit problem.  In the first problem,                
              the investigator will study certain third-order periodic                       
              phenomena in the stable homotopy groups of spheres.  This is a                 
              continuation of a general program for studying the global                      
              behavior of stable homotopy groups of spheres, as formulated by                
              Miller, Revenel and Wilson.  Results obtained from this research               
              will enhance our understanding of the underlying periodicity of                
              stable homotopy.  In the second problem, the author will study                 
              the so called "homotopy limit problem."  The importance of this                
              problem lies in the fact that various well-known conjectures and               
              theorems can be formulated as particular homotopy limit problems.              
              One of the goals is to extend known affirmative solutions to the               
              homotopy limit problem to include other important spaces from                  
              algebraic K-theory.  The result can them be applied to the study               
              of important homotopy theoretic questions.                                     
                   Bascially, homotopy theory is a tool for investigating the                
              topology of spheres in all dimensions and other such natural                   
              geometric objects.  It is an algebraic tool, useful because                    
              algebra permits computation.
