Title       : Electrophysiology and Morphology of Co2/H+-Chemosensitive Neurons in Brainstem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1992     
File        : a9296087

Award Number: 9296087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Comer                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 31,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay B. Dean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The respiratory and circulatory systems of the body can be                
              stimulated when carbon dioxide and hydrogen ions activate certain              
              brain cells (neurons).  These neruons are considered to be                     
              chemosensitive and, based on earlier studies, were thought to be               
              localized exclusively along one surface of the brainstem, i.e.,                
              the ventrolateral medulla oblongata.  Recent evidence, however,                
              now suggests that chemosensitive neurons have a wider                          
              distribution than previously believed and that they are also                   
              located in a region called the nucleus of the solitary tract.                  
              Both of these regions will be studied.  Chemosensitive neurons                 
              are thought to provide tonic input to both the cells that                      
              generate breathing rhythm and the cells that control vascular                  
              tone.  Chemosensitive cells also maintain the acid-base balance                
              during periods of metabolic disturbance and changes in the                     
              external environment.  Despite the importance conferred on these               
              neurons, the exact neural pathways and cellular mechanisms by                  
              which they produce their effects are not known.  In the proposed               
              studies, electrophysiological recordings will be made from these               
              neurons and their responses to changes in oxygen level, acid-base              
              balance and drug application will be studied.  The cells will be               
              localized and the way in which they are connected to other parts               
              of the brain will be investigated.  This work will contribute to               
              fundamental knowledge of how the brain controls the respiratory                
              and circulatory systems of the body.
