Title       : Theoretical Studies of Organosilicon and Main Group Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1992     
File        : a9296144

Award Number: 9296144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 25,  1992     
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Gordon mark@si.fi.ameslab.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Physical Chemistry Program the                         
              Principal Investigator will undertake a comprehensive                          
              theoretical study of main group organometallic chemistry, with                 
              an emphasis on silicon and the other elements in its group in                  
              the periodic table. A thorough understanding of the electronic                 
              structures and chemical bonding of these elements is of both                   
              fundamental and practical importance. These elements constitute                
              the backbones of industrially important polymers, such as the                  
              silicones, and are the basic substrates of electronic chips.                   
                                                                                             
              State-of-the-art electronic structure theory, interfaced with                  
              quantum and semi-classical dynamics studies for the prediction                 
              of reaction dynamics and mechanisms, will be used. Areas to be                 
              investigated include analysis of fundamental reaction                          
              mechanisms, such as the hydrosilation, coupling and                            
              rearrangement reactions. Other reaction types to be considered                 
              include those between silicon-containing compounds and atomic                  
              and molecular oxygen, reactions of importance in chemical vapor                
              deposition, SN2 reactions at silicon centers, and the role of                  
              pseudorotation in the pentacoordinated reactive intermediates,                 
              unimolecular decompositions of silanes, reactions of divalent                  
              group IV species, and reactions of small cations and anions.                   
              The molecular and electronic structures, properties and                        
              reactivity of highly strained rings will be investigated also,                 
              as will the nature of a variety of unusual bonding                             
              arrangements. Initial investigations of structure and                          
              reactivity will be undertaken for biologically active compounds                
              which contain main group metals and small clusters of main                     
              group metals. Theoretical investigations will include the                      
              development of extended basis sets for fourth and fifth period                 
              elements, continued explorations of techniques for interfacing                 
              electronic structure and dynamics calculations, and the                        
              development of methods for interfacing ab initio and semi-                     
              empirical calculations.
