Title       : PYI: Plant Ecophysiology of Temperate and Tropical Forest Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1994     
File        : a9296005

Award Number: 9296005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 31,  1991      
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Reich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Peter B. Reich's research focuses on basic and applied                     
              plant ecophysiology.  His efforts have been devoted to                         
              quantifying plant physiological response to environmental                      
              factors and stress agents, with an ultimate goal of                            
              understanding evolutionary adaptations, natural ecological                     
              patterns, and applied environmental problems.                                  
                                                                                             
              His specific interests in natural systems lie in comparing                     
              evergreen and deciduous species in both temperate and tropical                 
              forests.  This is done by performing integrated studies that                   
              measure key factors on a variety of temporal and spatial                       
              hierarchical levels.  Current work is directed toward assessing                
              net carbon gain of individual leaves and entire forest                         
              canopies over instantaneous (measured in seconds) and long-                    
              term (over seasons and years) time intervals.  The overall                     
              approach incorporates investigations of nutrient, water, and                   
              light utilization in the photosynthetic process.                               
                                                                                             
              With regard to air pollution ecophysiology, Dr. Reich's past                   
              efforts have yielded results that constitute crucial                           
              information which provided the basis for policy decisions                      
              affecting air pollution (including ozone and acid rain)                        
              regulation and control.  These results were the outcome of                     
              mathematical models capable of realistically predicting plant                  
              physiological responses to ambient gaseous levels in the                       
              atmosphere.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Future work will also include study of the effects of various                  
              other biotic stresses (such as insect pests and disease) on                    
              plant and forest resources.  The Presidential Young                            
              Investigator award will permit Dr. Reich, at the University of                 
              Wisconsin-Madison, to expand his research horizons and continue                
              along paths he has already established in his career.
