Title       : ROW: Oligocene-Recent Plate Reconstructions of the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge, the
               Macquarie Triple Junction, and the Australia-Pacific Plate Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1992   
File        : a9296091

Award Number: 9296091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bilal U. Haq                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joann M. Stock jstock@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The southwestern Pacific-Antarctica ridge and the Pacific-                     
              Antarctica-Australia (Macquarie) triple junction region are now                
              some of the tectonicly least well known areas of the world's                   
              oceans.  Published plate reconstructions of the eastern                        
              Southeast Indian Ridge and the Pacific-Antarctica ridge span                   
              time intervals 5 to 10 million years in length.  In some cases                 
              these lack an accurate assessment of the uncertainties in the                  
              reconstructions, or were based on sparse bathymetric coverage.                 
              Recently, detailed features of the seafloor have been revealed                 
              by observations of geoid anomalies (Geosat data).  More                        
              detailed reconstructions, spanning time intervals of 1 or 2                    
              m.y. can be obtained from the magnetic anomaly record adjacent                 
              to the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge and the Southeast Indian Ridge,                 
              and the uncertainties in these reconstructions will be                         
              dramatically decreased with the inclusion of bathymetric                       
              control from Geosat data.  The PI will reanalyze existing                      
              marine magnetic, bathymetric, and Geosat data form magnetic and                
              fracture zone data point, to complement existing results from                  
              both of these areas, in order to produce a more detailed set of                
              poles and stage poles of reconstruction for times since about                  
              anomaly 13 (36 Ma).  These reconstructions can be used to                      
              decipher in more detail the complex history of the seafloor                    
              near the Macquarie triple junction and along the southernmost                  
              Pacific-Antarctica ridge in regions that have not been well                    
              surveyed by ship.
