Title       : Development of a Shipboard Digital (CCD) Image Acquisition System for
               Characterizing Pico- and Nanoplankton Populationsby Fluorescence Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1991 
File        : a9296002

Award Number: 9296002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 16,  1991 
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Sieracki MSieracki@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An image analysis system for fluorescence microscopy will be                   
              developed which incorporates state-of-the-art image acquisition                
              technology.  The project will result in the development of                     
              instruments and techniques for detailed biomass measurements of                
              the pico- and nanoplankton components of the microbial food web.               
                                                                                             
              While video technology is the most common method of image                      
              acquisition, it is not particularly well suited for accurate,                  
              quantitative imaging in the low light environment of fluorescence              
              microscopy.  Video systems are limited by low sensitivity, non-                
              linear response, and a narrow dynamic range. Digital cameras                   
              incorporating cooled, solid-state charged-coupled devices (CCDs),              
              however, are now available with excellent characteristics of                   
              photon sensitivity, spatial and gray scale reolution, response                 
              linearity and quantum efficiency.  These imaging devices overcome              
              the major problems of video systems which limit their usefulness               
              for quantitative image analyzed fluorescence microscopy.                       
              Development will be directed toward a system capable of ship-                  
              board use to allow rapid size spectra and biomass measurements of              
              the bacteria and protists at sea as part of the Global Ocean Flux              
              Study.
