Title       : Geology and Recent Volcanology of Nevado del Ruiz Volcano, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1992      
File        : a9296082

Award Number: 9296082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 20,  1991  
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley N. Williams atsnw@asuvm.inre.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1557      VOLCANOLOGY & MANTLE GEOCHEMIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An integrated three-year program including geology, geophysics                 
              and geochemistry is planned for the purpose of studying the                    
              active volcano Nevado del Ruiz, Colombia.  Since the November,                 
              1985 eruption, the PI has been engaged in a diverse set of                     
              preliminary projects at Ruiz which suggest that previously held                
              beliefs about the volcano may be in error.  In order to improve                
              our understanding and to contribute to the general conceptual                  
              model of Andean volcanism a four-task program has been developed:              
              1) A detailed geological study of the volcanic complex including               
              analyusis of the age of volcanism, its evolution, eruption                     
              dynamics, petrology, and volcanic hazards.  2) A study of recent               
              behavior of the volcano as recorded in the nine known tephra                   
              layers distributed widely over the region.  Eruption volumes,                  
              dynamics and evolution will be a primary focus.  3) A detailed                 
              gravity study to evaluate and model the subsurface structure of                
              Ruiz.  Most of the questions about the unusual aspects of the                  
              form and behavior of Ruiz could be resolved if an unrecognized                 
              caldera were actually present.  4) A continued analysis of the                 
              geothgermal system and its response to the mesurgence of magma.                
              An effort will be made to more completely sample the system,                   
              analyze the alteration products, and determine their age and                   
              relationship to the geological evolution.  Additional isotopic                 
              studies will be undertaken to understand the nature of the deep                
              reservoir and the origins of the main and minor constituents.                  
              The goal of the research is to produce an integrated model of the              
              major northern Andean volcanic center which could then be applied              
              to and compared with those developed at other circumPacific                    
              volcanoes.
