Title       : Chemical Interactions Between Gabbros and Their Host Rocks: Field and Laboratory
               Studies of the Tertiary Macrodikes of the Kangerdlugssuaq Area, East Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1992  
File        : a9296068

Award Number: 9296068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane M. Ernst                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Lesher lesher@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The macrodykes of the Kangerdlugssuaq area, East Greenland                
              are among a large number of tholeiitic intrusions emplaced into                
              Archean crust and Tertiary volcanic rocks along the East                       
              Greenland margin during the initial stages of Tertiary rifting of              
              the North Atlantic basin.  These intrusions are spectacularly                  
              exposed in the glaciated terrain along the Blosseville Coast and               
              preserve evidence of complex interaction with their volcanic,                  
              sedimentary and gneissic host rocks.  The available chemical                   
              data on these intrusions indicate that these magmas were                       
              selectively contaminated by components of the lower crust and                  
              hydrothermally altered mafic volcanics and that magmatic                       
              processes led to chemical stratification within these intrusions.              
              Various scales and modes of crustal contamination are revealed                 
              along the intrusive contacts.  These exposures permit detailed                 
              structural and chemical study of the hybridization process.                    
              Field and geochemical studies of these intrusions are proposed                 
              to assess the roles of fractionation and assimilation in the                   
              chemical evolution of these magmas and appropriate models will                 
              be developed to describe these relations as constrained by                     
              experimental phase equilibria and kinetic data obtained using                  
              natural materials of the macrodykes.  The results from this                    
              "case study" will be used to evaluate the role of crustal                      
              contamination during chemical evolution of associated gabbroic                 
              complexes and contemporaneous East Greenland basalts and place                 
              constraints on the source regions for these magmas.
