Title       : MRI: A Feature - Based Word Recognition System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1991 
File        : a9296032

Award Number: 9296032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 30,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Y. Espy-Wilson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The aim of the project is to develop an approach to a feature-                 
              based word recognition system which can cope with the wide range               
              of variability that can occur in the acoustic manifestation of                 
              words.  The variability in the acoustic pattern of words has many              
              different sources, including intra- and inter-speaker differences              
              in speaking style and rate, various contextual effects, and                    
              anatomic differences between speakers.  Thus, whereas linguistic               
              descriptions use binary-valued features, the acoustic correlates               
              of the feature have varying degrees of strength and extent over                
              time.                                                                          
                   The research will be divided into three stages.  To ensure                
              an adequate representation of the variability that can occur, a                
              database of around 200 words will be designed.  The test words                 
              will be excised from a variety of contexts and spoken by several               
              talkers, both males and females.  Next, an acoustic study of the               
              corpus will be conducted to supplement data in the literature on               
              the acoustic correlates for features and to further study                      
              variability.  Finally, a speaker-independent isolated word                     
              recognition system will be developed and tested with a new                     
              database of the same 200 words.                                                
                   The recognition system will consist of three components:                  
              property detectors for extracting the acoustic properties for                  
              features, a lexicon which will consist of some arrangement of                  
              features for each word, and a matcher for mapping between the                  
              extracted acoustic patterns and the lexical representation.                    
              There will be several ways to handle variability.  First, the                  
              acoustic properties for features will be based on relative                     
              measures so that they will be minimally dependent upon the                     
              speaker's characteristics.  Second, unlike traditional feature-                
              based recognition systems, lexical access will be achieved                     
              directly from the acoustic properties rather than from postulated              
              phonetic segments.  In this way, contextual information can be                 
              taken into account more directly during the matching process.                  
              Finally, the investigator will develop a framework for expressing              
              variability within the lexical representation of words.  Although              
              variability has several sources, it appears that the resulting                 
              acoustic changes can be expressed in terms of a few feature-                   
              altering processes including phonetic lenition, feature                        
              assimilation and some other structurally-dependent variants.                   
              Thus by incorporating the feature-altering processes in the                    
              lexical representation of words, it should not be necessary for                
              the recognition system to have "seen" or have a rule for all of                
              the variability that can occur in a particular word before it is               
              able to recognize it.                                                          
                   The results of this project should contribute to our                      
              understanding of acoustic phonetics, and also to the development               
              of improved technologies for automatic speech recognition.
