Title       : Collapse, Steady State Concept, and Liquefaction of Granular Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9296009

Award Number: 9296009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 30,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Lou A. Chameau jeanlou.chameau@coe.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research program addresses fundamental                                    
              concepts for understanding the behavior of                                     
              granular material (usually sand)  saturated                                    
              with water (below the ground water table) when                                 
              subjected to the strong ground motions                                         
              resulting from earthquake shaking.  Under                                      
              these conditions, such soils have the                                          
              potential to "liquefy", that is to lose shear                                  
              strength and undergo large deformations,                                       
              resulting in damage to building foundations,                                   
              tunnels and pipelines built on or passing                                      
              through such liquefied soil.  This phenomenon                                  
              is related to the response of saturated loose                                  
              sands strained sufficiently to result in flow                                  
              slides.  A                                                                     
              devastating landslides is an example of such                                   
              a flowslide.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The relation between the steady state (flow                                    
              slide) and the cyclic (earthquake) behavior is                                 
              being addressed by fundamental experimental                                    
              studies.  A key element to be investigated is                                  
              the concept of structural collapse of the sand                                 
              fabric.  The concept of "collapse" is                                          
              associated with the fact that the structure of                                 
              contractive sands is metastable.  In a                                         
              collapsive skeleton, small shear strains may                                   
              be sufficient to produce a sudden                                              
              rearrangement of grains with an associated                                     
              loss of contact points between neighboring                                     
              grains, accompanied by a large increase in                                     
              pore water pressure.  Consequently, the shear                                  
              strength of the sand is reduced to a small                                     
              value and the sand becomes susceptible to                                      
              large deformations.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The results of this investigation are expected                                 
              to contribute to an improved understanding of                                  
              liquefaction phenomena and associated                                          
              instabilities, and to result in an improved                                    
              ability to predict their occurrence.
