Title       : Genome Evolution in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9296132

Award Number: 9296132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Ochman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research will investigate the factors promoting              
              variation in the size and organization of the bacterial                        
              chromosome.  By analysing isolates of Escherichia coli and other               
              enteric bacteria of known genetic and genealogical relationships,              
              he will examine many types of evolutionary events occurring above              
              the level of individual gene loci.  This research will address                 
              questions concerning: (1) the incidence of horizontal gene                     
              exchange, recombination and large-scale DNA rearrangements in                  
              natural populations, (2) variation in the physical maps of the E.              
              coli chromosome, (3) the extent of insertion and deletion of                   
              chromosomal DNA causing variation in genome size among natural                 
              isolates, (4) the chromosomal location and stability of                        
              transposable elements, and (5) the rate and evolutionary history               
              of genetic and chromosomal changes in enteric bacteria.                        
                   To analyse these events among natural isolates, Dr. Ochman                
              will:  (1) Assess the nucleotide variation in a large number of                
              genes positioned around the E. coli chromosome to search for                   
              regions that have been affected by recombination, as evident by                
              inconsistencies in the phylogenetic relationships among strains                
              based on a particular gene.  (2) Produce physical maps of the                  
              chromosome for many strains of E. coli.  Large DNA fragments                   
              generated by restriction enzymes with very infrequent recognition              
              sequences are resolved by techniques such as pulsed-field gel                  
              electrophoresis and mapped by blot and hybridization procedures.               
              (3) Compare homologous traits- nucleotide sequences and physical               
              maps - among divergent taxa.  In total, these methods provide a                
              broad approach to studying the dynamics of the bacterial genome.//
