Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlocal Models in Continuum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1991    
File        : a9296011

Award Number: 9296011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 16,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Brandon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In this project the principal investigator will analyze                   
              rigorously several mathematical models of nonlocal phenomena in                
              continuum mechanics.  In particular, she will study the question               
              of the existence of solutions of integral models for heat flow                 
              with finite wave speeds and with singular memory functions.  This              
              work is related to parallel work on similar equations arising in               
              viscoelasticity.  The principal investigator will also study                   
              nonconvex variational problems with spatially nonlocal terms of                
              the type that occur in ferromagnetism and superconductivity, in                
              collaboration with colleagues at her institution.                              
                   Many phenomena in the physical world involve what applied                 
              mathematicians and scientists call "nonlocal" processes.                       
              An example of a nonlocal process is the response characteristic                
              of an elastic material that has been subjected to stretching or                
              some other deformation.  The behavior of the material depends on               
              both the past deformations (a nonlocal effect) and the                         
              deformation you are applying now (a local effect).  As an                      
              illustration, pick up your telephone.  The cord will deform in                 
              some way.  All of those twists and turns in the cord are the                   
              result of all the past twisting it has received, along with the                
              twist you are applying now.  In this project the principal                     
              investigator will study rigorously mathematical models of                      
              nonlocal processes of the type that occur in heat flow,                        
              ferromagnetism and superconductivity.
