Title       : Transient Radiation Properties of Strongly Radiating Turbulent Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1992       
File        : a9296149

Award Number: 9296149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay P. Gore gore@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research proposal attempts to obtain information on the                   
              transient radiation characteristics of strongly radiating                      
              flames.  The authors have noted that previous attempts at                      
              predicting emission temperatures, absorption coefficients, and                 
                                                                                             
              radiative heat fluxes for such flames have been in                             
              considerable error, and they propose that the cause of this                    
              may be due to the misinterpretation of data which includes                     
              both spatial variations and temporal variation.  Previous                      
              analyses have not attempted to separate these effects.                         
              However, the authors presented ample evidence to indicate                      
              that, because of the high level of turbulence in the flames of                 
                                                                                             
              interest, temporal fluctuations are indeed present.                            
                                                                                             
              The approach is a coordinated experimental/analytical study.                   
                                                                                             
              The experimental program is innovative and ambitious.  It will                 
                                                                                             
              attempt to obtain simultaneous time resolved measurements of                   
              temperature, soot absorption coefficient, and Carbon Dioxide                   
              concentration at various positions in an acetylene/air                         
              diffusion flame.  The analytical approach is novel in that it                  
                                                                                             
              will attempt to follow the history of a parcel of fuel through                 
                                                                                             
              its trajectory within the turbulent flame.  Both studies will                  
                                                                                             
              be closely connected for correlation.                                          
                                                                                             
              The study proposed is a very important problem in a variety of                 
                                                                                             
              power generation, environmental, and industrial applications,                  
                                                                                             
              and the fundamental knowledge as proposed is very much in                      
              need.
