Title       : Identification of Structural Correlate Patterns for Protein Functional Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1991  
File        : a9296041

Award Number: 9296041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Temple F. Smith tsmith@darwin.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project's aim is to develop a method to identiy patterns                  
              which represent the structural correlates of protein functional                
              domains.  These will be constructed from protein primary                       
              sequences annotated with structural inferences derived from the                
              primary sequences.  The basis for the approach is that common                  
              functions generally correlate with common protein structures,                  
              domains and/or regions of invariant or equivalent amino acids.                 
              This is true even for functionally related proteins with very                  
              different primary sequences.  The proposed method involves                     
              comparative analysis of sets of functionally related proteins for              
              a pattern consisting of elements of the common structure,                      
              invariant amino acids and other properties which can be predicted              
              statistically from the primary sequence.  The approach utilizes                
              the input from the disciplines of molecular genetic,                           
              biochemistry, and computer science.  The project: will begin by                
              extending newly developed methods, which have been proven                      
              successful upon initial application; and will culminate with the               
              generation of a pattern-indexed library of protein functional                  
              domain pattern descriptors.  This will be coupled with the                     
              software development required for their identification in new                  
              sequences.  The generation of this library will thus aid in the                
              identification of the function(s) and domain substructure of                   
              newly sequenced DNA coding regions, which will be inmportant                   
              given the ease and anticipated rate of genome sequencing in the                
              near future.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Advances in biotechnology have led to the determination of the                 
              primary structure, or ordering of amino acids, of many types of                
              proteins.  A computer based pattern recognition program would                  
              analyze known primary structures to find common patterns, and                  
              this information could then be applied to the study of newly                   
              determined sequences and to the design of new proteins with                    
              specific functions. This capability would increase fundamental                 
              knowledge in biology and lead to improved methods in                           
              biotechnology.
