Title       : The Detection and Choice of Prey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9296050

Award Number: 9296050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98864              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Kamil kamil@niko.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The interactions between predators and prey are an important part              
              of all ecological systems.  In recent years, it has become                     
              increasingly clear that the dynamics of predator-prey systems are              
              strongly influenced by the behaviors of foraging animals.  Many                
              sensory and decision-making processes are involved in the                      
              behavior of both predators and prey.  Dr. Kamil will                           
              experimentally investigate these processes in an omnivorous,                   
              highly skilled predator and forager, the blue jay.  Experiments                
              will determine the effects of variation in the spatial and/or                  
              temporal distribution of prey on where the birds hunt, and for                 
              how long; the effects of temporal constraints on the breadth of                
              the birds' diet; the ability of the jays to collect and utilize                
              information about changing, dynamic prey populations; and the                  
              effects of variation in the appearance of prey on the birds'                   
              ability to detect the prey.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The results of these experiments will be important in three                    
              related ways.  (1) Because many of the decision-making abilities               
              of animals evolved in the context of foraging behavior, these                  
              experiments will help to reveal the nature of these abilities and              
              their biological significance.  (2) Dr. Kamil's experiments also               
              will provide basic information about the dynamics of predator-                 
              prey interactions, which will contribute to our understanding of               
              ecological systems.  (3) A better understanding of predator-prey               
              interactions in ecological systems should prove valuable in                    
              estimating the effects of alterations in natural systems.
