Title       : The Role of the Canopy Subsystem in Tropical Forest NutrientCycles: Mechanisms
               and Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9296023

Award Number: 9296023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Crystal Blackshear                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini M. Nadkarni nadkarnn@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Nadkarni will investigate the functional role of the                  
              canopy- dwelling epiphyte community in nutrient cycling in a                   
              primary tropical montane cloud forest.  She hypothesizes that                  
              epiphytic matter functions as a "keystone component" by                        
              contributing to atmospheric nutrient recruitment and                           
              within-system nutrient retention.  Nadkarni combines several                   
              research approaches including: 1) a process-oriented                           
              experimental approach in the lab and field to test specific                    
              hypotheses on how epiphytes increase nutrient recruitment and                  
              nutrient retention within the canopy and,  2) a plot approach                  
              to quantify nutrient pools and fluxes, including an estimation                 
              of ecosystem-level ephiphyte biomass, litterfall, throughfall,                 
              and certain gaseous fluxes.  This information will be                          
              integrated into a nutrient cycling model that will be tested                   
              and validated with measurements of nutrient pools and fluxes in                
              an adjacent secondary forest which has virtually no epiphytes.                 
              This work will relate canopy processes to other aspects of                     
              ecosystem ecology in tropical forests and will contribute to                   
              the growing body of knowledge of the poorly known tropical tree                
              canopy.  More generally, this can be viewed as a case study for                
              any complex ecosystem that contains "keystone ecosystem                        
              elements", certain components that may have greater functional                 
              importance than their                                                          
              biomass or appearance suggests.                                                
                   Dr. Nadkarni is an outstanding researcher in the area of                  
              tropical epiphytic communities.  The Marie Selby Botanical                     
              Gardens provides exemplary support for Dr. Nadkarni in this                    
              critical area of research.
