Title       : Chlorophyll b Synthesis and Formation of Light-Harvesting Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1993   
File        : a9296080

Award Number: 9296080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kenneth Hoober khoober@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              We developed a unique system with which to examine the biogenesis              
              of chloroplast thylakoid membranes.  A major complex of the                    
              thylakoid membrane is the light-harvesting chlorophyll (chl) a/b-              
              proteins complex (LCH-2).  Formation of this complex during                    
              development of the chloroplast in the alga Chlamydomonas                       
              reinhardtii y-1 can be measured after exposure to light.  Electron             
              microscopy of such cells has revealed that the site of initial                 
              assembly of the membranes is at the level of the chloroplast                   
              envelope.  The project will focus on the Chl-binding apoprotein of             
              LCH-2 (LCHP), which will be studied to determine the site and                  
              mechanism of integration of the protein into the membrane and                  
              interaction of the protein with Chl.  Oligonucleotide-directed                 
              mutations will be generated in the cabII-1 gene encoding this                  
              protein.  After transformation, cells will be isolated that express            
              the mutant gene.  The fate of the wild-type and mutant LCHPs will              
              be examined kinetically in an in vivo context.  These results will             
              markedly enhance understanding of membrane assembly.                           
                                                                                             
              Biological membranes are essential to life.  They form a barrier               
              between the cell and the environment and also divide the cell into             
              various compartments with specialized functions.  The maintenance              
              of differ environments on different sides of a membrane are                    
              essential for respiratory energy production in organelles known as             
              mitochondria and for chemical energy production from light during              
              the process of photosynthesis in organelles known as chloroplasts.             
              The ability of these specialized membranes to carry out these                  
              essential functions is based on the complex structure of the                   
              membranes which includes complexes of lipids, proteins, pigments               
              and low-molecular weight electron carriers.  This proposal will                
              address the fundamental question of how such complex membranes are             
              assembled.//
