Title       : Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of a Peptide Export System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1992   
File        : a9296060

Award Number: 9296060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel C. Skvirsky rachel.skvirsky@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of the experiments proposed is to elucidate                      
              mechanisms of peptide and protein export in bacteria.                          
              Specifically, the system to be used is the export of Microcin                  
              B17 (MccB17), a peptide antibiotic produced by E. coli.  Six                   
              genes, mcbB through mcbG, are necessary for production of and                  
              immunity to MccB17, itself the product of mcbA.  The                           
              antibiotic acts on sensitive enteric bacterial cells to block                  
              DNA replication.  The mcbE and mcbF gene products appear to                    
              mediate export of MccB17; mutations in mcbE and mcbF and                       
              extragenic suppressors thereof will delineate the roles,                       
              interactions, and functional domains of these components of                    
              the MccB17 export machinery.  Intracellular and extracellular                  
              MccB17 will be characterized by biochemical and cell                           
              fractionation studies and by electron microscopy.  Mutations                   
              in the MccB17 molecule that prevent its export will identify                   
              functional domains for transport; extragenic suppressors of                    
              these mutations that allow export of the altered peptide will                  
              identify interactions between the exported peptide and the                     
              proteins necessary for its export.%%%                                          
                                                                                             
              Dr. Skvirsky is establishing herself as an independent                         
              investigator through this Research Opportunities for Women                     
              Research Initiation award.  The work promises to be                            
              interesting because export of proteins to the exterior of the                  
              cell is rare in the bacterium E.coli.  The information                         
              obtained in these studies will have numerous possible                          
              practical applications to the commercial production of                         
              products of cloned genes in bacteria.***//
