Title       : Pressurized Underfill Encapsulation of Flip Chip on Board
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9522929

Award Number: 9522929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kuo K. Wang kkw1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cornelius A. Hieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522929  Wang   Flip Chip of Board (FCOB) technology generally requires
              encapsulation of the solder joints to reduce the loads on such joints during
              thermal excursions.  At present the encapsulation process constitutes the
              primary obstacle to widespeard acceptance and implementation of FCOB technology
              because of the long process times involved, and because of the subsequent lack
              of repairability.  Underfill process times are long because current practice
              involves dispensing a filled epoxy resin along the edges of the chip and
              relying on capillary flow (i.e. a surface-tension-driven effect) to fill the
              space between chip and substrate.  Because of the small driving force, this is
              unavoidably slow, requiring anywhere from one to ten minutes to underfill a
              typical chip.  This is clearly unacceptable as an in-line process in
              mass-production.  In this project an alternative encapsulation process with a
              significantly shorter duration on the order of seconds, rather than minutes 
              will be explored.  This will involve using positive pressure as a driving force
              in some kind of miniaturized transfer-molding process.  The project will also
              include characterization of encapsulant properties (such as rheology and curing
              kinetics) as well as process modeling.  Such property characterization and
              modeling can be used to optimize the process.  Current underfill materials
              require cure times on the order of hours (this long cure time is due to the
              long filling time), thus requiring that the process be done in a batch mode,
              and do not allow for subsequent removal for repair if chip or board proves to
              be defective.  However, the new process to be developed will allow for
              considerably more flexibility in materials selection.  With the possibility of
              replacing current epoxy-based thermoset encapsulants with faster-curing
              thermosets or even with a thermoplastic polymer.  The latter would allow
              repairability of the board, when required.     Close collaboration with
              industry ensures that this research is not only relevant  to the electronics
              manufacturing sector but also that if successful, it will have the necessary
              market pull for bringing the technology into commercialization.  The flip-chip
              market is estimated at only 5% of the total semi conductor chip sector with the
              most applications in the automotive industry (for example sensors for air bags
              and sensors for electronic fuel injectors).  Successful completion of this
              research has the potential to drive down the manufacturing cost and enable
              repairability option in the flip chip allowing for far wider applications into
              the computer and telecommunications industries.
