Title       : Stochastic Scheduling Methods for Queueing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1995  
File        : a9522795

Award Number: 9522795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Van Oyen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522795  Van Oyen   This research focuses on scheduling and release/admission
              control in systems for which the production process entails heterogeneous job
              types, service times, service delay penalties, and due dates as well as
              significant random variability in any or all of the following aspects: arrival
              process, job service times, and set-up overhead. In addition, the research
              develops models and methods of analysis for system control subject to
              incomplete observations of system state information. To achieve this, the
              research focuses on the development of an integrated analysis and design
              methodology to perform dynamic resource allocation for an extended class of
              polling models to address dynamic (state-dependent) control for queuing systems
              with incomplete state observations, set-up times/costs, and target production
              levels. The approach incorporates three core elements: (1) the characterization
              of optimal dynamic policies, (2) the computation of approximately optimal
              policies, and (3) the summary of insights gained from theoretical and numerical
              investigations in a set of operating principles for a class of problem
              instances.  This research will culminate in the development of a methodology
              for the analysis and design of dynamia control algorithms for the control of
              queuing systems with incomplete state observations.   Advanced scheduling and
              production control algorithms promise to yield significant performance
              advantages to manufacturing operations that employ them, provided they are
              built upon deeply rooted concepts. This research addresses a class of control
              problems in queuing networks that center on scheduling policies (and their
              interaction with release policies) for systems with significant switching
              (set-up) times and incomplete observation of the system state.  The results
              from this research will impact a class of problems in resource allocation
              directly relevant to a broad range of manufacturing facilities. Moreover, the
              models, methods, and control algorithms developed will be u seful in emerging
              information networks and systems, which contain similar optimization issues.
