Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics and Control of Complex Patterns in Distributed Chemical
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9522277

Award Number: 9522277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187256             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsueh-Chia Chang chang.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Chang - 9522277         Coherent Structures, like fronts and pulses
              drive the dynamics in reactor instabilities and transients, fast-igniting
              catalytic converters, reactive chromatographs and electrophoresis devices,
              ceramic synthesis, etc.  The PI has established empirically that such structure
              dynamics are low-dimensional and hence readily controllable and has developed
              the theoretical tools and computer software to capture the nonlinear dynamics
              and implement nonlinear feedback control, typically with a video sensor.    The
              PI plans to use his theory to classify and decipher all coherent-structure
              dynamics involving fronts, pulses, spiral waves, etc. in a general framework. 
              Guided by the theory, an scheme will be developed to estimate the spectra of
              thermal fronts and concentration pulses from IR thermal and video imaging.  The
              scheme will use multi-resolution windowed wavelets to compress the pixel data
              during estimation and feedback control.  This scheme will then will be used to
              study and control several coherent-structure driven dynamics with important
              potential applications.  Thermal flickering control with multiple hot spots and
              thermal fronts will be attempted.  A feedback control scheme will be developed
              to stabilize thermal fronts in a catalytic converter during transient driving
              conditions.  Interfacial waves on a wetted- wall column will be structured
              through feedback control to maximize heat/mass transfer in pollutant scrubbing
              processes.  A video-feedback control experiment will be designed to control the
              speed, width and integrity of a concentration pulse in a miniature reactive
              chromatograph to enhance detectability and separation.
