Title       : GOALI/IUCP: Stretch Forming of Aluminum Extruded Tubes for Automotive
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9522774

Award Number: 9522774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103202             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stelios Kyriakides skk@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Farhang Pourboghrat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522774  Kyriakides      The automotive industry is continuously seeking ways to
              reduce vehicle weight without compromising safety in order to increase fuel
              efficiency and increase payload capacity.  Iron and steel account for the bulk
              of the total vehicle weight.  Aluminum alloys with density of less than half of
              steel has the potential to lower vehicle weight substantially.  The aerospace
              industry already has considerable experience in the use of aluminum. 
              Translating that experience into automotive industry, a new body design called
              space frame has been developed.  Aluminum alloys are extruded into tubes which
              are assembled into a space frame.  Dimensional tolerances required on these
              cold formed tubes are high for ease of assembly in an automated process.  One
              problem encountered in bending a thin walled tube is the distortion of the
              cross section.  The current approach is to internally pressurize the tubes and
              by trial and error arrive at the optimum manufacturing process.  In this
              research, the feasibility of developing a forming model to arrive at the least
              distortion loading path (pressure-tension-curvature) will be evaluated. 
              Limited experimental verification of the model will be carried out.  If
              successful, this research would lay the foundation for a closed loop control
              stretch forming of aluminum tubes.       The automotive industry is a very
              large sector of the total manufacturing industry.  Increase in fuel efficiency
              has been a driver in this industry with many concurrent benefits. 
              Environmental benefit is one major factor with reduced emission along with
              lower vehicle operating cost to the consumer.  While the industry has made
              continuous improvements towards this goal, replacement of steel by aluminum has
              the potential for a major reduction in vehicle weight with concurrent benefit
              in fuel efficiency.  This cooperative industry/university research is seeking
              the most optimum manufacturing process to make this materials substitution an
              attractive option for the automotive indu stry.
