Title       : Interior-Point Algorithms: Theories and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1998 
File        : a9522507

Award Number: 9522507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yinyu Ye yinyu-ye@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522507  Ye   The objective of this research is to develop and analyze
              interior-point algorithms and their variants for solving large-scale linear,
              quadratic, and nonlinear optimization problems that arise in production
              management and resource allocation. In the research, work will be performed to
              strengthen results obtained from prior research and explore new techniques for
              improving linear and nonlinear programming algorithms. The results of the
              research will be tested by solving  actual industrial problems. Details of the
              research include (1) complexity analysis with the objective of developing
              complexity theory for linear programming (LP), (2) development of algorithms to
              extend LP-interior point algorithms to solve nonlinear optimization problems
              arising from engineering design and control, (3) decomposition and column
              generation  for the development of interior point algorithms for solving
              large-scale, semi-infinite dimensional, and combinatorial optimization
              problems, and (4) implementation of the developed interior-point algorithms and
              development of public-domain computer programs based on the implementation.   
              The findings and discoveries from this research will strengthen and improve
              theoretical results and practical performance of interior point algorithms.
              This will lead to the development of new efficient algorithms for a variety of
              optimization problems. Progress in the development of efficient algorithms for
              solving large-scale optimization problems improves the efficiency of
              manufacturing systems, communication networks, aircraft routing, multiple-flow
              operations, and resource planning. Strengthening research in this area will
              contribute to the national interest in industrial competitiveness and
              scientific knowledge.
