Title       : New Directions In Convolutional Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9522939

Award Number: 9522939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Costello costello.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Convolutional codes have long been recognized as the preferred  method of
              providing error control over a variety of communication  channels. Examples of
              their practical application can be found in  deep space communication, digital
              satellite transmission, military  communications, mobile cellular telephony,
              and high speed data  modems. Despite the many examples of their practical
              importance,  relatively little research has been conducted into the fundamental
               properties of convolutional codes, compared to other methods of  error
              control. This project is a program of basic research into  several new
              approaches to finding efficient methods of encoding and  decoding convolutional
              codes. Spurred by recent advances in trellis  coded modulation, iterative
              decoding techniques, and the decoding  of very complex codes, five areas of
              research are undertaken:  cascaded convolutional codes, multilevel
              convolutional codes,  product convolutional codes, non-standard rate
              convolutional codes,  and unbalanced memory convolutional codes. The goal is to
              uncover  new code structures which can offer better trade-offs between error 
              performance, decoder complexity, and system delay than the standard  structure.
              Particular emphasis is given to studying the fundamental  role that delay plays
              in determining the relationship between  performance and complexity. The
              results of this research may  provide viable alternatives to existing coding
              schemes in  applications such as low earth orbiting satellite networks, digital
               mobile cellular communications, and wireless indoor packet  transmissiol
              systems.
