Title       : Dissertation Research: Zooarchaeology and Taphonomy of Late Archaic
               Hunter-Gatherers in New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1995      
File        : a9522828

Award Number: 9522828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4568               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, Mr. T. Cregg Madrigal will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct laboratory analysis
              of faunal remains from two Late Archaic sites which are located in New York
              State and date to approximately four thousand years ago. One site, Lamoka Lake,
              located in Schuyler County was the subject of extensive excavation in the 1920s
              and again in the 1980s. It has yielded thousands of animal bones as well as
              other cultural materials. Excavation at the second site, Cole Quarry, in
              Livingston County, uncovered over 9000 bones. Mr. Madrigal will conduct an
              extensive analysis of both collections. He will identify bones to taxon and
              element to determine the diversity, richness, relative abundance and
              skeletal-part representation of species present. He will also examine cut marks
              on bones to determine how they were butchered and the degree of alteration due
              to post depositional disturbance. Mortality profiles of deer with be
              constructed to determine hunting techniques and season of death. Analysis of
              other species, such as migratory birds, will also provide information on the
              season of site occupation.  Mr. Madrigal, together with many anthropologists,
              is interested in the process which leads to the development of complex
              societies. The question is why and how do nomadic hunting and gathering peoples
              gradually settle down, aggregate into large groups, and develop hierarchical
              social systems. It is this process which leads to societies we observe in the
              world today. The Late Archaic marks a very early stage in this story and
              through analysis of faunal remains Mr. Madrigal hopes to gain insight into how
              this process starts. He should be able to determine the degree of
              sedentarization and the extent to which social differentiation occurred.  This
              research will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new
              light on how social complexity develops and assist in the training of a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
