Title       : Collaborative Research: Antarctic Dry Valley Nematode Communities:
               Establishment, Function, and Response to Disturbance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9522665

Award Number: 9522665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83656              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross A. Virginia Ross.A.Virginia@Dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. P. Chamberlain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1097,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9522665     Virginia  Nematodes, microscopic roundworms, are among the most
              complex  animals capable of survival in the soils of the Antarctic Dry 
              Valleys.  If dispersal of nematodes to habitats is uniform and  unlimited by
              geographical constraints, communities of nematodes  could potentially establish
              in all soils of the Dry Valleys of  Antarctica, as they do in other ecosystems
              studied.  Nematode  distribution in the Dry Valleys is patchy.  It follows that
               dispersal rates are low, or the establishment of nematode  communities is
              governed by the suitability of potential habitats  and the ability of nematodes
              to survive harsh environmental  conditions.  Habitat suitability may be defined
              by such factors as  carbon availability or salinity.  This research project is 
              organized around central hypotheses that move from individual to  ecosystem
              scales in order to understand how nematodes disperse,  survive, and develop
              functional communities in Antarctic Dry  Valley soils.  The hypotheses are: (1)
              nematode community function  is more influenced by desiccation than
              temperature, and (2)  habitat suitability, not dispersal, is the major factor 
              determining establishment and maintenance of nematode communities  in the Dry
              Valleys. To test these hypotheses, field work will be  conducted to examine the
              characteristics of habitats that appear  suitable for nematode community growth
              and establishment by  sampling from a variety of sites, encompassing a wide
              range of  salinities, moistures, and carbon contents.  Stable isotope  studies
              (C and N) will provide information on sources of C  entering soil ecosystems
              and supporting nematodes. Dispersal will  be examined with traps in the field,
              and molecular techniques in  the laboratory to investigate the genetic
              variability that exists  between widely distributed nematodes with similar
              morphological  characteristics. The survival strategies of nematodes will be 
              examined under field and laboratory conditions to better  understand how these
              animals are able to  persist under harsh  climatic conditions.  In addition,
              the soil food web serves as a  sensitive indicator of environmental change,
              particularly in this  ecosystem, where biodiversity is low and resource
              allocation is  primarily invested in survival.  Any knowledge about the degree
              of  influence of such change, as well as the influence of various  physical and
              chemical soil characteristics, can ultimately  extrapolated to other
              environments.
