Title       : GOALI: Transition Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9522564

Award Number: 9522564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaman Arkun yaman.arkun@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Arkun - Georgia Tech - 9522564    Nowadays chemical plants use the same
              equipment to produce a wider variety of products.  For higher productivity and
              better utilization of resources, the equipment must be easily adaptable to
              different operating regimes resulting from changes in raw materials, product
              specifications, market demands, different energy sources and other external
              disturbances.  Production of undesired materials, loss of product quality and
              unsafe operation are attributed to control problems encountered during long
              periods of plant transitions between different regimes.    The objective of
              this research program is to investigate the fundamental issues related to the
              design and implementation of transition control systems.  The PI plans to
              develop and test new theoretical approaches, and transfer the theory into
              useful industrial practice.  His approach stems from a unified treatment of
              certain modeling, monitoring, control and plant-wide optimization issues
              underlying the transition control problem.  It is often difficult to develop a
              single first principles model which describes the plant dynamics over all the
              operating conditions; neither is it practical to identify such a model from
              input-output data.  Therefore, quantitative tools are first proposed to
              partition the plant operating space into local model descriptions that are
              validated at the individual regimes.  Next these models are combined into a
              global model in order to explain the plant behavior in transition regions as
              well.  Different global modeling techniques are planned, including model
              matching, output weighting, linear parameter varying systems (LPV) and neural
              nets with self-organized learning.  Based on recent model validation results, a
              method is given to quantify the uncertainty associated with these global
              models.  The transition controllers will be designed based on the global model
              and have the following properties: (1) they are robust control laws which
              guarantee a certain level of performance during transiti ons, and (2) they
              reduce to local regulatory controllers, when the plant operates in its isolated
              regimes.  For design purposes different approaches will be studied including
              robust scheduling and predictive control using LPV or self-organized neural net
              models.    The implementation of transition controllers within the context of
              plant-wide control will be tackled.  This will include interfacing with the
              lower level feedback loops (PIDs) and coordination with the higher level
              optimization task where scheduling of transition objectives is performed. 
              During the course of this research the PI will collaborate with the research
              group at DuPont (this is a GOALI project).  It is anticipated that the control
              methodology will help alleviate the generic transition problems encountered in
              industrial processes and improve plant operations.
