Title       : Implicity Restarted GMRES and Arnoldi Methods for Nonsymmetric Systems of
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9522612

Award Number: 9522612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56189              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald B. Morgan Ronald_Morgan@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Morgan  9522612  In this project, improvements of the restarted GMRES method for
               solving large nonsymmetric systems of linear equations will be  investigated. 
              The goal is to develop a method that is  competitive with short recurrence
              Lanczos methods such as QMR,  but maintains the desirable properties of GMRES. 
              These  properties include extraction of the minimum residual solution  from the
              subspace, generally steady convergence, and numerical  stability.  It is also
              desired to not significantly raise cost  per iteration and storage
              requirements.    The convergence of GMRES can be improved by including
              approximate  eigenvectors in the subspace.  Once these eigenvalues are 
              essentially deflated from the spectrum of the matrix, removing  even just a few
              small eigenvalues from the spectrum can  significantly improve the convergence.
               In this project a new and  efficient way of including eigenvectors is
              proposed.  Sorensen's  implicit-QR Arnoldi method for eigenvalues is combined
              with an  interior eigenvalue version of Arnoldi.  The surprising result is 
              that the approximate eigenvectors become part of a new Krylov  subspace.  This
              Krylov subspace can be used with GMRES.  The  expense per iteration is even
              less than that of regular GMRES for  the case where matrix-vector products are
              expensive, and the  number of iterations needed is sometimes greatly reduced.  
               The resulting implicitly restarted GMRES method will be studied  and compared
              with other methods.  ***
