Title       : Travel Grants for Graduate Students and Independent Scholars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1999       
File        : a9522049

Award Number: 9522049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith R. Benson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : History of Science Soc
	      University of Washington
	      Seattle, WA  981951330    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This five year grant provides funds for travel by graduate students and
              independent scholars to attend the annual meetings of the History of Science
              Society, the Philosophy of Science Association, the Society for History of
              Technology and the Society for Social Studies of Science.  All four societies
              have long prided themselves on their reputation as open organizations, eager to
              embrace scholars from many fields of work who share an interest in historical,
              philosophical, and social scientific studies of science and technology.  This
              attitude of openness has also extended to the societies' efforts to involve
              junior scholars not only in the meetings as presenters but also in the
              governance of the societies and in the honors bestowed by the societies.  All
              four societies have prizes and awards that specifically target graduate
              students and junior scholars and include junior scholars as members of standing
               committees.  The efforts underscore the commitment of the membership to
              maintain the vitality, openness, and inclusiveness of their organizations by
              passing  valued academic traditions to their younger colleagues.  The major
              obstacle in implementing these goals is the lack of travel funds to bring
              student and independent scholars to meetings.  With universities and colleges
              restricting travel funs and the job market constricting, the opportunity of the
              most junior members, graduate students, and independent scholars of the
              societies to obtain necessary funding to attend meetings of the societies also
              constricts.  These travel grants will go a long way to provide support for
              participation of these groups.
