Title       : Minority Research Planning Grant: Reliability and Performance of Automated
               Fixed-Path Material Handling Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9522299

Award Number: 9522299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benita M. Beamon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9136,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522299  Beamon   This is a research planning grant whose objective is to
              undertake a study involving the incorporation of reliability issues in the
              design of fixed-path material handling systems. A fixed-path material handling
              system refers to a class of material handling devices that operate on dedicated
              paths.  The research is built on the premise that reliability issues can affect
              the performance of automated fixed-path material handling systems and that the
              use of appropriate performance and reliability measures will allow for a more
              accurate and realistic evaluations of such systems. With this premise, the
              research aims to pursue (1) the development of quantitative methods for
              defining, modeling, and measuring system failures, reliability, and
              performability for fixed-path material handling systems, and (2) the 
              determination and modeling of relevant trade-offs between systems design and
              material handling reliability or performability. The developed procedures will
              enable fixed-path material handling systems designers to design, compare, and
              evaluate the true performance characteristics of such systems. The work to be
              undertaken during the life of this grant will be exploratory in nature. The
              research outcome will be used in the preparation of a more detailed proposal
              aimed at an in-depth pursuit of the research concerns explored under the
              research planning grant.    Material handling, as a key component in most
              manufacturing systems, have been well recognized as a major contributor to
              production cost. Material handling provides the link between machines stations
              in the flow of material. In highly automated manufacturing systems such as a
              flexible manufacturing system (FMS), the consequences of a material handling
              system failure is a complete shut down of the entire operation. Not only does
              this result to increase in production cost but also increased order throughput
              time and missed order due dates. The work undertaken in this research can lead
              to improved system design to lessen failure  frequency, provide an assessment
              tool for the need of a preventive maintenance program, and also as a tool to
              evaluate alternate material handling systems and designs. It will also
              contribute to a better understanding of the stochastic behavior of a material
              handling system.
