Title       : Dynamics and "Phase Behavior" of Foams and Concentrated Emulsions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9522710

Award Number: 9522710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eli Ruckenstein feaeliru@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Eli Ruckenstein  CTS-9522710  SUNY Buffalo    The stability of foams
              and concentrated liquid-liquid emulsions is a necessary prerequisite for their
              utilization in any practical application.  Gravity driven drainage of the
              continuous phase which takes place primarily through an interconnected network
              of Plateau border channels (formed between adjacent bubbles) plays a pivotal
              role in determining their stability since there is considerable interplay
              between drainage and collapse.  A systematic study of drainage is therefore
              important in understanding the instability in these systems.  A unified
              theoretical treatment of drainage is proposed which takes into account the
              separation of the continuous and dispersed phases.  The problem will be treated
              in two ways:  a conventional macroscopic approach in which balances are
              formulated over bulk differential elements containing a large number of bubbles
              and a microscopic approach in which the dispersed phase droplets are
              represented by Voronoi polyhedral and detailed balances are written over each
              Plateau border channel in the complex network.  The latter approach will enable
              us to clearly identify the effect of the polydispersivity of the dispersed
              phase on the drainage process.  An attempt will be made to relate the results
              from the two approaches to formulate a corrected macroscopic model which is
              computationally more tractable.  Inspection of the equations suggests that it
              is possible to determine based on the initial state of concentrated emulsion
              which phase separates out before a drainage equilibrium, which corresponds to a
              balance between the Plateau border suction and gravity, is established.  It
              should be emphasized that this equilibrium is not thermodynamic; liquid-liquid
              concentrated emulsions are, however, expected to remain in this mechanical
              equilibrium for a long time.  An attempt will be made to establish a phase
              diagram based on the initial state of the system.  Simple experiments are
              proposed to verify the theoretical predicti ons.
