Title       : Dissertation Research: Language Socialization and Language Maintenance in a
               Hasidic Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9522671

Award Number: 9522671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bambi B. Schieffelin bs4@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Despite predictions after World War II that Yiddish would  disappear,
              Yiddish has thrived alongside English and Hebrew in  many New York Hasidic
              communities, including the Bobover Hasidim  of Boro Park, Brooklyn. Yiddish is
              critical to Bobover ethnic  identity. The cultural meanings of Yiddish,
              however, are  established in contrast to patterns of English use. These 
              patterns of language choice - Yiddish and English - are gendered.  In this
              project I use the language socialization research  paradigm to investigate
              activities through which young children  become competent members of a groups
              whose identity is enacted  through gendered language practices and other self
              and community  defining activities. My research will be based on the analysis
              of  audiotaped natural speech between caregivers and four focal  children in
              contexts of home and school as well as analysis of  English and Yiddish
              children's literature published by the  community. To date, there has been no
              research which focuses on  Hasidic children and multilingual acquisition and
              practices. The  Bobover provide a particularly illuminating case study for 
              language socialization because language maintenance (especially  Yiddish) and
              the reproduction of social identity are so tightly  linked in this community.
              This study will be relevant more  broadly for understandings of gender and
              religious  fundamentalism, processes of social reproduction and change, as 
              well as the relationship between Jewish ethnic identities and  languages.
