Title       : Aggregation for Large-Scale Location Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9522882

Award Number: 9522882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Francis Francis@ISE.UFL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522882  Francis   This research is concerned with the location of a facility to
              serve a large number of customers.  A common measure of the quality of a
              location decision is the distances that  customers will have to travel to
              receive service from the facility. However, when the customer pool is large,
              the sources of customers may be aggregated to reduce problem size and improve
              computational efficiency. The objective of this research is to employ
              aggregation methods to develop and solve facility location problems and to use
              the model to calibrate the quality or error associated with such aggregation
              since aggregation involves using approximate customer locations instead of
              actual locations. Approximate locations obviously lead to an approximate
              solution for the distances customers will actually travel to reach  the
              facility. The research will develop and test aggregation methods which are
              designed to control error and exploit special problem structures to improve
              computational efficiency. The testing process will involve both computer
              implementation of the methods and testing using real-world data.    The use of
              aggregation/approximation is very common in applied facility location when
              there are many facility users/customers. Despite the common acceptance of the
              approach, little analytical work exists to evaluate the quality or error of
              aggregation schemes.  The developed aggregation and testing algorithms in this
              research are designed to keep approximation error small. Thus, the algorithm
              should be useful to urban and regional planners, transportation/logistics
              specialists, and geographers who must choose aggregation schemes for large
              -scale location problems.
