Title       : Human-Aided Hierarchical Drug Delivery Control System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9522639

Award Number: 9522639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429960             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Wayne Bequette bequette@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Kaufman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Rob J. Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9522639  Kaufman  Critical care patients have often suffered a disturbance to
              the  normal operation of their cardiovascular system; this disturbance  could
              have been generated by surgery or some sort of trauma.  A  responsibility of
              the critical care physician is to maintain  certain patient states within an
              acceptable operating range.  Often, the anesthesiologist will infuse several
              drugs into the  patient to control these states close to the desired values, 
              historically, this has been done using a manual (open-loop)  strategy.   
              Towards the important goal of using feedback for aiding the  anesthesiologist,
              the Departments of Biomedical (BME), Chemical  (CHE), and Electrical, Computer,
              and Systems (ECSE) Engineering  at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute are
              proposing an  interdisciplinary research project in the development and 
              analysis of a human-aided supervisory adaptive control system and  its
              application to a representative drug delivery system.  This  system will
              regulate the infusion of multiple drugs in order to  simultaneously steer
              several hemodynamic states (eg blood  pressure, cardiac output) towards desired
              values.  This system  can also be considered as an interactive human aided
              supervisory  system in which the human operator or anesthesiologist commands 
              the desired state and interacts with the control drug selection  logic.  From a
              set of measured signals, the patient state is  constructed and then used by the
              anesthesiologist to command a  desired state and with the help of a supervisory
              program, to  select the controls or drugs.  These drugs, along with the 
              commanded values, are then used by the control system to steer  the states
              towards their commanded values.  Fuzzy and adaptive  control concepts are to be
              used and an expert system will be used  to select the proper (adaptive or
              fuzzy) controllers for the drug  infusion rates.    The novel contributions
              expected to result from the proposed  research include:         A system that
              manipulates the infusion of a variety of     drugs, in response to some trauma,
              in a manner so as to steer the    hemodynamic states towards their desired
              values.         Procedures for studying the behavior of complex nonlinear   
              systems that include a mixture of fuzzy controllers and    conventional and/or
              adaptive controllers.         Procedures for deciding what controls or drugs
              should be    used and which should be nulled out for a specific state and   
              mission.    Control strategies that incorporate almost continuous  measurements
              of cardiac output.  ***
