Title       : Dynamical Model of Stormtime Ring Current
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9522288

Award Number: 9522288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret W. Chen mchen@aero.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence R. Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerospace Corporation
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  90009    /   -

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                           This is a project to develop and use a dynamical model for 
              studying the growth and decay of the stormtime ring current.   The ring current
              is a complex region of the magnetosphere in  which particle transport and loss,
              magnetic and electric  fields, and plasma wave effects are critical processes. 
              The  investigators have developed a guiding center simulation  model and a
              transport model of ring current ions the test  the understanding of fundamental
              mechanisms involved in the  formation of the stormtime ring current.  The
              models are  able to quantitatively account for the increase in energy  content
              associated with magnetic storms.  This study will  build upon the existing
              model to gain a better understanding  of the unresolved physical processes
              responsible for growth  and decay of the ring current.  The modeling efforts
              will  determine the role of electrons, assess the stability of the  ring
              current against ion cyclotron wave growth, investigate  the role of the waves
              in ring current decay, and quantify  the relative importance of ionospheric and
              solar wind  plasmas in the ring current.  The simulation results will be 
              applied to observations obtained by the Combined Release and  Radiation Effects
              Satellite.
