Title       : Giant Magnetoresistance of the Two Dimensional Electron Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1995  
File        : a9522915

Award Number: 9522915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shou-Cheng Zhang sczhang@quantum.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9522915  Zhang  This project is part of the Grant Opportunities for Academic 
              Liaison with Industry (GOALI) initiative at NSF.  The  project is an
              industry-university collaboration between  Stanford University and IBM Almaden
              research center,  especially Dr. Barbara Jones.  The investigators are using 
              both analytic calculations and extensive numerical  simulations to understand
              giant magnetoresistence of the two-  dimensional electron gas.  The project
              also includes  interaction with the experimental colleagues at both IBM  (such
              as Dr. Stuart Parkin) and Stanford (such as Prof.  Charlie Marcus), and
              interaction with the IBM development  and manufacturing divisions in San Jose
              to understand long  term issues and share developments.  The project represents
               a synergy between research in magnetism, semiconductors, and  mesoscopic
              physics.  Successful completion could eventually  benefit the computer industry
              by integrating magnetic  recording with the semiconductor devises.  It will
              also  educate and train a new generation of young physicists with  both the
              capability of pure research and the experience of  industrial development.  %%%
               This project is part of the Grant Opportunities for Academic  Liaison with
              Industry (GOALI) initiative at NSF.  The  project is an industry-university
              collaboration between  Stanford University and IBM Almaden research center, 
              especially Dr. Barbara Jones.  The investigators are using  both analytic
              calculations and extensive numerical  simulations to understand dramatic
              changes in semiconducting  interfaces due to the application of an external
              magnetic  field.  The project also includes interaction with the  experimental
              colleagues at both IBM (such as Dr. Stuart  Parkin) and Stanford (such as Prof.
              Charlie Marcus), and  interaction with the IBM development and manufacturing 
              divisions in San Jose to understand long term issues and  share developments. 
              The project represents a synergy  between research in magnetism,
              semiconductors, and  mesoscopic physics.  Su ccessful completion could
              eventually  benefit the computer industry by integrating magnetic  recording
              with the semiconductor devises.  It will also  educate and train a new
              generation of young physicists with  both the capability of pure research and
              the experience of  industrial development.  ***
