Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Produce a World Wide Web Program of the Conference on
               Statistical Challenge– and Possible Approaches in the Analysis of Massive Data
               Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9522317

Award Number: 9522317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Alexander   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 95-22317  PI:  John Alexander  Institution:  National Academy of
              Sciences  Title:  Produce a World Wide Wed Program of the Conference on
              Statistical Challenges and Possible Approaches in the Analysis of Massive Data
              Sets       ABSTRACT    The workshop on Statistics and Massive Data Sets, 
              hosted by   the  Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics  of the
              National Research Council,   focuses on how to deal effectively with  massive
              amounts of data  that need statistical analyses. In numerous practical
              contexts, researchers   are confronted with the inadequacy of standard
              statistical techniques  to handle the explosion in the size of current data
              sets, where the  number of observations can easily run into the giga- and even
              terabyte  ranges.   Statistical assumptions underlying many  of the most
              popular methods, such as "homogeneity" of the data,  may simply be wrong  in
              these cases, thus rendering common statistical  tools ineffective and even
              dangerous.   A corresponding problem is the growth in the  number of dimensions
              in many current problems.  Again standard  approaches, which were developed  in
              a different  era, even predating the computer in many cases, are not powerful 
              enough for these challenges.      The workshop on Statistics and Massive
              Datasets explores  the challenges  presented by massive data sets, and  does so
              in the context   of a variety of real world and currently pressing application
              areas, including  the atmospheric, biological and geo sciences, business and
              marketing,  ecology, and engineering and technology. With these areas as a
              backdrop,   specific over-arching multi-disciplinary research issues  on common
              needs,   including relevant statistical principles, computational aspects, data
              analysis, and  visualization of massive data sets are identified.   The
              workshop involves highly  animated discussions among scientists.  These
              discussions are not easily  captured in a traditional published proceedings
              format.  In contrast, the  activities are capture d and distributed via the
              preparation of a videotape  of the workshop followed by a World Wide Web (WWW)
              dissemination.   This new dissemination method brings the benefit   of the
              actual discussions to a wide audience in a timely fashion.
