Title       : Structural Effects on Interdiffusion, Entanglement, and Ultimate Mechanical
               Behavior of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9522596

Award Number: 9522596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie H. Sperling lhs0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea B. Kirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9522596  Sperling    This proposal was submitted under the GOALI program and
              involves the collaboration of Lehigh University and Rohm and Haas Corp. in an
              industrially important program of research.    The objective of this proposal
              is to provide a study of the structural effects of polymers on interdiffusion,
              entanglement, and ultimate mechanical behavior.  The focus will be the effect
              ofionic end group substitution and x1 on interdiffusion.  A direct comparison
              of the diffusion coefficients, depth of interdiffusion, and volume fraction of
              mixing will be determined on various polymer pairs, one of which contains
              deuterium, chromophores, or both, with the objective of determining the
              relative advantages and potential drawbacks of measurements via small-angle
              neuron methods are being used successfully, no direct comparison of the two
              methods has yet been made.  In particular, positive x1 values are known to
              exist in deuterated-protonated polymer pairs, and a similar effect may exist in
              donor-acceptor pair chemistry.  The size of the donor and acceptor chromophores
              may impede interdiffusion.  Mechanical measurements on selected films are
              planned, to provide a more complete picture of the interdiffusion phenomenon,
              and to allow evaluation of scaling law relationships.    A series of
              anionically made polystyrenes and polymethacrylates containing deuterium or
              hydrogen, or donor acceptor fluorescent chromophores, or both kinds of labels
              will be obtained, with appropriate modification carried  out in house. 
              Polymers made via anionic polymerization and formed into latexes via
              interdiffusion observe by small-angle neutron scattering and non-radiative
              energy transfer, as appropriate.  Variables will include polymer molecular
              weight, time, and temperature of annealing of the films, and extent of labeling
              with various groups.    A series of new experiments are planned to explore the
              possibility of a thermodynamic acceleration.  Here, slightly negative x1 values
              may result in a more rapid interdiffusion of  polymer chains, with concomitant
              more rapid development of strength in the resulting films.    This will be a
              cooperative research between Rohm and Haas and Lehigh University personnel. 
              Rohm and Haas is committing $100,000 towards the successful completion of their
              portion of the research.  This research will be helpful in developing
              water-based coating technology, minimizing the need for solvents, plasticizers,
              or coalescing aids.  ***
