Title       : NSF-CGP Science & Engineering Fellowship Program: Studies of the Solar Corona
               Using Simultaneous X-ray and Radio Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9522723

Award Number: 9522723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mukul R. Kundu kundu@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Mukul Kundu of the Department 
              of Astronomy , University of Maryland at College Park and Dr. Takashi Sakurai
              of the National Astronomical Observatory, Mitaka, Japan.  Project funding will
              permit Dr. Kundu to spend 6 months in Japan, resident in Mitaka, in order to
              study the sun's corona using simultaneously obtained X-ray and radio
              observations with the Japanese Space mission Yohkoh and ground based radio
              telescopes.  Dr. Kundu has made pioneering contributions to the knowledge of
              the sun's corona using combined radio and X-ray imaging data.  Dr. Sakurai will
              bring his theoretical expertise to the problem of studying solar active regions
              and flares from the point of view of magnetic energy storage and trigger
              mechanisms.  They will jointly study a broad range of solar coronal phenomena :
              study of  X-ray emission above sunspots, study of radio emission associated
              with coronal jets, study of the evolution of active regions in terms of flare
              productivity.  This proposal brings together research scientists from two
              countries working in the area of solar coronal physics.  The U.S. scientist
              will have the opportunity to become familiar with research techniques related
              to Yohkoh X-ray techniques while contributing to the overall research effort.
              Therefore this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange
              and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international collaboration.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
