Title       : Real-Time Monitoring of the Solidification Front in Metal Casting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1997  
File        : a9522973

Award Number: 9522973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ming C. Leu                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jung-Hoon Chun jchun@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nannaji Saka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Lanza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522973  Chun   Real-time monitoring of the solidification front in metal
              casting operations will greatly enhance manufacturing productivity.  In the
              casting of aluminum alloys for example, the shape, location, and velocity of
              the solidification front affect casting speed, ingot integrity, and
              macrosegregation.  Ingot recovery loss due to cracking now amounts to as much
              as 10% for both aerospace and common alloys.  At present, information on the
              solidification front is obtained either experimentally or numerically. 
              Experimental methods include installation of a thermocouple-tree in the
              solidification zone, measurement of the secondary dendrite arm spacing of cast
              ingots, or by "doping" the liquid metal with grain refiners.  While these
              techniques provide valuable information on the solidification front, they
              cannot be used for on-line, closed-loop control of the process.  Efforts have
              also focused on the three-dimensional numerical ingot casting models to
              simulate, for example, mold filling and start-up and steady-state conditions. 
              Although much progress has been made, there is no direct method of verifying
              these numerical models.  In the current research, using high energy (5-10 MeV)
              gamma rays generated by a compact, linear electron accelerator (LINAC), the
              differences in gamma ray transmissivity due to differences in the density of
              the solid and liquid metals will be measured.  Because the attenuation
              coefficients of the liquid and solid metals are about the same but their
              densities are different (typically 4-12 percent), it is possible to estimate
              the liquid (or solid) fraction of metal in a solidifying ingot.  Moreover, by
              scanning the gamma ray beam across the solidifying ingot appropriately, a
              three-dimensional image of the solidification front can be obtained using the
              reconstruction techniques of computerized tomography.  The direct result of the
              proposed work would be an enabling technology for the on-line monitoring of
              solidification front and the closed-loop control of casting oper ations. 
              Expected research outcomes are: (i) design and fabrication of a sensor system,
              (ii) identification of characteristic signals that reveal such undesirable
              process conditions as ingot cracking and breakout, and (iii) characterization
              of the extent and morphology of the mushy zone at the solidification front.    
                   In primary metals processing, ingots are cast and rolled or slabs are
              continuously cast.  The final property of the product is strongly influenced by
              what goes on at the molten metal and frozen solid interface.  This is a dynamic
              state and there are no known non-invasive monitoring techniques that can lead
              to feedback control interface.  If this innovative idea works, the casting
              industry could benefit by cutting waste and rework, which could translate into
              driving down the manufacturing cost while concurrently improving the quality.
