Title       : Direct Dynamics for the Electrode-Electrolyte Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9522286

Award Number: 9522286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Woods Halley woods@jwhp.spa.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1037,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9522286  Halley  This project constructs computational models to describe the 
              electrode-electrolyte interface, with particular emphasis on  models of metal
              electrodes and aqueous electrolytes.  Using  direct dynamics methods, which
              have not been applied to  these interfaces by others before, the electronic
              structure  of the constituents of the interface is recalculated at each  step
              of the simulation of the atomic motion.  More  traditional methods are
              qualitatively incorrect because of  the mobility of the molecules of the
              liquid.  Preliminary  work is being improved upon in several stages, beginning 
              with the inclusion of nonlocal pseudopotentials and various  computational
              improvements to study the potential dependence  of the interfacial capacitance.
               The next stage studies the  reconstruction of noble metal surfaces under
              potential  control in electrochemical environments.  The third stage 
              investigates deposition and dissolution.  Progress in the  proposed directions
              will contribute to understanding  chemical reactions at interfaces in diverse
              technological  contexts, including catalysis, corrosion, electroplating,  and
              the understanding, development, and improvement of  microelectronic processing
              techniques and advanced  batteries.  %%%  This project constructs computer
              models to describe the  electrode-electrolyte interface, with particular
              emphasis on  models of metal electrodes and aqueous electrolytes.  Such 
              interfaces are found in batteries, fuel cells, corrosive  environments, and in
              the electronics industry.  The  investigators have developed preliminary
              computer codes of a  type that no other has ever applied to such systems. 
              Other,  more conventional approaches fail because they do not do a  good job
              describing the liquid.   The project proceeds in  three states of increasing
              complexity, eventually addressing  the change in the structure of the metal
              surface, and adding  material to or taking material away from the metal
              surface.  Progress in the proposed directions will contr ibute to 
              understanding chemical reactions at interfaces in diverse  technological
              contexts, including catalysis, corrosion,  electroplating, and the
              understanding, development, and  improvement of microelectronic processing
              techniques and  advanced batteries.  ***
