Title       : Computational Techniques for Mapping Design Features to Machining Features:
               Machining Algebra and Dimensioning and Tolerancing Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9522971

Award Number: 9522971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251495             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jami J. Shah jami.shah@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522971  Shah   This project investigates several computational techniques for
              transferring product geometry data from design to  manufacturing without human
              intervention.  The project is   divided into two parts.  The first component of
              the project is the  development of machining algebra for geometric
              representation of  tool-workpiece interaction for all machining processes. 
              This provides the mathematical basis for determining the machining  process
              that produces each machining feature on a given part.   The second component of
              the project is a computational model for  mapping dimensions and tolerances
              (D&T) while preserving the design  intent.  The key elements of the model are
              geometric building  blocks, directed geometric constraints, and degree of
              freedom  analysis for validation.  Methods for redistributing the designers 
              D&T between machining features will also be developed.   This project addresses
              a critical area of industry need, viz., design and manufacturing integration. 
              The lack of this integration  results in longer development times because
              manufacturing planning  today is a very labor-intensive activity.  The
              machining algebra  has the potential to capture the fundamental characteristics
              of common machining processes, replacing shallow heuristic rules used now,
              enhancing the degree to which manufacturing can be automated.  The methods
              proposed are generic; they are independent of particular computer aided design
              (CAD) or computer aided process planning (CAPP) systems used.  Each of the
              computational methods can be used independent of each other, making it
              attractive to incorporate them into existing CAD/CAPP systems.  This will
              enhance the communication between design and manufacturing and enhance process
              planning productivity, thus reducing time to market.
