Title       : Research Planning Grant: The Investigation of a Concurrent Approach to Design of
               Facility Layout and Automated Guided Vechicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1995  
File        : a9522733

Award Number: 9522733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fataneh Taghaboni-Dutta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9221,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522733  Taghaboni-Dutta   This is a research planning grant aimed at
              integrating decisions on the problem of facilities layout and the specification
              of guide path configuration for automated guided vehicle (AGV) system in a
              flexible manufacturing environment. Automated guided vehicles are computer
              controlled mobile material handling equipment that operate on a network of
              guide wire buried in a plant floor. The size and configuration of the guide
              wire network is a design problem whose solution depends on the characteristics
              of material flow in the shop, the  creativity of the network designer,  and the
              design criterion selected  The ultimate objective of this research  is to
              develop methodologies for the concurrent specification of  both the layout of a
              shop (i.e., the arrangement of departments or workstations) and the flow path
              of automated guided vehicles. As a prelude to the main research, the research
              planning grant will be used to undertake the background work necessary to
              prepare a full proposal that pursues the ultimate objective.  In the main
              research to be pursued, the design of the facility layout and the layout of the
              guidepath will be based on the minimization of the total travel time needed to
              move the required volume of material through the plant floor. Although the
              current  focus is on AGV system, the research experience and insight gained
              will be used to extend the work to other types of material handling systems
              such as monorails and overhead cranes.   However, in the research planning
              grant phase, the research objectives are (1) to explore similar (concurrent
              design) problems in other areas, and (2) to investigate potential solution
              techniques. The solution techniques to be investigated include simulated
              annealing and genetic algorithms.    Facilities layout and material handling
              are two highly interrelated subsystems in a manufacturing system. Despite this
              strong relationship, very little research that focused on their design
              integration have been reported. There are several  benefits that can be
              realized through the concurrent design of both the layout and the material
              handling systems of a facility. Concurrent design of a layout and an AGV system
              will lead to a more efficient material flow, less traffic control problems, and
              proper accountability and location of buffers for both idle vehicles and
              materials. Furthermore, not only will it guard against locating too far apart
              machine stations that have high material flow volume between them but also
              ensures that aisle directions for traffic flow are well oriented.  This will
              reduce shop floor congestion,  reduce work-in-process due to improved flow, and
              reduced order throughput time.
