Title       : U.S.-Russian Workshop on Sustainable Development in Russia Using Environment and
               Health Databanks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9522969

Award Number: 9522969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira Kaufman legacy@igc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Greg Guroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murray Feshbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Legacy Interntl
	      128 North Fayette Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223142902    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 5939,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9522969  Kaufman    This grant supports a two-day Joint US-Russia Workshop on 
              "Planning for Sustainable Development in Russia: Using  Environment and Health
              Databanks," to be held in the Washington,  DC, area in the last week of April,
              1995, which is to be  organized by Drs. Ira Kaufman, Greg Guroff, and Murray
              Feshbach,  under the aegis of Legacy International of Alexandria, VA, the 
              Center for Post-Soviet Studies, and the Center for Russian  Environment Policy.
               To assess Russia's influence on global  economic change requires researchers
              and policymakers to have  greater access to the Russian Federation's vast
              scientific  resources and information.  Likewise, government agencies, 
              international organizations, corporations, and Russian citizens  require the
              appropriate data to address the current environment  and health crisis, as well
              as the impact of future development.   The recent completion of the first
              "Environment and Health Atlas  of Russia" is a first step to presenting the
              wealth of Russian  data.  To integrate the atlas and other information with
              global  change initiatives, a repository for Russian environment and  health
              data sets needs to be standardized, digitalized, updated,  and translated to a
              format for policy makers.  The goal is to  outline a strategy for establishing
              a Russian electronic databank  for environment and health.  The workshop will
              fulfill this goal  by (1) examining existing Russian data initiatives and
              assess  future data needs for environment and health in Russia; (2)  presenting
              several options for applying information technology to  meet Russian data
              needs; (3) recommending the infrastructure and  standards necessary for the
              proposed databank; and (4) generating  new proposal ideas to address global
              change issues using current  data.  Delegations from government, private
              sector, non-  government organizations, and universities from the U.S. and 
              Russia will participate.  The group will address the  possibilities and
              difficulties to be encountered in creati ng a  Russian databank, as well as
              integration of the databank with  relevant international programs. 
              Participants will recommend  follow-up databank proposals, the submission of
              which, workshop  organizers will coordinate.    This project in geography and
              regional science fulfills the  program objective of advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling  leading experts in Russia and the United States to
              combine  complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong  mutual
              interest and competence.  ***
