Title       : Multilayer Diamond Composites for Heat Spreaders in Electronic Packaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1999  
File        : a9522659

Award Number: 9522659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagannadham Kasichainula jag_kasichainula@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522659  Kasichainula   This project addresses the need for higher efficiency
              heat spreaders for high frequency power devices.  The research approach is to
              take advantage of high thermal conductivity of diamond by growing  a multilayer
              composite coating to prevent the common failure of delamination of the diamond
              layer from the substrate.  The composite coatings are designed to consist of
              diamond, aluminum nitride or silicon carbide layers.  A discontinuous layer of
              diamond crystallites is grown on copper or molybdenum or silicon nitride
              substrates either by hot filament chemical vapor deposition or microwave plasma
              chemical vapor deposition.  The diamond crystallities are further embedded and
              anchored to the substrate by deposition of an interposing layer of aluminum
              nitride or silicon carbide layer by laser physical vapor depostion.  A second
              and continuous layer of diamond is deposited on the top with a smooth surface. 
              Metallization of diamond layer with deposition of thin layer of tatanium and a
              barrier layer of tungsten or chromium to prevent interaction of titanium with
              the gold-tin eutectic solder will also be carried out in-situ by laser physical
              vapor deposition in the multi-target high vacuum chamber.  The heat spreaders
              will be soldered to the device wafer using a eutectic alloy of gold-tin or
              gold-silicon that can withstand temperatures up to 500K.  Selective deposition
              of diamond multilayer structure to absorb heat from the devices, maximization
              of contact area to increase the heat flux, and epitaxial growth of diamond and
              interposing layers to reduce the thermal resistance of the interfaces in the
              composite layers are the important goals of this research.  The thickness of
              the interposing layers, the microstructure and the epitaxial growth of the
              diamond and the interposing layers will be optimized to give the highest
              thermal conductivity and good adhesion.  Improvement in resistance against
              failure from stresses generated due to high frequency thermal cycling is the
              expected bene fit of this project.  In an attempt to quantify the benefit, the
              failure mechanisms of the new and conventional heat spreaders will be
              determined by subjecting them to laser pulse radiation or high power heat bulb
              radiation and quantified by measuring the energy density at which peeling takes
              place.  The effective thermal conductivity perpendicular to the film will be
              determined by the Flash method.  Thermal cooling pattern of the power devices
              with the new heat spreaders will be investigated using the infrared detection
              of the temperature of different regions of the device.  Modeling of the thermal
              conductivity and thermal stresses in the multilayer structure will be carried
              out by numerical solution of the non-linear heat equation and finite element
              analysis, respectively.     As electronic devices shrink in size while packing
              more information per unit area and frequencies increase to speed information
              processing, local heating becomes a major problem.  The ability to effectively
              cool these devices becomes the technical barrier to further progress.  With the
              advent of diamond coating technology, an opportunity arises to use its high
              thermal conductivity to dissipate the heat.  However, another property of
              diamond, non-stickiness makes it difficult to apply as an adherent coating. 
              Successful solution of this problem as addressed in this project may have a
              major impact on the electronics industry.
