Title       : Dissertation Research: Ceramic Production in the Maya Formative: A Study of
               Ceramic Technology at K'axob, Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9522576

Award Number: 9522576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8342               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. McAnany tricia@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              McAnany    Under the direction of Dr. Patricia McAnany, Ms. Mary Lee  Angelini
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She  will analyze ceramics
              from the archaeological site of K'axob, a  prehistoric Mayan village. Her goal
              is to look at changes in the  manufacture of ceramics over time. To determine
              the types of  clays which the K'axob potters exploited, she will compare 
              ceramic pastes from three hundred and thirty-eight vessels from  the site to
              one hundred clay samples from locations in northern  Belize proximate to
              K'axob. Comparisons will be based on ceramic  petrography and INAA. Vessels
              will be sampled to obtain  information on the full range of types present and
              clay locales  will be tested on the basis of soil data and topographical 
              features. Determination of changes in production technology will  be
              investigated through analysis of formation techniques as  revealed through
              breakage patterns, xeroradiography and  petrography and determination of clay
              modification strategies  through petrography and experimental testing. Changes
              in vessel  size and form will also be noted.    Because ceramics are so
              abundant in many prehistoric sites and  because they preserve well in the
              ground, they provide a focus  for much archaeological analysis. Archaeologists
              try to  reconstruct prehistoric social, political and economic  organization on
              the basis of detailed analysis of such remains.  The site of K'axob spans the
              time period when complex Mayan  society emerged. Most archaeologists believe
              that as social  complexity increases and centralized authority appears, objects
               such as ceramics become more standardized because production is  taken over by
              specialists who operate under a hierarchical form  of control. The case of
              K'axob is very interesting because -  based on visual inspection of ceramic
              form - just the opposite  seems to occur. If this is the case, it challenges a
              basic  archaeological assumption. Ms. Angelini wishes to see if this  pattern
              holds when one examines the same corp us of data from a  technological
              perspective and determines where raw materials were  collected and how vessels
              were made.    This project is important for several reasons. It will provide 
              data of interest to many Middle Americanist archaeologists. It  will help
              scientists to refine analytic tools and models and it  will assist in the
              training of a promising young scientist.
