Title       : Factors Controlling Solute Dilution in Heterogeneous Formations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9522651

Award Number: 9522651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Kitanidis kitanidis@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9522651  Kitanidis    The objective of the proposed research is to quantify the
              interaction of heterogeneity in soil  hydraulic  conductivity, local
              dispersion, and other factors in controlling the temporal behavior of dilution
              in porous media.  Although the effect of heterogeneity on the spreading of
              plumes of dissolved chemicals has been studied extensively, the effect of
              heterogeneity on dilution of contaminants remains to be determined, especially
              at "early" times, which are relevant in tracer tests and remediation projects. 
              Dilution is quantified by measures such as the peak concentration and the
              volume occupied by solute.  Spreading is quantified by the spatial second
              moment of the concentration distribution.  In assessing environmental impacts
              of groundwater contamination, if is important to be able to anticipate peak
              concentration in addition to the spatial extent of contamination.    In this
              work, we will conduct theoretical analysis, detailed numerical experiments, and
              comparisons with field data.  Contaminant dilution measures will be related to
              the porous media constitutive parameters and, primarily, the variability of
              hydraulic conductivity.  Predictions of dilution will be made via analytical
              approximations or "closures" which lead to deterministic equations and through
              variational analysis.  The performance of the approximations will be
              numerically assessed and the results will be evaluated by comparison with
              results from field experiments.  The contribution of this work will be a better
              understanding of the time-evolution of contaminant concentration levels in
              heterogeneous porous media, and guidance to the practitioner to assess dilution
              of contaminants in the subsurface environment.
