Title       : Internal Interfaces in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1997        
File        : a9522253

Award Number: 9522253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Barry Carter carter@cems.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9522253 Carter  The goals of this research project are to gain new
              understanding of microscopic details, particularly chemical bonding and
              defects, at heterostructure interfaces and of dislocations in the lattice of
              compound semiconductors.  The research will emphasize studies of anti-site
              bonding which is thought to be an intrinsic factor in the core of dislocations
              and of nearly all grain boundaries in these materials.  Correlation between
              observed and calculated defect structures will be made through computer image
              simulation.  The electrical properties of interfaces will be investigated by
              high-resolution cathodoluminescence and electron-beam induced current
              techniques.  Additionally, the mechanical behavior of individual interfaces
              will be studied by controlled deformation experiments.  The project will
              utilize samples specially prepared where interfaces and defects have been
              introduced in a controlled manner so that improved understanding of the defects
              can be obtained, and also understanding of the ways new information can be used
              to both exploit defect behavior or to develop strategies to control, avoid or
              eliminate the defects. %%% This research project will apply state-of-the-art
              materials science analysis and computer simulation techniques to obtain basic
              understanding of defects at critical interfaces in advanced structures of
              compound semiconductor materials used in lasers and electronic devices.  This
              research will contribute to improve fundamental understanding of interface
              chemistry and physical properties as well as other defects which limit the
              applications or lifetime of semiconductor devices.  An important feature of the
              program is the training of graduate and undergraduate students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***
