Title       : NSF-CGP Science and Engineering Fellows Program: Investigation of Thermal and
               Fluid Dynamic Phenomena for Design of Cryogenic Pulse Tube Cooler Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1995  
File        : a9522968

Award Number: 9522968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravikumar Kudaravalli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522968  Kudaravalli    This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr.
              Ravikumar  Kudaravalli of the Department of Chemical Engineering at the 
              University of California, Los Angeles and Professor Yoichi  Matsubara of the
              Atomic Energy Research Institute (AERI) at  the Nihon University, Chiba.
              Project funding will enable Dr.  Kudaravalli to spend one year in Japan,
              resident at Nihon  University, in order to investigate the thermal and fluid 
              dynamics phenomena for design of cryogenic pulse tube cooler  components for
              optimum performance. Dr. Kudaravalli has  previously investigated the heat
              transfer, fluid dynamics  and thermodynamic aspects of various cryogenic
              systems in  general and heat exchangers and regenerators of cryocoolers 
              including pulse tube coolers in particular. Professor  Matsubara is one of the
              leading researchers in the pulse  tube cryocooler area. He has pushed the
              technology further  by multistaging of the cooler and by invention of the 
              regenerative tube. Professor Matsubara's demonstration of  liquid helium
              temperatures (3.6 K) is the record low  temperature ever produced by a pulse
              tube cryocooler. Dr.  Kudaravalli will combine his expertise with that of 
              Professor Matsubara to study the thermal and fluid dynamics  phenomena in
              cryogenic pulse tube coolers achieving optimum  performance.    This proposal
              brings together research scientists from two  countries working in the area of
              advanced cryogenic cooler  technology. The U.S. scientist will have the
              opportunity to  become familiar with research techniques, equipment and 
              facilities at AERI while contributing to the overall  research effort.
              Therefore, this proposal fulfills the  objectives of the program in its
              exchange and transfer of  scientific knowledge through an international
              collaboration.  ***
