Title       : Fullerene Nano-Probes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9522251

Award Number: 9522251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $744728             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Smalley res@cnst.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1254,1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9522251  Smalley      This project addresses one of the grand challenges of
              nanotechnology:  learning how to image and manipulate individual objects on the
               nanometer scale.  Using carbon networks  in the form of fullerene  nanotubes
              and wires, this project aims to develop a new generation of  probes which
              connect the macroscopic to the nanoscopic world with  chemically specific,
              atomic precision.    Whereas x-ray diffraction and related techniques have long
              been the  basis of our detailed understanding of objects on this atomic length 
              scale, they only work with large numbers of identical copies of the  structure
              arranged in regular crystal lattices.  Since the invention  and early
              applications of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) it has  become increasingly
              clear that it is possible, at least in principle,  to break loose from this
              requirement of needing a crystalline array.  It should be possible to image,
              probe and manipulate individual  structures, one by one, on the nanometer
              scale.  Extensions of the  idea of STM to other proximate probes such as atomic
              force microscopy  (AFM), and magnetic force microscopy (MFM) have therefore
              become a  major scientific endeavor worldwide.    The common feature of all
              these methods is that they rely on a direct,  physical connection between the
              macroscopic and nanoscopic realms in  the form of a tiny "tip" which is scanned
              with sub-angstrom precision  by piezoelectric devices.  Most bulk materials are
              not chemically  stable when elongated into probes of width less than 10
              nanometers.  However, carbon in the form of a graphine sheet is chemically
              stable  in the form of fullerene balls and tubes even when these are less that 
              1 nm in diameter.  This project is aimed at the general development of 
              fullerne tubes as the tips of proximate probes and manipulators.    Fullerene
              nanotubes will be produced both by currently known  techniques using carbon
              arcs and/or catalytic particles and by new  methods presently under
              development.  These involve production o f  single- and multi-walled nanotubes
              by laser vaporization of  carbon/metal catalyst composite targets in  a quartz
              tube furnace, and  controlled growth of mounted "seed crystal" nanotubes in
              high electric  fields.  Mounting techniques will be developed to attach
              individual  nanotubes to sharpened platinum electrodes with good electrical 
              contact and reliable mechanical, chemical stability.  Electrical and 
              mechanical  properties of the individually mounted nanotubes will be  measured,
              including their ability to serve as efficient antennas at  optical frequencies
              and their Q value when used as a nanoscopic  cantilever.  ***
