Title       : Structure of Turbulent Convection over Non-uniform Horizontal Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9522662

Award Number: 9522662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $865579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Adrian r-adrian@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Adrian/Abstract           Experimental studies of turbulent fluid flow will be
              conducted  in wide fluid layers that model many fundamental aspects of the 
              atmospheric boundary layer.  Turbulent motions in these layers are  caused by
              buoyant heating of the lower surface, which is typically  horizontal.  The
              purposes of the experiments are to understand how  turbulent flows are
              organized from characteristic coherent  structures such as thermals and
              plumes,and to determine how details  of the surface geometry and heat patterns
              affect these structures  and the macroscopic mean phenomena such as heat
              transport, humidity  transport and transport of pollutants.  To this end
              experiments  will be conducted over three types of surfaces:  smooth, rough and
               inhomogeneous, with primary emphasis on  the latter.  The  inhomogeneous
              surface have patterns of heating or elevation that  are on a scale comparable
              to the layer depth.         High resolution particle image velocimeter
              techniques will be  used to measure instantaneous velocity vector field in
              flow, and  laser induced fluorescence will be used to measure instantaneous 
              temperature fields.  New techniques will be developed to measure  the three
              dimensional structure of the scalar fields of temperature  and concentration
              and velocity vector fields.  From the  measurements patterns of motion will be
              educed by direct inspection  and by statistical methods such as spatial
              correlation techniques,  stochastic estimation and proper orthogonal
              decomposition.  Basic  properties of the fields such as distribution of
              turbulent kinetic  energy, transport of various moments and dissipation will be
               measured.  In the case of homogeneous surfaces, the statistical  axisymmetry
              about the vertical will allow complete determination of  the two-point spatial
              correlation function, from which accurate  measurement of the viscous
              dissipation will be possible.         The rough surface study will concentrate
              on sinusoidal surface  shapes, while the inhomogeneous study will co nsider
              variety of  inhomogeneous heating patterns such as a step function, a 
              monolithic square, and a checkerboard.  The information obtained  will be
              useful in testing and developing large eddy simulations.
