Title       : Development of Genetic Mosaics in the Mouse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9522307

Award Number: 9522307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Federoff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rochester Sch Med
	      30 Administration Building
	      Rochester, NY  14627    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9522307  Federoff, Howard    The study of the structure and function of the
              central nervous  system is frequently best elucidated by overproduction or 
              underproduction of the neurochemicals involved in normal neural  function. 
              However, at present, there are no molecular mechanisms  to control the
              expression of the genes encoding these chemicals at  different sites within the
              brain or at different times during or  after development of the brain. 
              Conventional approaches to over-  or underexpress these genes have significant
              limitations, the worst  outcome is the loss of function mutation causing
              embryonic  lethality.  The present proposal outlines an innovative mechanism 
              to specifically over- or under expression genes in the central  nervous system
              at specific times and in specific places.  These  studies will employ the
              cre-loxP system to generate genetic  mosaics.  cre is an enzyme recognizing
              specific DNA sequences  (loxP) and initiating recombination at these sites. 
              Specific  transgenes are designed incorporating loxP sites in their structure 
              in advance of a DNA expression cassette. After incorporation into  the genome
              organisms are exposed to genetically engineered herpes  simplex viruses
              containing the cre gene.  Upon infection cre is  expressed, inititing
              recombination at available loxP sites and  over- or underexpression of the
              targeted DNA cassette.  This  proposal is appropriate for a SGER award because
              the studies are  innovative and highly risky.  These studies, if successful,
              give  this investigator the potential to control the expression of genes  in
              virtually any tissue at any time and could lead to major  advances in our
              understanding of basic brain mechanisms, having  direct implications for health
              and disease.
