Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Network Optimization: State of the Art
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9522573

Award Number: 9522573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagote M. Pardalos Pardalos@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Hearn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Hager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             % \                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    % \     %
              \          4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                           (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9522573
              Pardalos This grant provides funding for a conference on network optimization,
              Hosted by the Center for Applied Optimization at the University of Florida,
              this conference will bring together leading researchers working on many
              different aspects of network optimization and on diverse applications in fields
              such as engineering, computer science, operations research, transportation,
              telecommunications, and manufacturing. It will also provide a unique
              opportunity for cross-disciplinary exchange of research. The conference has
              received endorsements from the Mathematical Programming Society and the
              Institute for Operations Research and Management Science, and is being held in
              cooperation with the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  Networks
              are pervasive in modern life, whether real, as in the case of highways,
              pipelines, electrical systems, etc., or more abstract network models which
              represent interconnections among components of a complex system.  Advances in
              data structures and computer technology and the development of new algorithms
              have made it possible to solve classes of netwo rk optimization problems that
              were formerly intractable. Among these are problems in airline scheduling,
              transportation planning, satellite communications, water resource allocation,
              environmental modeling and VLSI chip design.  Papers presented at this
              conference will represent the state-of-the-art in network modeling and solution
              techniques. A selection of these papers will be placed in the public domain by
              the publication of special issues of refereed scholarly journals. ***          
                                      Oh     +'  0                     S u m m a r y I n f o
              r m a t i o n                           (                                      
                          '                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          $       H       l                                  
                          D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       lagnese    
                                      lagnese                     @    Wzp                   
                      @     J#                            @      G                           
                                                                                      @    ^ 
                                                  Microsoft Word 6.0                         
                                          2                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 e =       e               ?                       ?                         
                           j       j   j       j       j       j       ?                     
                                                                   D                         
                                                       D       F       F       F       c     
                               %   T   y   "                           j                     
                                                                                 j       j   
                                                                                 j           
                 j               D                       j       r       j       j       j   
                 j               D                                                           
                                                               9522573 Pardalos This grant
              provides funding for a conference on network optimization, Hosted by the Center
              for Applied Optimization at the University of Florida, this conference will
              bring together leading researchers working on many different aspects of network
              optimization and on diverse applications in fields such as engineering,
              computer science, operations research, transportation, telecommunications, and
              manufacturing. It will also provide a unique opportunity for cross-disciplinary
              exchange of research. The conference has received endorsements from the
              Mathematical Programming Society and the Institute for Operations Research and
              Management Science, and is being held in cooperation with the Society for
              Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  Networks are pervasive in modern life,
              whether real, as in the case of highways, pipelines, electrical systems, etc.,
              or more abstract network models which represent interconnections among
              components of a complex system.  Advances in data structures and computer
              technology and the development of new algorithms have made it pos
