Title       : PEET: Taxonomic Monographs of Meteoriaceae Mosses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9522034

Award Number: 9522034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $798489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Magill bob.magill@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1056,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9522034  Magill   Mosses, although conspicuous in tropical forests, are among
              the more neglected groups of organisms, especially for tropical parts of the
              world.  There are few institutions in North America with significant resources
              for their study, but one such is the Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis,
              where Drs. Robert Magill and Bruce Allen have pulled together a team of
              colleagues for a five-year enterprise studying mosses of the family
              Meteoriaceae.  Traditional morphological investigations, supplemented when
              possible with gametophyte culturing studies, will be enhanced with additional
              data from molecular analyses, including DNA sequencing with assistance from
              colleagues at Washington University.  Field collecting in Central and South
              America and in Africa will target both taxa and regions needing better samples,
              and will make possible biogeographical studies of current and historical
              distribution patterns.  Improved taxonomic understanding of species diversity
              in these mosses and plausible hypotheses of their evolutionary and phylogenetic
              relationships will result from the work.  In particular, tests can be made of
              the idea that the pendent, epiphytic habit of many of the Meteoriaceae has
              evolved convergently or independently a number of times, in various parts of
              the New and Old World tropics.   Training of new graduate and postdoctoral
              students is a significant component of the project, through associations with
              three universities in the area, Washington University, the University of
              Missouri-St. Louis, and St. Louis University.  Formal course work as well as
              laboratory and museum study comprise the training program, along with field
              work and apprenticeship in taxonomic monographic research.  Computerization of
              many aspects of the enterprise, including specimen databasing, character
              analyses, and phylogenetic inference, enhances the timely dissemination of
              results through the Missouri Botanical Garden's World Wide Web service.
