Title       : Improvements of the High Voltage Transmission Electron Microscope for Imaging of
               Frozen Cells and Complex Macromolecular Bio-Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1998  
File        : a9522771

Award Number: 9522771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120481             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek Malecki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In transmission electron microscopy of biological  structures, there are two
              phenomena that often prevent  imaging at the molecular level: radiation damage
              and  contamination. These problems can be reduced by two  approaches:
              protecting the specimen and/or improving the  microscope.      In the first
              approach, significant progress has been  achieved. Firstly, a special apparatus
              has been developed  for rapid cryoimmobilization of a living cell during light 
              microscopic observation for further imaging as this cell's  cryo-whole-mount.
              Cellular architecture is retained at the  molecular level and therefore can be
              referred directly to  the behavior of the living cell (Malecki 1992, Proc. EMSA
               50: 566-567. Secondly, the deep negative staining/ embedding  procedure has
              been developed. A thick and uniform layer of  embedment supports and protects
              the three-dimensional  structure within the whole-mount. This electron-dense 
              preparation is only transparent for electrons with high  energies attainable at
              high accelerating voltages  (Ris&Malecki 1993, J. Struct. Biol. 111:148-157).  
                 In this project, as the second approach, the aim is to  improve the
              microscope for work with beam-sensitive  specimens maintained at low
              temperatures. The high voltage  transmission electron microscope operating at
              the  accelerating voltage lMeV is used. It is already known that  high
              accelerating voltage is a major factor in reducing beam  damage. Therefore,
              benefiting from this unique high  accelerating voltage feature and on the basis
              of preliminary  results, four modifications are proposed: (1) addition of an 
              improved cryo-stage to reduce thermal drift and to damp  mechanical vibrations;
              (2) development of new double-blade  and cylindrical cold traps to shield the
              specimen; (3)  replacement of diffusion pumps for the specimen chamber and  the
              film camera with turbomolecular pumps to obtain a  cleaner vacuum, and (4)
              addition of a computer and an  intensified charge-coupled device camera to
              pursue real-time  image pro cessing at low doses, including real-time 
              three-dimensional imaging via the HEVEM.      These new capabilities of the
              high voltage transmission  electron microscope will be essential to pursue
              three  leading projects: (a) study of the functional ultrastructure  of the
              nucleopore complex in nucleus/cytoplasm transport,  (b) study of the role
              played by titin gene expression in  myofibril assembly and myoblast maturation,
              and (c) study of  the effects of the forced expression of myoD, myogenin, and 
              titin genes on induced differentiation, thus reduction of  malignancy in
              rhabdomyosarcomas.
