Title       : High-Power, Phase-Locked Single-Frequency Arrays of Diode Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9522035

Award Number: 9522035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Botez botez@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luke J. Mawst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9522035  Botez  Phase-locked arrays of antiguided diode lasers (so called ROW
              arrays) have demonstrated 1-1.5W of diffraction-limited power, the highest
              coherent powers for all-monolithic oscillators.  However, the devices do not
              have a single-frequency output, which prevents their  use in many applications.
               Furthermore, all the present time, their number of elements is limited to 20
              ,which in turn limits the amount of coherent power.     It is proposed here to:
              1) develop ROW arrays with a distributed feedback (DFB) built-in structure for
              longitudinal-mode control; and 2) implement novel concepts for increasing the
              number of array elements from 20 to 40-80, while maintaining a single spatial
              mode.  For ROW-DFB arrays the proposed material system is InGaAs/InGaP/GaAs, an
              A1-free structure that assures defect-free regrowths, high efficiency,
              reliability, and low linewidth enhancement factor.  As a result 20-element
              ROW-DFB devices are expected to provide single-frequency,
              diffraction-limited-beam operation to 1W with linewidths of = 50kHz.    In
              order to increase the intermodel discrimination, and thus allow for
              single-spatial mode array operation of devices with more than 20 elements, two
              novel concepts are proposed: 1) array-(lateral)-mode selection via selective
              feedback from a buried diffraction grating, and 2) laterally restricted
              reflector (LRR).  Both concepts rely on the single-frequency nature of ROW-DFB
              devices.  High-order array modes are discriminated against by preferential
              feedback.     The devices will be made by using metalorganic chemical vapor
              deposition for crystal growth; e-beam and/or X-ray lithography and chemical
              etching for grating fabrications; and e-beam lithography and preferential
              etching for array pattern generation.  Theoretical analysis and design will be
              performed employing the matrix formulation for antiquated arrays, the beam
              propagation method, and the Block-function formalism for 1-D and 2-D finite
              periodic structures.     ROW-DFB devices are in effect 2-D pho tonic lattices. 
              Their will shed new light on how such lasers work, and will spur interest in
              other classes of devices based on  photonic lattices.  The realization of
              watt-range, single-frequency, diffraction-limited-beam stable sources will have
              significant impact on parallel optical-signal processing, the generation of
              blue light via harmonic conversion, the generation of mid-IR coherent light for
              environmental monitoring, and free-space optical communications.     This
              research program is strongly coupled to collaborative with optoelectronic
              research and development groups at various major US companies and laboratories,
              including AT&T Bell Labs, Uniphase, New Focus, TRW, and David Sarnoff Research
              Center.  A key feature of the program is the training of graduate and
              undergraduate students in this significant area of optoelectronic device
              research.  ***
