Title       : GOALI: Photodegredation of Electro-Optic Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9522019

Award Number: 9522019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317010             (Estimated)
Investigator: George I. Stegeman george@mail.creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex Jen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seth R. Marder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9522019  Stegeman  Polymer opto-electronics has undergone rapid development in
              the  last five years and has shown considerable promise for photonics 
              applications.  However, recent papers have shown that cumulative 
              photodegradation of electro-optic polymers poses a serious long-  term problem.
               Large changes in both the refractive index and  waveguide losses have been
              measured in the near infrared and  communications regions of the spectrum in
              the prototypical molecule  DANS.    A collaborative university-industry
              research team consisting of  Alex Jen of ROITECH, Seth Marder of Caltech and
              George Stegeman of  CREOL at the University of Central Florida will investigate
              these  issues under a GOALI program.  By sharing facilities and expertise, 
              this team will use both optical and analytical chemical techniques  to study
              both the major mechanisms responsible for photodegradation  and new approaches
              to minimizing their effects in the  communications bands.  Accelerated optical
              testing will simulate  device performance over many years at typical device
              operating  powers.    Photodegradation leads to changes in the molecular
              structure and  optical properties.  These changes will be measured and
              correlated  in well-known molecules such as DR1 and DANS.  Mechanisms such as 
              trans-cis isomerization, and the oxidation and breaking of bonds by  incident
              photons will be quantified.  Both linear and multiphoton  triggered events will
              be studied.  New molecules designed to reduce  photodegradation effects will be
              designed, synthesized and  evaluated.  For example, molecules with much
              narrower (than DANS or  DR1) absorption spectra placed strategically relative
              to the  communications bands are to be investigated.  ***
