Title       : Dissertation Research: Learning Variation: Language Acquisition and
               Socialization in St. Lucia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9522567

Award Number: 9522567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bambi B. Schieffelin bs4@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              St. Lucian children are confronted with a complex sociolinguistic  environment
              in which they receive highly variable, multilingual  input. As they acquire
              language they must learn to control  multiple varieties or codes, including a
              French-lexicon creole  (Kweyol), various emergent forms of English-lexicon
              creole, and  "standard" English(es). In the course of developing the 
              communicative competence to use these different varieties in  pragmatically and
              culturally appropriate ways, these children  acquire detailed knowledge of a
              great degree of both linguistic  and sociocultural variation, as well as an
              intimate understanding  of how these two orders of variation are interlinked in
              St.  Lucian society. In the process, they learn to draw on these  language
              varieties as a rich cultural resource for setting forth  their emergent
              identities and negotiating various types of social  interactions. These
              developmental processes will be investigated  through a language socialization
              study. The language acquisition  process will be longitudinally documented in
              six children of  differing social backgrounds. Regular periodic audio
              recordings  will be made of the children's speech interactions with various 
              interlocutors in a variety of naturalistic settings. These  recordings will be
              annotated in detail and transcribed in  cooperation with local consultants so
              as to place the recorded  utterances in ethnographic context. The course of
              language  acquisition will be analyzed with regard to the extent to which 
              different varieties are used in each child's verbal environment,  the differing
              structural features of those varieties, the  differences in pragmatic salience
              among particular forms and  variants, and the sociocultural norms of their use.
              This research  will yield insights into how children acquire communicative 
              competence in multilingual settings, and how knowledge of  linguistic variation
              and the social differentiation it indexes  and encodes forms an essential part
              of the overall cultural  competenc e of persons living in creole societies.
              More broadly,  the study will contribute to theoretical understandings of how 
              multilingual communities are constituted and organized; and it  will provide
              insight into how individuals apprehend their social  worlds and how they use
              language in asserting and managing their  often shifting identities in these
              heterogeneous (and today,  increasingly prevalent) settings.
