Title       : Preparation of Microporous Solids from Molecular Building Blocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9522303

Award Number: 9522303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar M. Yaghi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic  
              Chemistry Program, will support the research of Professor Omar Yaghi of  
              Arizona State University on the synthesis of new porous solids from   soluble
              molecular building blocks.  The focus of the project is the   development and
              understanding of two fundamental issues that are relevant   to the preparation
              of solids from molecular building blocks: 1) how to   control the relative
              orientation of the molecular components so that the   resulting structure has
              the desired structure, stability and physical   properties, and 2) how to
              obtain the solid product in crystalline form so   that its structure is readily
              determined.   The general method to be used   will involve the room-temperature
              condensation polymerization of   inorganic clusters or suitably functionalized
              coordination compounds   using  polymeric matrices as diffusion and reaction
              media for addition   copolymerization and condensation polymerization
              reactions.  The   anticipated zeolitic type structures are expected to have
              voids that can   accommodate guest molecules or ions and thus to be useful in
              separations,   ion-exchange, and catalysis.  In principle, these framework
              structures   can be chemically modified and manipulated to predictably vary
              their   properties.   The term porous solid applies to a class of network
              solids that contain   channels and voids that are comparable in size to many
              small molecules   and ions.  Such species often may diffuse into these solids
              to be   exchanged for an existing ion or to be otherwise retained as a result
              of   intermolecular interactions.  Such solids are widely used industrially  
              for the selective adsorption and catalytic transformation of molecular  
              structures, particularly through acid catalyzed pathways.  Such materials   are
              usually synthesized by high temperature processes that often do not   provide
              crystalline products.  This research project will attempt the   synthesis of
              porous solids by formation of bonds between small pre-formed   fragments of the
              desired structure through various types of    room-temperature, condensation
              polymerization reactions.  Polymeric   matrices will be used as reaction media
              to prevent the formation of more   dense  structures and to slow the
              condensation process such that crystals   are more likely to be formed.  The
              materials that result from this   project may be useful in separations
              technology and in catalysis.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
