Title       : Generalized Job Shop Models with Multiple Objectives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9522938

Award Number: 9522938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Pinedo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9522938  Pinedo   This research addresses the problem of job scheduling in a job
              shop environment. Some special features of this research are (1) the
              consideration of flexible routing for the jobs to be scheduled, and (2) the
              consideration of multiple objectives. The development of procedures for
              parametric analysis of schedule quality will also be undertaken. The outcome of
              the algorithmic developments will be incorporated into prototype scheduling
              software that has been developed at Columbia University over the past four
              years.  The term "routing flexibility" as used in this research is given two
              meanings. In the first case, routing flexibility refers to scheduling scenarios
              in which each workstation in the shop is populated with multiple machines. A
              job visiting a workstation can only be processed by one machine at the station.
              In the second case scenario, each job is characterized by an ordered sequence
              of operations or processing steps to be performed. Each operation or process
              step can be performed by a subset of all the machines in the shop. Subsets of
              machines that can perform the various process steps required by a job may
              overlap. In all the scheduling scenarios considered, the jobs may recirculate. 
                Depending on the scheduling objective pursued, several modeling and solution
              approaches exist for solving scheduling problems. Most existing algorithms are
              focused on traditional production scenarios in which each job follows a fixed,
              prescribed route. Although, these earlier algorithms can serve the needs of
              many production situations, they fail to function effectively when flexible
              routing exists for jobs. The work done in this research will serve the needs of
              the modern day flexible shops as typified by flexible manufacturing systems
              (FMS). The outcome of the research will be a major contribution to scheduling
              theory and the expansion of  the domain of applicability of scheduling
              algorithms in production shops.
