Title       : Guided Wave Optics in Super-EO Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9522740

Award Number: 9522740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry F. Taylor taylor@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ohannes Eknoyan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9522740  Taylor  The overall objective of this research is to obtain analytical
              and  experimental results which support and promote the application of 
              high-electrooptic-coefficient tungsten bronze ferroelectric materials 
              ("super-EO materials") in a variety of guided wave optical devices.  Techniques
              developed at Texas A&M for making the first low-loss waveguides  and
              electrooptic modulators in tungsten bronze substrates will serve as the 
              foundation for the proposed project. The waveguides are produced by a  simple
              process in which static strain from a patterned surface film creates  a
              localized refractive index increase. The Rockwell International Science 
              Center, which has supplied super-EO materials to Texas A&M for several  years,
              will continue in this collaborative role during the course of the  proposed
              project.    Research will be conducted in five critical task areas: (1) static
              strain  optic (SSO) waveguide modeling, (2) device design, (3) material 
              characterization, (4) modulator and switch development, and (5) tunable  filter
              investigations. Two-dimensional refractive index profiles for TE and  TM
              polarizations in SSO waveguides will be computed, considering both 
              strain-optic and electrooptic contributions to the localized index change.  A
              variation method will be utilized for waveguide mode analysis. Parameters 
              needed for the waveguide and device models, such as strain-optic and 
              electrooptic coefficients, refractive indices, and thermal expansion 
              coefficients, will be measured. The recently discovered "self-poling"  effect
              will be investigated experimentally to determine the conditions  under which a
              large electrooptic effect is present without poling after  processing of an SSO
              device at elevated temperatures. Electrooptic cutoff  modulators, coupled
              waveguide switches, and tunable channel dropping  filters which make use of the
              SSO waveguides will be designed, fabricated  in the Rockwell substrates, and
              characterized.    The proposed research will lay the groundwork for using 
              super-EO materials  in guided wave devices which could find increasing
              application in broadband  communication networks over the next decade.
              Modulators and switches which  exhibit order-of-magnitude improvement in
              performance over their  counterparts in LiNbO3 - the traditional substrate of
              choice for guided  wave electrooptic devices - will be sought. New
              channel-dropping filters  for wavelength multiplexing with unprecedented tuning
              range, low crosstalk,  and minimal electrical power dissipation will be
              explored. Successful  demonstrations should reinforce Rockwell's expressed
              interest in  commercializing the tungsten bronze substrates so that they will
              be  generally available for research and device application.  ***
