Title       : Optimizing the Differential Global Postioning System Infrastructure for
               Scientific Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9522074

Award Number: 9522074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107240             (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnn Clayton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9522074  Clayton, JoAnn  National Academy of Sciences  Title:
              Optimizing the Differential Global Positioning System              
              Infrastructure for Scientific Applications    A variety of civil, commercial,
              and scientific organizations  currently are establishing ground-based
              differential networks to  provide the basic infrastructure for generation and
              dissemination  of Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) data.  These 
              differential stations will provide data not available from the  basic
              DOT/DOD-managed civil GPS signal.  These data include  corrections to GPS
              position errors; high accuracy orbit  information; corrections for the
              intentional degradation of the  civil signal, ionospheric errors, and clock and
              ephemeris errors;  and provide integrity information.  An opportunity now
              exists to  optimize the usefulness of the data produced from DGPS networks for 
              scientific applications.  Considerations for future GPS  infrastructure include
              specification and standardization of  receiver equipment, testing,
              documentation, error reduction, real-  time data communications, analysis
              software development, and data  management and archiving.    To maximize the
              value of emerging DPGS networks for scientific  applications, the NRC/ASEB in
              cooperation with several other NRC  units, proposes to bring together in a
              workshop a select group of  scientists, engineers, and researchers, as well as
              representatives  from federal agencies.  The goal of the workshop will be to
              discuss  DGPS plans and objectives and develop options for improving 
              communication and coordination among the scientific DPGS users and  network
              operators.  A steering committee of six experts will be  appointed to develop
              the workshop program and oversee the  preparation of the proceedings of the
              workshop, which will include  a thematic summary of the discussion.    This
              workshop is important because it will enhance the scientific  benefit from the
              rapidly emerging GPS technology.
