Title       : Dissertation Research: Population Genetics and the Distribution of mtDNA
               Diversity in Asian Primate Genera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1996  
File        : a9522052

Award Number: 9522052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Don J. Melnick djm7@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The relationships between populations of a species, and between closely related
              species, have  often been estimated through the analysis of mitochondrial DNA
              (mtDNA).  This study will test  a key assumption on which conclusions from past
              mitochondrial DNA  based phylogenies have  rested.  The assumption is that the
              amount of mtDNA variation across an entire species is  negligible.  This
              assumption is critical to the reconstruction of phylogenies and the
              interpretation  of evolutionary histories, especially those of primates. 
              Contrary to this assumption, within the  female philopatric macaques,
              significant mtDNA variation exists within the same species.   Unlike macaques,
              leaf monkeys exhibit female dispersal.  Additionally, there are species within 
              each genus that have similar geographic distributions.  Through mtDNA analysis
              of two such  species in each genus, we propose to: (1) examine the effects of
              female dispersal on distributions  of mtDNA diversity (geography held
              constant); (2) assess the effects of geographic distribution  on mitochondrial
              genetic structure within each genus (female dispersal held constant); and (3) 
              determine whether the 'macaque' model of mtDNA population structure can be
              broadly applied  to other higher primates.   Hence, a mtDNA analysis of
              selected macaque and leaf monkey  species pairs provides a naturally controlled
              situation in which to examine the effects of female  dispersal on population
              structure based on maternally inherited mtDNA.  This study uniquely  examines
              the relationship between social organization and the dynamics of mtDNA
              evolution in  higher primates.  The information obtained will be crucial to
              recognizing limitations of mtDNA  analysis for inferring primate phylogenies
              and evolutionary histories.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
