Title       : Proteasome Workshop (July 1-3, 1995) to be held at Colorado State University,
               Fort Collins, CO.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9522216

Award Number: 9522216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Mykles don@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9522216  Mykles      The proteasome is a multimeric, multicatalytic
              proteinase  complex that plays a central role in intracellular  proteolysis in
              eukaryotes.  As the catalytic core of the 26S  protease complex, it mediates
              the ATP-dependent degradation  of ubiquitinylated proteins.  There have been
              few forums for  researchers to meet and discuss their work on the  proteasome. 
              Consequently, a Proteasome Workshop, organized  by Donald L. Mykles and others
              will be held July 1-3 1995 on  the campus of Colorado State University (Fort
              Collins CO).  This is the first time that a workshop on the proteasome has 
              been convened in the US.  The preliminary program consists  of one poster
              session and five oral session organized around  the themes of structure and
              catalytic properties; allosteric  regulators and synthetic inhibitors;
              expression, processing,  and assembly of the 20S and 26S complexes; and
              physiological  functions.  The sessions will focus on recent developments, 
              such asa the isolation of endgenous regulators and the 20S  ATPase complex, the
              synthesis of cell-permeable inhibitors,  the cloning of the complete set of
              cDNAs encoding proteasome  subunits in yeast, and the indentification of
              "nonessential"  subunits that replace other subunits and change the  catalytic
              proteties of the complex.  The proposal requests  partial support for the
              travel costs of the 15 main speakers  and eight women and/or minorites.  The
              main speakers  represent most of the laboratories making significant 
              contributions in the field, and therefore constitute the  critical promamatic
              core of the workshop.  We recognize the  importance of promoting and
              encouraging the particaption of  under-represented induviduals, and therefore
              include in the  proposal support for the travel and registration costs of 
              eight women and/or minorities.  %%%  The Proteaome Workshop is a timely meeting
              which examines a  non-membrane-bound organelle of the cytoplasm.  The 
              proteasome is comprised of aggregates of proteins involved  in c ellular
              degradation of other cytoplasmic proteins.  These aggregates are differentially
              sedimenting complexes of  proteases with as yet incompletely defined catalytic 
              properties.  The meeting will address the isolation and  function of the
              complexes and the individual proteins of  which they are comprised.  It is the
              first workshop in the  US specifically addressing this new organelle.  There
              will  be five oral sessions which will include speakers from  around the world,
              as well as poster session.  The primary  uses of the funding will be in
              defraying the travel costs of  the speakers and in providing a travel and
              registration  stipend for women and minorities.  ***
