Title       : Evaluation of the National Science Foundation's Science and Technology Centers
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9522582

Award Number: 9522582
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: David Schindel                          
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 3,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Fitzsimmons   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ABT Associates Inc
	      55 Wheeler St
	      Cambridge, MA  021381125    617/492-7100

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This 12 month program evaluation will assess the effectiveness and impact of the
              Science and Technology Centers (STC) Program. The National Science Foundation
              created the Science and Technology Centers Program in 1987, and initiated
              funding for eleven Centers in 1989 and an additional fourteen Centers in 1990. 
              This is the first program-level evaluation conducted in the STC Program. The
              STC Program evaluation will gather performance data that indicates the degrees
              to which and the ways in which the STC Program is meeting its goals.  Program
              goals are: ambitious research that requires the longer duration and higher
              support levels of center-based research; transferring knowledge and technology
              from the academic setting to other sectors of society such as industry and
              government laboratories; and preparing graduates at many levels for research
              and other careers in a technological society.    Abt Associates, an independent
              evaluation contractor, will construct a detailed history of the program, design
              performance indicators associated with the three program goals, compile and
              analyze existing performance data, collect and analyze additional data, and
              synthesize this information in the form of a program profile.  These findings
              will be submitted to an expert panel for interpretation.  Technical and summary
              final reports will be produced and disseminated to appropriate audiences.  The
              results of this evaluation will provide NSF with information useful to the
              effective management of and future plans for the STC Program and will also
              assist the STC Directors as they seek to improve the operations of their
              respective Centers. The evaluation will provide information on the impact of
              the STC Program to NSF's senior management; the National Science Board; members
              of the Administration and Congress; the research community; and interested
              parties in the industrial sector and the science and technology education
              enterprise. The STC program evaluation is one of four pilot projects being
              conducted by NSF in response to passage of the Government Performance and
              Results Act of 1993.  The experience gained during this program evaluation will
              help NSF prepare for full agency-wide implementation of the Act.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
