Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Object-Oriented Language Design and Implementation
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9457767

Award Number: 9457767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig D. Chambers chambers@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9251,9297,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Object-oriented programming promises to make programs  easier to write, easier
              to extend, and easier to reuse.  The Cecil project aims  to help
              object-oriented technology deliver on this promise through integrated  language
              design, implementation, and programming environment research.    The  Cecil
              language is a purely object-oriented language which is serving as a  vehicle
              for investigating new language features.  Current research includes  studying
              more flexible kinds of method lookup based on symmetric multiple  dispatching,
              investigating the effectiveness of advanced static type systems at  expressing
              practical object-oriented programming problems, and developing new  module
              constructs that support application-specific tailoring of objects.  Programming
              environment support for these and other features of object-oriented  languages
              is crucial for effective use of object-oriented programming styles.  Advanced
              language designs and programming styles only impact practice if  efficient
              implementations are available.  The Vortex compiler project is  investigating
              whole-program analysis.  Interprocedural analysis of  object-oriented programs
              is the foundation of this work, dynamic profile  information is treated as an
              integral component of the compiler, helping to  focus the compiler's efforts on
              profitable optimizations.  Incremental  recompilation techniques for
              object-oriented languages help to keep turn-around  time short.  The Vortex
              compiler initially targets the Cecil language, with  front-ends for other
              languages such as C++ planned for the future.  The Vortex  compiler is written
              in Cecil itself, providing feedback for the language design  research and a
              realistic benchmark for the compiler research.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
