Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Analysis and Simulation of Multi-Stage Inventory Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1999   
File        : a9457189

Award Number: 9457189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285356             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Glasserman pg20@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9297,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9457189  Glasserman       This research is focused on the analysis and
              simulation of  multi-stage inventory systems with limited production capacity. 
               The emphasis and common theme is on the use of new techniques for  bounding
              and approximating the performance of such systems.  The  methodologies involve
              draw upon techniques for analyzing  probabilities of rare events, which, in a
              properly designed system,  correspond to inventory stockouts, last sales, long
              response times,  etc.  The different subclasses of problems to be studied
              include  capacitated multi-stage systems, capacity allocation among multiple 
              products, stocking levels in the presence of component commonality,  cyclic
              schedules for multiple products, and efficient simulation of  rare events.  In
              capacitated multi-stage systems,  the research  emphasis is on the study of
              features of the assembly and supply  chains of many industries with the
              objective of developing design  and control tools to coordinate the various
              stages to meet service  levels for external demands and to limit inventory
              costs.  Research  in capacity allocation problems will seek to extend the
              solution to  capacity allocation problems that involve multiple products in 
              make-to-order stock environment.  Research in stocking levels is  aimed at
              developing solution to the problem of setting stock levels  for components that
              are required by multiple products.  The study  of cyclic schedules in which
              products are made in a fixed schedule  and each visit to a product restores its
              inventory to a preset  target level that depends on intervening demand will
              also be  considered in this research.  The rarity of events such as  stockouts,
              lost sales, etc. in complex inventory systems make the  use of simulation as an
              evaluation tool of such systems very  difficult.  This research will also focus
              on the development of  variance reduction techniques, based on importance
              sampling, to  increase the efficiency of simulation analysis.       Expected
              outcomes of this research inclu de the  characterization of asymptotically
              optimal base-stock levels for  control of capacitated inventory systems,
              identification of  asymptotically optimal capacity allocation among products,
              and  better analysis, understanding, and design of cyclic schedules for 
              multiple products.  Furthermore, tools to better analyze inventory  systems
              through simulation will be developed.  This will make it  easier, more
              attractive, and computationally more efficient to  analyze complex inventory
              systems through simulation technique.
