Title       : NSF Young Investigator: The Structure of the Sun
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9457460

Award Number: 9457460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pawan Kumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1207,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9457460  Kumar      The research to be carried out will be divided between
              studies of  solar oscillations and a few other problems in astrophysics.  Three
               specific projects are described below:    The rotation profile in the solar
              interior was mapped by  helioseismology several years ago, and yet our
              theoretical  understanding of the physical processes taking place in the sun is
               very poor.  However, progress has been made on this problem (Kumar,  Narayan
              and Loeb), and the plan is to continue to work on this  problem.  The solution
              of this problem is not only important in the  context of understanding stars,
              but has considerably wider  application in astrophysics.    A detailed study of
              the tidal evolution of binary stars, which  includes the transfer of angular
              momentum and the tidal energy  dissipation in stars, is being carried out. 
              Particular emphasis  will be placed on astrophysical binary systems containing
              a neutron  star (pulsar) which allows very accurate determination of the 
              orbital parameters, including the periastron advance.  Two such  binary
              systems, because of their high eccentricity and small  periastron distance, are
              particularly interesting from the point of  view of detecting tidally forced
              oscillations in the companion main  sequence star. A number of pressure and
              gravity modes of  oscillations are expected to be tidally excited in these
              stars to  an observable amplitude. The detection of these oscillations will 
              enable us to determine both the mass and the age of the stars very  accurately.
               This should provide an excellent opportunity for  studying the orbital
              evolution of the binary orbits.    The last project that will be pursued
              pertains to the study of the  large velocity dispersion of the material in
              molecular clouds.  There are several giant molecular clouds about 1 kiloparsec
              in  distance from the galactic center which are very peculiar in that  they
              show a large random internal velocity.  The velocity  dispersion of the clouds,
              obtained by observing the carbon m onoxide  (CO) emission, is found to be about
              four times their virial  velocity.  These observations are also supported by
              observations of  other molecular emissions as well as by the 21 cm neutral
              hydrogen  line emissions from the clouds.  Therefore, it is almost certain 
              that these clouds are not gravitationally bound.  A plausible model  for the
              large velocity dispersion is clumping and collisions of  clouds that are moving
              on non-circular orbits in a bar potential.   This theoretical model will be
              analyzed carefully to see whether it  explains the observations.  The
              observations of the clouds may  offer additional evidence for the presence of a
              bar in the central  region of our Galaxy.    This award is to recognize an
              outstanding young faculty member in  science and engineering.  The award will
              enhance the career of the  faculty member by providing flexible support for
              research and  educational activities.  Cooperation with industry and
              institutions  that support research and education is encouraged.
