Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Surface Induced Dissociation of Molecular Ions at
               Self-Assembled Monolayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9457709

Award Number: 9457709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luke Hanley lhanley@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Trenary  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9297,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This National Science Foundation Young Investigator project is in the   general
              area of analytical chemistry, with a specific focus on surface   chemistry. 
              During the five-year tenure of this award, Professor Hanley   and his students
              will examine the reactions that occur when a high flux   molecular ion beam
              impinges on a self-assembled monolayer.  The fragments   from this collision,
              when analyzed by mass spectrometry, yield valuable   information about the
              structure of the parent ion.  The state of the   surface before and after the
              ion-surface collision will be probed using   techniques such as x-ray
              photoelectron spectroscopy, infrared reflection   absorption, and thermal
              desorption, and these experiments will allow the   mechanisms of the surface
              induced dissociation process to be   investigated.  The use of these molecular
              ion beams for surface   lithography of nanostructures and for plasma
              polymerization chemistry   will also be explored during the course of this
              research project.    This project should provide important insights into the
              mechanisms of   molecular fragmentation occuring when molecular ions collide
              with a   well-characterized surface.  This approach, when used in conjunction
              with   mass spectrometric detection, allows structurally similar molecules to
              be   distinguished.  Additionally, this award will enable Professor Hanley to  
              further his overall professional development as a researcher and educator   at
              the University of Illinois at Chicago.
