Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Binarity in Young Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9457458

Award Number: 9457458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea M. Ghez ghez@astro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9457458  Ghez      The study of star formation is often motivated by the  desire
              to explain the formation and evolution of the solar system.  Thus, the current
              paradigm for star formation is centered on  the production of a single star
              that, at a young age, is surrounded  by a disk of gas and dust, roughly a few
              hundred astronomical units  (AUs) in size, from which planets may form. 
              However, recent  surveys, carried out by Dr. Ghez and others, of the star
              forming  regions of Taurus and Ophiuchus in our Galaxy have led to the 
              conclusion that most, if not all, young low mass stars have  companion stars. 
              Furthermore, the majority of these binary stars  are separated by distances
              that are smaller than the size typically  assumed for a circumstellar disk.   
              At the distance to Taurus and Ophiuchus, the nearest sites of  star formation
              in our Galaxy (Distance = 150 parsec), the angular  extent of a circumstellar
              disk is expected to be roughly 1-2  seconds of arc.  Unfortunately, due to
              turbulence in the  atmosphere, the angular resolution of traditional imaging 
              techniques is limited to 1 second of arc, a factor of 10-30 times  worse than
              the theoretical resolution of a 4-m telescope.  Thus, to  study these
              perplexing and yet prevalent close binary stars,  the  high resolution imaging
              technique of speckle imaging will be used.    The current research effort is
              focussed on studying the effect of  these close binary stars on the formation
              and evolution of  circumstellar disks.  The presence of a circumstellar disk
              and its  properties are primarily inferred from the measured spectral energy 
              distribution (SED) of T Tauri stars.  In particular, it is the  excesses of
              radiation at ultra-violet and infrared wavelengths that  have been attributed
              to disk processes.  More recently, increased  efforts in modeling the effects
              have resulted in the interpretation  of dips in the SED as evidence for
              planetary formation.  However,  the SED's for close binary stars have so far
              been the result of  observing the co mbined light from both components.      In
              one approach to answering questions regarding the consequence of  close
              companion stars for circumstellar disks, Dr. Ghez is  measuring the SED, from
              optical to infrared wavelengths, of each  individual component within these
              close binary star systems using  high spatial resolution imaging techniques. 
              This will allow a  determination of (1), how much of the previously observed
              excess  can be attributed to the presence of a secondary source as opposed  to
              a circumstellar disk (2), if the excess remains, whether both  components or
              only one shows evidence for a circumstellar disk and  (3), whether or not the
              dips in the SED are created by the presence  of two stars with different
              apparent temperatures.    In a second approach, Dr. Ghez will also compare the
              binary star  frequency of the classical T Tauri stars (CTTS), which are thought
               to have an inner accretion disk, with that of the weak-lined T  Tauri stars
              (WTTS), which are thought to lack an inner accretion  disk.  In their initial
              work, Dr. Ghez and her collaborators  observed a distinction at the 3 sigma
              level; at separations less  than 35 AU binary stars are more frequent among the
              WTTS than the  CTTS.  These observations suggest that close companions 
              significantly interfere with the disk accretion process associated  with many T
              Tauri stars.  This result is an exciting possibility  but requires follow up
              observations of more T Tauri stars to gain  statistical significance.  This
              will be accomplished by (1),  expanding the sample of observed T Tauri stars to
              additional star  forming regions and to fainter systems with the use of a more 
              sensitive camera and (2), eventually using larger telescopes  (Diameter > 5-m,
              such as the Keck telescope) to probe this  relationship further.  If Dr. Ghez'
              hypothesis is correct, then the  difference between the CTTS and WTTS binary
              star populations should  increase at smaller separations.    This award is to
              recognize an outstanding young faculty member in  s cience and engineering. 
              The award will enhance the career of the  faculty member by providing flexible
              support for research and  educational activities.  Cooperation with industry
              and institutions  that support research and education is encouraged.
