Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Investigation of Multi-Class Queuing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9457336

Award Number: 9457336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiangang "Jim" Dai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9297,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9457336  Dai   The focus of this research is the investigation of  several
              aspects of multi-class queuing networks that arise from complex manufacturing
              systems.  The scope of the research will range from the development of
              fundamental mathematical models of such networks  to the computer
              implementation of the models for some real world applications. Specific
              research topics to be investigated include the scheduling of  wafer fabrication
              lines, stability of multi-class queuing networks, Brownian models under
              non-FIFO (non-first in-first out) policies, heavy traffic convergence, and
              computation of stationary distribution for a reflected Brownian motion (RBM). A
              queuing network is said to be stable if the corresponding deterministic fluid
              limit eventually reaches zero and remains there. Research on wafer line
              fabrication will investigate whether the current operating policies of such
              lines are stable. If a system operates under an unstable policy, it could be
              mistaken to have insufficient resources.  Study of stability of queuing
              networks will investigate the conjecture that if all customer classes visiting
              a station have the same mean service time, and the nominal load at each station
              is less than one, then any work-conserving policy is stable. Fluid models of
              two stable policies will also be investigated.  Brownian models have been
              proved to be effective for the approximate analysis of queuing networks. It has
              also been proved that FIFO which most Brownian models to date employ may be
              unstable in some networks. Although a heavy traffic limit is used to justify
              the use of Brownian models, no such limit theorem exist for a general
              multi-class network with feedback under any policies. A proof for the heavy
              traffic limit theorem under the FIFO policy will be established for the case in
              which customers that visit the same station also have the same mean service
              rate. To improve and extend the existing algorithm for computing the stationary
              distribution of an RBM in an arbitrary polyhedral domain, fin ite element
              method will be used. This will enable the computation of stationary
              distribution of RBMs arising from closed queuing networks and finite buffer
              queuing networks.   Brownian models play important roles in both performance
              analysis and optimal or near optimal scheduling of queuing networks. The
              Brownian approximation will be used to analyze most queuing network models that
              are interesting in practice. The computer implementation of the Brownian
              approximation scheme will predict the performances of a variety of queuing
              networks, including those that arise in manufacturing and telecommunication
              systems.
