Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Theoretical Studies of Solvent Effects on Solute
               Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9457365

Award Number: 9457365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Tucker sctucker@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9297,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Susan Tucker is supported by an NSF Young Investigator Grant from the  
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to study solvent effects   on
              solute reactivity in supercritical fluids.  In the supercritical   regime,
              solvent properties vary dramatically, but continuously, with   modest changes
              in temperature and pressure.  Tucker will use computer   simulation techniques,
              such as reactive flux molecular dynamics and   umbrella sampling Monte Carlo,
              to explore the microscopic details of both   dynamic and static solvent effects
              on solute reaction rates.  Initially   she will focus on the hydrolysis of
              alkyl aryl ethers, e.g. anisole,   2-methoxynaphthalene, in supercritical
              water.  The rates of these charge   transfer reactions are sensitive to solvent
              properties, and thus provide   a stringent test of theoretical predictions. 
              These reactions have also   been subjected to extensive experimental studies. 
              In addition,   mathematical models for solvent effects within the generalized
              Langevin   equation and the Caldeira-Leggett/Zwanzig Hamiltonian will be
              explored in   order to develop new theories for describing the effect of
              changing   solvent properties on solute reactivity.    Supercritical fluids
              have found widespread application in many industrial   extraction processes. 
              They are also being used for environmental   remediation.  A unified
              theoretical description of the unique behaviors   observed in supercritical
              fluid solvents would provide a significant   contribution to predicting how
              thermodynamic conditions might affect   solute reactivity in supercritical
              fluids, and aid in the development of   industrial processes which make use of
              these technologically important   solvents.
