Title       : National Socialism and the Politics of Inventing in Twentieth-Century Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9213569

Award Number: 9213569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelis W. Gispen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              From the founding of the American Republic, patent policy has been             
              recognized as being critical for the economic well-being of this               
              country.  Yet there is a real tension on where the rewards for                 
              inventing should belong:  with the individual inventor or with                 
              companies that promote innovation.  In 1962, for example, Senator              
              McClellan, chair of the Judiciary Subcommittee on Patents,                     
              Trademarks, and Copyrights, raised the possibility of introducing              
              legislation to "restore the patent system, in at least some                    
              measure, to its traditional role of rewarding the inventor, in                 
              order the better to carry out the constitutional objective of                  
              `promoting the progress of science and useful arts.'"  McClellan               
              was worried that the rise of the corporate research establishment              
              had caused the employer to interpose "himself between the                      
              individual inventor and the patent system, with the former                     
              appropriating the patent rights and the latter often being rewarded            
              by nominal monetary grants or other recognition."  Senator                     
              McClellan's concern remains an issue to this day.  In order to                 
              reach any conclusions about this issue, it is critical that there              
              be studies of the experiences of other nations with differing                  
              policies.  Dr. Gispen, with his study of patenting policies in 20th            
              century Germany, is examining one of the most interesting and                  
              important cases of contrasting policies.                                       
                                                                                             
              Dr. Gispen is looking specifically at the vexed relationship                   
              between German fascism and technology, specifically the policies of            
              the Nazi regime toward inventors and industrial scientists and its             
              efforts to steer and accelerate technological progress through                 
              social and patent legislation.  To place the study in the widest               
              possible perspective, Dr. Gispen is employing a long-term analysis             
              covering the entire first six decades of the 20th century.  He is              
              also providing a comparative dimension, contrasting German                     
              developments with conditions in the United States and other                    
              European countries.  The project's principal research technique is             
              historical-empirical.  He is analyzing both qualitative and                    
              quantitative published and unpublished sources concerning the                  
              social conditions of German inventors and the sociopolitical                   
              struggles about the reform of German intellectual property law                 
              between 1900 and 1960.  The project's goal is to gain a deeper                 
              understanding of National Socialist technology policy and of the               
              nature and evolution of Germany's technological culture during the             
              period studied.  This study will result in a better understanding              
              of the Nazi regime's place in the historical development of modern             
              Germany, the changing position of the German technical professions,            
              and the strengths and weaknesses of Germany's technological                    
              culture.
