Title       : Time Course of Object Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9213246

Award Number: 9213246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Sanocki sanocki@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin W. Bowyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1180,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Despite the ease with which humans recognize everyday objects, the             
              processes by which this occurs have become a central concern in                
              cognitive science, because object recognition is actually very                 
              difficult; for example, computer scientists have only been                     
              partially successful in creating computer programs for recognizing             
              objects, and even those programs stretch the computational limits              
              of the most sophisticated machines.  Since humans are "good at"                
              object recognition, this research will focus on human abilities,               
              with emphasis on how computational complexities might be handled.              
              Human recognition takes place over a time span of about 100 ms.,               
              and the research will use newly developed techniques to control                
              exactly what information is available during that period of time.              
              The working hypothesis underlying this research is that for humans             
              computational burdens are reduced because the brain uses certain               
              types of information early in that time period and other types of              
              information later in that time period.  For example, early in time             
              general information about the shape or orientation of an object                
              might be used to narrow down the possibilities, whereas later in               
              time information about more idiosyncratic details would be used to             
              arrive at the proper identification.  The research will examine a              
              number of possible types of information that have been suggested in            
              the psychological and computer science literatures.  The research              
              will also use several related techniques, because each has its own             
              strengths and weaknesses.  Initial work will use relatively simple             
              objects for exploration; later work will use large samples of                  
              common objects.  Later work will also seek to extend principles of             
              earlier work to the perception of objects within scenes, and to the            
              process of word perception.  The knowledge gained will help in the             
              design of robots for a variety of purposes and of aids for visually            
              disabled persons.
