Title       : Interactions Between Cognition and Language in the Transition from infancy to
               Early Childhood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9213959

Award Number: 9213959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison Gopnik gopnik@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              About the time that children begin to talk, there are also                     
              important changes in their problem-solving abilities.  Are these               
              two developments related?  In particular, does learning to use                 
              certain words allow children to solve new problems?  This research             
              will explore two areas of problem solving that might be related to             
              language.  When they are about eighteen months old, children begin             
              to classify objects in new ways.  When they see a mixed-up group of            
              different kinds of objects, they may put each kind of object into              
              a separate pile.  At about the same time, they often have "a naming            
              spurt", suddenly beginning to name every object they see.  In                  
              earlier research, there was a relation between these two                       
              developments, with children who had a naming spurt early also                  
              beginning to group objects early.  Also at about eighteen months,              
              children begin to use words like "in" and "out," while at about the            
              same time beginning to understand how containers work in a new way.            
              This research will explore whether these two developments are also             
              related.  The research will compare children who hear different                
              kinds of languages, in order to try to tell whether the new words              
              are leading to the new problem-solving abilities.  Korean- and                 
              Japanese-speaking mothers use many fewer names than English                    
              speakers, and they use more words that talk about movement,                    
              particularly verbs.  Korean- and Japanese-speaking children may                
              develop the ability to classify objects later, but may develop the             
              ability to understand containers earlier.  In addition, the                    
              research will explore the effects of exposing different English-               
              speaking children to many names or alternatively to many verbs.                
              Children who are particularly exposed to names may be advanced in              
              classifying but not in understanding containers, while those                   
              exposed to verbs may show the opposite pattern.  Learning to talk              
              may allow children to think in new ways, and the specific words                
              they hear may influence the kinds of problems they can solve.
