Title       : The Economics of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1994      
File        : a9213007

Award Number: 9213007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur M. Diamond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2200

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will write a review essay on the economics of                 
              science that will serve as the basis for a workshop discussion                 
              among a group of eight scholars from economics and STS                         
              disciplines.  The day-long workshop will consist of three or four              
              sessions focusing on broad questions of the application of                     
              economics to science issues.  Possible session topics are:  "The               
              Maximizing Model Applied to Science," "The Organization of                     
              Scientific Inquiry," and "The Allocation of Scarce Resources."                 
              The review essay, written responses to the review essay, and                   
              perhaps other readings suggested by participants, will be                      
              distributed before the workshop and will serve as the common                   
              starting point for the discussions.  Based on comments and the                 
              workshop discussion, the investigator will revise and submit the               
              review essay for publication.  Participants will submit their                  
              thoughts on whether further research in economics of science is                
              promising and, if so, what questions it should seek to answer.                 
              The investigator will also compile these results in a form                     
              suitable for publication.  The purpose of the project is to allow              
              exchanges to occur between scholars with overlapping research                  
              agendas and complementary research methods.  Results should lead               
              to deeper and more useful understanding of the behavior of                     
              scientists and organization of the scientific enterprise, and to               
              identification of areas where collaboration will be fruitful.  It              
              may help to form a new subfield of scholars who specialize in the              
              study of the economics of science, whose issues range from the                 
              cognitive status of scientific knowledge to the efficient                      
              allocation of scientific funds.
