Title       : Electrochemical and Mechanistic Studies of Small Metal Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1994      
File        : a9213695

Award Number: 9213695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome B. Keister keister@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Schulman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo-                       
              metallic Chemistry Program, will explore the redox properties                  
              of metal clusters, and the volumes of activation of intra-                     
              molecular cluster processes.  Cluster compounds to be studied                  
              in the first area will contain carbon atoms as part of the core                
              structure.  Substituents on these carbon atoms will have                       
              pi-donor/acceptor properties that will serve to delocalize the                 
              unpaired electron density arising from electron transfer                       
              processes.  This is expected to stabilize the redox products                   
              such that they can be characterized by conventional spectro-                   
              scopic techniques.  In the second area, volumes of activation                  
              for intramolecular processes will be studied for several series                
              of compounds, whose reactivity has already been studied by                     
              other methods, to see if this parameter can be used as a                       
              reliable measure of the nature of the transition state.  This                  
              is particularly important for reactions that are first order in                
              cluster where it is presently nearly impossible to determine                   
              whether metal-metal bond cleavage, bridge to terminal ligand                   
              conversion, etc. is involved in achieving the transition state                 
              for the reaction.  The ultimate objective of these investi-                    
              gations is to determine the ways in which the properties of                    
              ligated metal clusters differ from those of small uncomplexed                  
              aggregates of metal atoms and to be able to selectively modify                 
              these properties by changing the number of atoms in the cluster                
              and the nature of the ligating groups.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This project is aimed at understanding the fundamental                         
              chemistry of organometallic compounds that are composed of                     
              small numbers of metal atoms that are bonded together (in a                    
              cluster) and are surrounded by donor ligands.  In some ways the                
              chemistry of these compounds models that of catalytic reactions                
              of molecules on the surfaces of small metal particles that are                 
              routinely used in industrial processes.
