Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research Proposal in Studies in Science, Technology and
               Society Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9213515

Award Number: 9213515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Provine wbp2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara F. Tjossem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dissertation student, Sara Tjossem;  topic: "Defying Boundaries:               
              Rachel Carson and Ecological Environmentalism."                                
                                                                                             
              The development of American ecology involved defining the scope of             
              its influence on fields such as botany and zoology by studying                 
              biological processes like the development, adaptation and                      
              distribution of organisms.  Throughout the development of the field            
              of ecology, the Ecological Society of America promoted its status              
              as a scientific discipline through its journals and scientific                 
              meetings.  There were difficulties in focus, however, for a society            
              that attracted scientists with such disparate training.  Questions             
              arose about the proper direction and scope of ecological questions,            
              such as the place of environmental concerns in research.  This                 
              drawing of disciplinary boundaries drew distinctions between pure              
              and applied research.  Rachel Carson highlighted the problems of               
              defining boundaries by usurping the authority of the scientific                
              field of ecology with her book Silent Spring.  Carson popularized              
              ecological concepts and urged the inclusion of ethics in science.              
              She was instrumental in awakening the public to the dangers of                 
              excessive pesticide use, yet her reception by ecologists was mixed.            
              Carson was never part of mainstream American ecology and yet she               
              affected its definition by drawing public attention to its                     
              practice.  Ms. Tjossem is examining the process by which Carson                
              affected the whole course of the science of ecology.
