Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations & Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9213595

Award Number: 9213595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Beals beals@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. Coifman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award supports the work of three researchers                         
              investigating several areas of broad mathematical interest and                 
              importance.  Some work will be conducted jointly while other will              
              be addressed by single investigators.  One can divide the studies              
              into three main themes: nonlinear partial differential equations,              
              wavelet analysis and complex function theory.  In the first,                   
              efforts will be made to explore how the one-dimensional quantum                
              version of the inverse scattering methods which replace the                    
              classical action-angle variables can be applied to understanding               
              the corresponding higher dimensional systems.  Work is also                    
              progressing on the investigation of inverse geophysical problems               
              involving surface wave phenomena.  Progress on model scalar cases              
              suggests that analysis of the full system of equations can be                  
              obtained.                                                                      
                   Studies of adapted wave form analysis, a collection of FFT-               
              like adapted transform algorithms, continues to discover and                   
              refine new orthonormal bases which decompose functions and                     
              operators into almost diagonal form.  The interplay between these              
              theoretical advances and the application to numerical signal                   
              processing has led to highly successful decomposition techniques               
              using entropy based stopping time searches.  The applications                  
              lead, in turn, to a host of new questions in harmonic analysis.                
              One of these will be that of creating a new concept of                         
              theoretical dimension of a function designed to measure the                    
              number of parameters necessary to describe the function with wave              
              forms taken from a given library.  Studies on the fine structure               
              of harmonic measure also continue.  Here the goals are to find                 
              the asymptotic behavior of harmonic measure in a variety of                    
              settings.                                                                      
                   Work will also be done estimating the length of level lines               
              of the Green's function on bounded simply connected domains.  It               
              is believed that level line length varies with the fourth root of              
              the value of constancy.                                                        
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them and validate methods for                    
              expressing solutions.  Harmonic analysis focuses on the                        
              decomposition of functions into component parts which best                     
              reflect their oscillatory characteristics, while complex function              
              theory seeks to describe the geometric and analytic properties of              
              differentiable functions of a complex variable and their                       
              generalizations to higher dimensions.
