Title       : Role of Law in Transnational Developments of Liberal Democracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9213156

Award Number: 9213156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31548              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence C. Halliday halliday@abfn.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucien L. Karpik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6589

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Global changes, such as the internationalization of business, have             
              a major impact on the organization of the legal profession.  At the            
              same time, the legal profession, like other professions that                   
              transcend national boundaries, influences transnational movements,             
              including the trend towards open markets and democratic governance.            
              This conference grant brings together an international team of                 
              sociologists and historians to study the historical engagement of              
              the legal profession in transnational movements related to liberal             
              democratic governance. Specifically, the research team, drawn from             
              North America and Europe, devise a collaborative research strategy             
              to investigate the intersections between an evolving legal                     
              profession and the irregular expansion of democratic governance,               
              and complete a series of papers addressing a common set of                     
              questions related to these intersections.                                      
                                                                                             
              The study of the engagement of the legal profession in social and              
              political movements has largely been confined to local and national            
              settings.  This team project will add a transnational dynamic by               
              examining historical instances of the profession's involvement with            
              the struggle between universalizing and localizing political                   
              movements associated with liberal democratic governance.  These                
              studies provide the basis for devising a model to investigate the              
              role of legal professions in contemporary political                            
              transformations, especially those underway in Eastern Europe, South            
              America, and Africa.  Therefore, the project provides a new                    
              historical context for studying the political engagement of the                
              legal profession, and a model for investigating the profession's               
              engagment in a new wave of political transformations underway that             
              have both transnational and local roots.
