Title       : Development of Neuronal Excitation - Secretion Coupling and Its Regulation by
               Target
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9213204

Award Number: 9213204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69350              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Bruce Gray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The brain, spinal cord and nerves are made up of individual cells              
              including the type called nerve cells or neurons.  For the nervous             
              system to function, neurons have to communicate with each other and            
              with the cells they control such as muscle cells.  The most                    
              important type of communication is via secretion of chemical                   
              messengers called neurotransmitters which can excite or inhibit                
              other cells.  Most secretion of neurotransmitters requires that                
              calcium, which is present in the fluid which surrounds cells, enter            
              the neuron at a site just prior to secretion.  This calcium enters             
              the neuron through structures called channels.  Since neurons have             
              many kinds of calcium channels, and since many substances in                   
              the nervous systems can control neurotransmitter secretion by                  
              affecting calcium channels, it is important to know which types of             
              calcium channels directly affect or are coupled to transmitter                 
              secretion.  It is also known that cells around the neuron can                  
              affect which channels are coupled to secretion at different times              
              of development.  Dr. Gray will study the relationship between                  
              specific types of calcium channels and the secretion of the                    
              neurotransmitter acetylcholine in neurons during development, using            
              direct measurement of release of radioactively-labeled                         
              acetylcholine and electrical recording of calcium influx through               
              channels.  The mechanism by which cells such as muscle cells affect            
              coupling between these types of channels and acetylcholine                     
              secretion will also be studied.  The control of secretion at                   
              synaptic sites in the nervous system is of fundamental importance              
              to the understanding of brain function.***//
