Title       : The Effect of Pressure on Hydrocarbon Oxidation Through the Negative Temperature
               Coefficient Regime
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1995   
File        : a9213901

Award Number: 9213901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235726             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas P. Cernansky cernansk@cbis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This program (an extension of a current NSF program) is                        
              directed to the study of effects of pressure on hydrocarbon                    
              oxidation in                                                                   
              low and intermediate (550-1000K) temperature regimes, with                     
              acquisition of kinetic information at pressures up to 20                       
              atmospheres for oxidation of pure hydrocarbons containing four                 
                                                                                             
              or more carbon atoms.  A major part of the work will utilize a                 
                                                                                             
              recently-developed pressurized flow reactor test facility.                     
              The                                                                            
              experiments to be conducted will provide resolution of                         
              mechanistic details (and the effects of pressure on these)                     
              associated with alkylperoxy radical reactions and definition                   
              of                                                                             
              the role of diperoxy radicals as branching agents.  Other                      
              separate complementary bench-scale experiments will also be                    
              utilized to elucidate mechanistic details controlling the                      
              oxidation of straight and branched hydrocarbons in the low and                 
                                                                                             
              intermediate temperature regimes.  Gas chromatography, GC/MS,                  
              and GC/FTIR diagnostics will be used for chemical analysis of                  
              stable reaction intermediates and products, while in-situ                      
              measurements of stable and radical species will be carried out                 
                                                                                             
              using FTIR spectroscopy.  Specific objectives are: (1) Obtain                  
              kinetic information for oxidation of pure hydrocarbons between                 
                                                                                             
              550 and 1000K at pressures up to 20 atmospheres; (2) Determine                 
                                                                                             
              effects of pressure on oxidation mechanism(s) in each                          
              temperature regime and how pressure affects boundaries                         
              separating the regimes; and, (3) Suggest and refine mechanisms                 
                                                                                             
              for modeling the alkylperoxy radical reaction system and the                   
              diperoxy radical reaction system.                                              
                                                                                             
              Hydrocarbon oxidation chemistry at low to intermediate                         
              temperatures (below 1000K) plays a significant role in                         
              operation of many combustion devices, notably internal                         
              combustion engines, in some cases accounting for a significant                 
              fraction of the                                                                
              overall heat release as well as strongly affecting input                       
              boundary conditions for the higher temperature regions in                      
              these                                                                          
              devices.  Since such devices operate at elevated pressures,                    
              fundamental research on low and intermediate temperature                       
              hydrocarbon oxidation at pressures well above atmospheric is                   
              important to furthering the understanding of many practical                    
              internal combustion engine phenomena, including engine knock,                  
              preignition fuel decomposition, pollutant formation, and                       
              general autoignition processes.
