Title       : National and Transnational Competitive Market Forces in the Land Transfer
               Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1992  
File        : a9213206

Award Number: 9213206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Braunstein braunstein.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is an empirical study of interprofessional competition in the             
              residential land transfer process in the United States and the                 
              United Kingdom.  The study focuses on competition between                      
              professionals to secure monopolies within each country and barriers            
              to globalization of the real property services market.  The study              
              has the following theoretically derived research objectives: (1)               
              to identify and describe the claims that are being made by                     
              competing professions in the two countries, the current allocation             
              of tasks between competing professions, and the extent to which                
              similar tasks are performed by different professional groups; (2)              
              to assess the results of different divisions of labor in the two               
              countries in relation to outcomes and to the claims that                       
              professionals make concerning the efficacy of their services; (3)              
              to explain why lawyers currently have a monopoly over conveyancing             
              services in the UK but not in the US; and (4) to explain apparent              
              local barriers to transnational competition for the real property              
              legal services market.  The primary means of data collection will              
              be open-ended tape recorded interviews with lawyers, real estate               
              agents, title insurance companies, licensed conveyancers, lending              
              institutions and house purchasers and sellers.  Data will be                   
              collected in two areas of each country, one urban and the other                
              rural.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The house purchase transaction, perhaps more than any other, brings            
              the general population into contact with the formal legal system.              
              Nevertheless, no comprehensive study has been made of the land                 
              transfer process from a sociolegal perspective.  This research will            
              further understanding of competitive market forces across                      
              traditional professional boundaries and across transnational                   
              boundaries.  As such it will illuminate a number of important                  
              questions regarding the roles played by lawyers and other                      
              professionals, the factors that condition those roles, the factors             
              that cause those roles to remain embedded or to change over time,              
              the ways in which regulation and market structure can affect the               
              organization and cost of professional services, and the alternative            
              ways in which markets for housing can be organized.
