Title       : Material Modelling and Computational Methods for River Valley Projects, Award in
               Indian and U.S. Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9213752

Award Number: 9213752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandra S. Desai csdesai@engr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0314000   Rural Development                       
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 5919,
Abstract    :
              Description: The proposed research project is                                  
              in the earth sciences and its objective is to                                  
              develop knowledge that will lead to improved                                   
              analysis of geological materials and realistic                                 
              constitutive models for systems that will be                                   
              used in river valley projects. Realistic                                       
              constitutive models will allow incorporation of                                
              many factors such as nonlinear material                                        
              behavior, insitu stresses, and discontinuities                                 
              very often ignored or highly simplified in the                                 
              past.  Together with modern computational                                      
              methods the resulting procedures will permit                                   
              solutions of highly complex problems which are                                 
              difficult to solve using conventional methods.                                 
              A unique aspect of the research is the                                         
              integration of basic mathematical modelling for                                
              realistic characterization of the behavior of                                  
              materials, implementation of models in non-                                    
              linear computational procedures, and                                           
              verification of field behavior of typical                                      
              structures.  The collaboration is between                                      
              Drs. C.S. Desai, University of Arizona and A.                                  
              Varadarajan, Indian Institute of Technology,                                   
              New Delhi.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Scope:  Results of the research will benefit                                   
              applications of advanced constitutive models                                   
              and computer procedures for the development of                                 
              rational structures for river valley projects                                  
              both in India and the U.S.  This type of                                       
              research is particularly relevant in the U.S.                                  
              as significant research work is in progress in                                 
              constitutive modelling of geologic materials                                   
              and discontinuities, development of new                                        
              laboratory devices, implementation of                                          
              constitutive models in computer methods and                                    
              verification through laboratory/field studies.                                 
              A formal collaboration will be of mutual                                       
              benefit.
