Title       : Dissertation Research: The Genetic Consequences of Colonization in Lupinus
               lepidus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1995 
File        : a9213143

Award Number: 9213143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Schemske   (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Bishop  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will address the evolutionary dynamics of                
              colonization in newly-founded populations of Lupinus lepidus var.              
              lobii, an important plant colonist of the blast zone at Mt. Saint              
              Helens.  Preliminary data indicate that these populations are                  
              genetically differentiated from each other over small spatial                  
              scales.  The scale and magnitude of this differentiation will be               
              documented, and the ecological and demographic factors which may               
              affect future differentiation will be studied.  Measurements of                
              population growth rate, age structure, seedbank dynamics, and                  
              outcrossing rates will be made in different aged populations, and              
              in artificial founder populations.  These parameters and genetic               
              data will allow estimation of a key evolutionary parameter,                    
              effective population size, and its rate of growth after a                      
              population bottleneck.  Gene flow between populations will be                  
              measured using genetic data for small populations.  Effective size,            
              gene flow, and estimates of patch turnover will be incorporated in             
              simulations of metapopulation genetic models.  Finally, the                    
              potential for stochastic differentiation will be compared to                   
              results from transplant experiments designed to elucidate the                  
              magnitude of and spatial variation in selection pressures.  This               
              research will provide insight into the relative importance of drift            
              and selection during the founding of populations, and information              
              of central value in understanding the recovery of naturally or                 
              artificially damaged ecological systems.
