Title       : Dissertation Research: A Phylogenetic Analysis of ProteaceaeUsing Ontogeny of
               Flowers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1992   
File        : a9213339

Award Number: 9213339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6325               (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew W. Douglas  (Student current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Floral development will be compared in representative taxa of             
              the monophyletic, morphologically diverse and unique flowering                 
              plant family Proteaceae.  The proposed study will determine the                
              relationship between flower development and hypothesized                       
              phylogenetic patterns of Proteaceae.  This will be done by                     
              establishing a robust phylogenetic tree of the family using                    
              principles of systematic theory.  Using the phylogeny, important               
              morphological trends in the flowers will be identified and studied             
              ontogenetically.  The ontogenetic study will utilize scanning                  
              electron microscopy and anatomical techniques.  Comparative                    
              ontogenetic analyses among proteaceous taxa will provide an                    
              invaluable data base to test putative intra-familial relationships,            
              by establishing homologies of characters from early developmental              
              stages, which in flowers tend to be conserved and phyletically                 
              informative (cladogenic) compared to later developmental events,               
              which are generally associated with functional limitations like                
              seed dispersal and pollination.  The combination of ontogenetics               
              and phylogenetics will elucidate the peculiar floral morphologies              
              of Proteaceae which contribute to its isolated position among                  
              angiosperms.  Preliminary results contradict the established                   
              classification of Proteaceae.  The study will also provide evidence            
              to clarify the taxonomic position of Proteaceae among other                    
              angiosperms.
