Title       : The Structured Use of Space and Movement in a Manual Visual Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1994   
File        : a9213110

Award Number: 9213110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Poizner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy Kegl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  Manual communication, with its very different motoric and                 
              perceptual substrate, offers a fresh and exciting opportunity to               
              investigate the biological foundations of language.  In a series               
              of experiments, we explore the nature of American Sign Language                
              (ASL) and its neural substrate.                                                
                                                                                             
                   Biological and Linguistic constraints on Structure.  We                   
              investigate the ways in which requirements of production                       
              constrain the 'phonological' structure of language, sorting                    
              natural constraints imposed by the visual gestural modality from               
              language-particular characteristics.  We also initiate new                     
              analyses of ASL verbs, which are the blueprint for and the                     
              backbone of the ASL sentence.  The research aims toward a                      
              comprehensive and systematic account of verb class organization,               
              lexical representation, and morphosyntax in ASL.                               
                                                                                             
                   Neurological Control of Language and Movement.  The study of              
              sign language probes the interaction of the brain's control of                 
              language and of movement.  We combine new techniques of                        
              three-dimensional computer-graphic movement analyses with                      
              linguistic analyses to illuminate neural mechanisms controlling                
              language and movement from an important new perspective: We                    
              contrast brain damaged signers with deficits at different levels               
              of linguistic processing and motor control.                                    
                                                                                             
                   Biological and Linguistic Constraints on Perception and                   
              Action.  Signs in American Sign Language are not static, but                   
              rather move in complex, highly patterned dynamic arrays.  We                   
              quantitatively investigate the ability of signers with motor                   
              disorders to analyze various types of visual motion stimuli,                   
              ranging from the simplest analysis of velocity, to motion with                 
              linguistic content.  Moreover, we investigate the processing                   
              stages underlying their ability to point to memorized target                   
              locations in 3-D space.  These data sets will help uncover the                 
              perceptual-motor underpinnings of the neural substrate for sign                
              language.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                   The convergence of formal linguistic, objective three-                    
              dimensional measurement, and neurological approaches in this                   
              project will provide fresh perspectives on issues in brain                     
              organization for language that are relevant for all natural                    
              languages, both spoken and signed.
