Title       : Collaborative Research on Legitimacy, Judicial Power and the European Court of
               Justice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9213201

Award Number: 9213201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82085              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Caldeira caldeira.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative project, with James Gibson of the                      
              University of Houston, to investigate the processes through which              
              transnational legal institutions acquire mass political legitimacy             
              and attain compliance with their decisions.  The project focusses              
              on the European Court of Justice, which is emerging as one of the              
              most powerful judicial institutions in the world, and is based on              
              a survey of the mass publics in the twelve nations of the European             
              Community.  The survey constitutes part of the Autumn 1992                     
              Eurobarometer.  Several hypotheses will be tested about the                    
              acquisition of legitimacy by transnational institutions, as well               
              as the consequences of that legitimacy for compliance with both                
              national and international courts.                                             
                                                                                             
              The project is one of the first research efforts investigating                 
              processes of the acquisition and maintenance of the legitimacy of              
              transnational legal institutions.  The analysis will contribute to             
              the development of theories of institutional legitimacy through (1)            
              determining whether the theoretical frameworks are useful beyond               
              the confines of the nation-state;, (2) exploring the connections               
              between legitimacy and compliance, relying heavily on theories of              
              procedural justice; (3) testing a serious of conventional                      
              hypotheses about courts, legitimacy, and compliance for which there            
              are no previous comparative inquiries; (4) providing a benchmark               
              for future research into the processes through which institutions              
              acquire a reservoir of good will; and (5) contributing to the                  
              development of democratic theory by analyzing how courts contribute            
              to and profit from the legitimacy of transnational political and               
              legal institutions.  Overall, the project will contribute to                   
              prominent questions in comparative politics, the workings of legal             
              systems, and in international relations.
