Title       : Unemployment Dynamics in Czechoslovakia During the Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1993  
File        : a9213310

Award Number: 9213310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Terrell   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Ham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Svejnar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 5930,5979,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study undertakes a rigorous analysis of unemployment dynamics             
              in the transition from central planning to a market economy.  As               
              unemployment rises rapidly in all the transforming economies, the              
              issues of the determinants of unemployment and the optimal policies            
              to cope with the explosive situation have come to the forefront of             
              the public policy debate.  The project makes two major                         
              contributions toward these issues.                                             
                                                                                             
              First, it uses unique Czechoslovak data and combines traditional               
              with frontier statistical analysis to examine three sets of                    
              important research questions.  The first set relates to the origins            
              and incidence of unemployment.  What are the characteristics of the            
              unemployed?  Are certain types of workers (e.g., older, female or              
              poorly educated workers) at greater risk of being laid off than                
              others?  The second set of questions focuses on identifying the                
              determinants of the duration of unemployment spells.  In this                  
              context, the study examines how unemployment duration varies with              
              enterprise characteristics, individuals' demographic and regional              
              characteristics, changing demand conditions, and changes in                    
              important elements of the unemployment insurance system.  The third            
              set is concerned with estimating and explaining variations in the              
              transition rates out of unemployment to other states (in or out of             
              the labor market).  For example, what is the probability that a                
              worker with certain characteristics and who was previously employed            
              in a given sector will leave unemployment for the small scale                  
              private sector or for training, etc.?  Unlike many previous studies            
              of unemployment, this project relates the incidence and duration of            
              unemployment to firm specific characteristics.                                 
                                                                                             
              The second contribution of the study consists of developing, in                
              conjunction with the Czech and Slovak Ministries of Labor and                  
              Social Affairs and the Federal Statistical Office, sampling schemes            
              and estimation methods for further analysis of the inflow to                   
              unemployment.  The main question to be addressed is how the large              
              public and newly privatized firms make their layoff decisions.                 
              Moreover, the new data set would allow for the estimation of the               
              transition rates from employment to unemployment.                              
                                                                                             
              The major scientific value of the proposal stems from its ability              
              to collect and analyze informative data sets related to one of the             
              most important economic phenomena in this century.  The dramatic               
              changes in the Central and East European economies in this period              
              provide us with much greater variation in the explanatory variables            
              than has been witnessed in any middle income or advanced economy.              
              The study will hence be able to capture major behavioral patterns              
              and contribute significantly to our understanding of the dynamics              
              of labor markets moving towards an equilibrium during the                      
              transition.
