Title       : Dissertation Research: Upper Paleolithic Site Location in the Portuguese
               Estremadura: Insight into Human Adaptation and Land Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9213736

Award Number: 9213736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7118               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. Marks amarks@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Thacker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Anthony Marks, Mr Paul Thacker, a                   
              graduate student at Southern Methodist University, will collect                
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological             
              research in the Estremadura region in western Portugal and collect             
              data from two river valleys. Previous work has indicated that this             
              region is rich in archaeological remains. In each he will focus on             
              surface survey and description. Aerial photographs and land                    
              ownership maps will be used to devise a sampling strategy which                
              includes all major landforms. A survey team of three people will               
              walk over selected areas and note all artifact occurrences. At each            
              site environmental variables  including aspect, elevation, slope               
              ground surface visibility, area and shape will be measured. The                
              distance to significant natural resources such as water and lithic             
              sources will also be noted. Because the sandy soils of the region              
              do not preserve faunal remains, assemblages consist almost solely              
              of stone tools and chipping waste. Mr. Thacker will analyze these.             
              On this basis he will reconstruct the settlement pattern for this              
              region and determine how it changed over time.                                 
                                                                                             
              While a great deal is known about the Paleolithic period in Spain              
              and more northerly parts of Europe, research in Portugal has lagged            
              far behind. Recent work by Dr. Marks and Portuguese collaborators              
              has revealed a succession of Upper Paleolithic cultures which span             
              the time range of ca 28,000 - 10,000 B.C. While excavation in                  
              stratified sites has established this sequence, very little is                 
              known about the cultural adaptations of any of these groups. Very              
              limited data exist on subsistence and land use practices and Mr.               
              Thacker's research will help to remedy this situation. The Upper               
              Paleolithic period saw the appearance of anatomically modern humans            
              in Europe together with the appearance of art, religion and other              
              complex traits which characterized all present day peoples. The                
              basic goal of Upper Paleolithic research is to understand how these            
              traits developed. To do so it is necessary to adopt a comparative              
              approach and study how people adapted to a variety of environmental            
              contexts. The value of Mr. Thacker's work can be understood in this            
              context.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists and increase our                       
              understanding of prehistoric adaptative strategies. It will also               
              assist in the training of an extremely promising scientist.
