Title       : Research Equipment (REG): A High Power Laser and Microscopic Image Analysis
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1992   
File        : a9213161

Award Number: 9213161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klod Kokini   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yung C. Shin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank P. Incropera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   A high power laser and microscopic image analysis system will             
              be used to perform controlled experiments on multilayered ceramic              
              thermal barrier coatings.  These coatings are developed for high-              
              temperature applications such as diesel engines, jet engines and               
              gas turbines used in land and aerospace vehicles.  Current research            
              performed by subjecting coated specimens to low heat fluxes has                
              resulted in identifying some of the failure modes.  It is now                  
              necessary to subject similar specimens, as well as specimen with               
              thin multi-layer coatings to large heat fluxes in order to obtain              
              larger temperatures and temperature gradients.  The cracking                   
              process occurring during the application of the high heat flux will            
              be quantified interactively using the microscopic image analysis               
              system.  The fundamental understanding that this research will                 
              provide will be used to develop and design multilayer coatings with            
              a significantly longer life under high temperature.                            
                   The second program is a multidisciplinary investigation to                
              develop a thermally enhanced processing technique in order to                  
              improve the productivity and surface quality in the machining of               
              ceramics.  The approach is to locally heat the surface of the                  
              workpiece by using a high power laser beam in front of the cutting             
              tool edge so as to soften the material and increase the ductility.             
              It is anticipated that this hybrid technique can allow for                     
              machining of the difficult-to-cut materials.  Thereby reducing the             
              cost to fabricate ceramic parts and improving dimensional and                  
              surface quality.  The research seeks to perform experimental                   
              investigation by constructing a testbed, to develop models for heat            
              transfer and surface deformation along with crack propagation, and             
              to implement a control scheme based on the process models.  In-                
              process sensing techniques pertinent to process control will be                
              developed as well.
