Title       : The Evaluation of the NCSA Video Macintosh Concept for Interpretation of
               Chemical Process Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9213691

Award Number: 9213691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Bishop kbishop@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The PI spent a year at the National Center for Supercomputing                  
              (NCSA) looking at the potential applications of high                           
              performance computers to the solution of chemical engineering                  
              problems.  Since then he has worked with NCSA in the area of                   
              developing network access to supercomputers.  The Dow Chemical                 
                                                                                             
              Company is an industrial partner of NCSA.  The PI has also                     
              been working with Dow on the remote use of supercomputers via                  
              high speed, wide area networks.  As a result of these                          
              activities, the PI and Dow are establishing a cooperative                      
              research program in the area of chemical process applications                  
              of high performance computers.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The specific purpose of the project is to evaluate the current                 
                                                                                             
              technology associated with frame accurate video recording                      
              applied to the interpretation and archival storage of                          
              scientific databases.  Two databases:  computed results from a                 
                                                                                             
              complex chemical reactor simulation and measured data from an                  
              experimental investigation will provide the information used                   
              for the evaluation.  Equipment and software assembled at Dow                   
              as an implementation of an NCSA project called "NCSA Video                     
              Macintosh - Producing Scientific Visualizations on a Desktop"                  
              will be used in the project.  Four specific activities are                     
              planned:                                                                       
                                                                                             
                1. Daily contact among the principals during the planning                    
              period      for the initiation of the program;                                 
                2. Familiarization of graduate research assistants with the                  
                                                                                             
                      procedures and equipment employed in industrial                        
              laboratories;                                                                  
                3. Training of graduate research assistants in the use of                    
                                                                                             
                     contemporary high performance computing equipment; and                  
                                                                                             
                4. Design of the experimental apparatus involved in                          
              evaluating      the performance of a flow reversal reactor.//
