Title       : Dissertation Research: Phosphorus Cycling in Semiarid Woodlands: Potential
               Consequences of Global Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9213243

Award Number: 9213243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne Kraemer  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1128,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project tests the hypothesis that global warming alters                   
              phosphorus cycling and triggers biological feedback mechanisms in              
              pinyon-juniper ecosystems.  The intention is to quantify the                   
              consequences of increased soil temperature and decreased moisture              
              on biogeochemical phosphorus cycling and the response of dominant              
              plant species relative to woodland successional development.  An               
              initial laboratory study will be conducted with soils incubated                
              under various temperature and moisture treatments.  During a one               
              year field study, soil climate will be manipulated in an early                 
              successional and a mature pinyon-juniper community of north-                   
              central Arizona.  A replicated factorial design will be used to                
              test for changes in inorganic, organic, microbial, and plant                   
              available phosphorus pools and fluxes.  Soil phosphatase activity              
              will be examined as an indicator of organic phosphorus                         
              mineralization.  Phosphorus reabsorption efficiency in pinyon,                 
              juniper, and blue grama will be used as a measurement of plant                 
              internal changes in phosphorus cycling in response to a soil warming.          
              This project will identify the inorganic and organic processes mediated        
              by an altered soil climate and the biological activity of plants               
              and microbes that are key to understanding phosphorus dynamics and             
              ecosystem function under conditions of climate change.  This                   
              research may be viewed as a case study for biogeochemical                      
              phosphorus cycling at a regional scale under conditions of global              
              change.
