Title       : History of Biological Electron Microscopy 1940-1975
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9213226

Award Number: 9213226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicolas Rasmussen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              Working with Dr. Peter Galison at Harvard University, the PI is                
              beginning a major study of the history of biological electron                  
              microscopy.  He is exploring the introduction and impact of this               
              machine as an instrument for life sciences.  Specimen preparation              
              techniques, initially quite inadequate, were adapted from light                
              microscopy, from non-related disciplines, and invented outright                
              through the 40s and 50s.  With each major change in preparative                
              technique came surprising appearances, necessitating related                   
              innovations in epistemological technique (e.g. micrograph                      
              interpretation).  Dr. Rasmussen is studying in detail a small                  
              number of Americans in the 40s, at institutions such as the                    
              Rockefeller Institute, Penn, MIT and especially RCA's  New Jersey              
              labs, responsible for many of the crucial innovations.  He is also             
              examining dissemination of students and practices from these labs              
              in the first postwar years.  For the period from the mid-50s to the            
              mid-70s, he is taking a selective approach to the burgeoning field.            
              To illuminate the epistemological roles of the electron microscope             
              in diverse biological disciplines, Dr. Rasmussen is examining                  
              several major controversies involving the instrument.  Finally, he             
              is comparing the megavolt electron microscope (introduced about                
              1970) in French and American life science.  This last undertaking              
              provides insights into the issues of national context for science              
              and the prospects of "big science" in biology.  Because of the                 
              importance of this project for understanding the processes for                 
              introducing new instrumentation in biology, this project is being              
              supported both by the Biological Instrumentation and Resources                 
              Division and by the Office of Studies in Science, Technology and               
              Society.
