Title       : Dissertation Research: A Phylogenetic and Morphometric Analysis of Early
               Palezoic Archaeogastropods: An Examination of the Expansion of a Clade into
               Morphospace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1992  
File        : a9213077

Award Number: 9213077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Wagner  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Archaeogastropoda appeared in the Late Cambrian and                   
              rapidly radiated to encompass a wide range of morphologies.  These             
              included most of the morphotypes associated with basic gastropod               
              lifestyles.  A minor morphologic radiation occurred later with                 
              changes in shell ornamentation.  Archaeogastropods thus offer                  
              multiple character types and morphologic levels for describing                 
              changes through time in the patterns of morphology.                            
                   This project includes both phylogenetic and morphometric                  
              analyses of Early Paleozoic archaeogastropods.  These approaches               
              will be used to compare typical morphological distances of                     
              differences between sister species in three different morphospaces:            
              1) one based upon twelve "basic-shell" characters appearing at the             
              group's origin; 2) one based upon shell ornamentation, which did               
              not appear in most subgroups until the Late Ordovician; and 3) one             
              based upon character complexes thought to have a basic functional              
              utility.  Using ornamentation to compare the temporal patterns of              
              clade expansion in both "early" and "later" shell characters will              
              provide information on whether inter- and intraclade variation                 
              depend more on the time in which the clade radiated (i.e.,                     
              extrinsic factors) or upon the ages of the character states                    
              distinguishing them (i.e., intrinsic factors).  Examining                      
              phylogenetic patterns in a morphospace of character complexes will             
              describe the archaeogastgropod radiation in a biologically more                
              meaningful manner and also provide an additional morphologic                   
              "level" to test for non-random sorting of clades.
