Title       : netILLINOIS - Illinois Research & Education Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9213981

Award Number: 9213981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George O. Strawn                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Patrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel L. Hartman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Bradley University with participation and support form major                   
              educational institutions and industry, and a strong working                    
              partnership with CICNet, the state of Illinois Central Management              
              Services (CMS), and with considerable networking experience                    
              within its member shop, is prepared to develop the necessary                   
              technical and organizational infrastructure to establish and                   
              operate this network known as netIllinois.                                     
              This network with its connection to regional and national                      
              networks, will support partnerships, consortia, and multi-                     
              disciplinary research activities; it will also enable statewide                
              access t computing resources, databases, library information                   
              electronic mail and messaging capabilities.  Specific emphasis                 
              will be given to Illinois-based information resources and                      
              research opportunities.  The educational institutions that will                
              participate include: Western Illinois Univ., Eastern Illinois                  
              Univ., Governors State Univ., Northeastern Illinois Univ.,                     
              Chicago State Univ., Wheaton College, Illinois Benedictine Col.,               
              Olivet Nazarine Col., Elmhurst Col., College of DuPage, and                    
              Illinois Valley Community College.                                             
                                                                                             
              The network will provide a consistent statewide architecture for               
              NSFNET access for a broad variety of entities engaged in                       
              education and research.  This cooperative network will provide                 
              gateways to regional, national, and international networks and                 
              will be consistent with their standards.  It will further the                  
              institutions' work in enhancing the state's economic development               
              through a well-educated workforce, accessible training                         
              opportunities, and research and development partnerships.                      
              Another goal of the network is to facilitate collaborative                     
              projects and sharing of resources between institutions, including              
              those outside the state.***
