Title       : Archaeology and Paleoenvironments of the Kapthurin Formation, Baringo, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9213775

Award Number: 9213775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45632              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally McBrearty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Sally                    
              McBrearty will conduct archaeological research in the Baringo Basin            
              region of Kenya. In particular she will focus on the Kapthurin                 
              Formation in the Tugen Hills. Previous archaeological research in              
              the area has yielded a stratified sequence of archaeological sites             
              as well as a small amount of hominid (human) skeletal material.                
              Building on previous work done by a Belgian team she will conduct              
              archaeological, geological and paleontological prospecting and                 
              mapping. Limited excavation will also be carried out. Sediment                 
              samples will be collected to determine age by means of argon                   
              dating. Geochemical fingerprinting will serve to check on field                
              stratigraphic correlations and x-ray fluorescence analysis will                
              provide a technique to provenience surface fossils whose                       
              stratigraphic position is unclear. Dr. McBrearty will use stone                
              artifacts and archaeological fauna in an attempt to reconstruct                
              human behavior. A number of techniques, including soil carbonate               
              analysis will be employed to understand the fluxuating environment             
              to which these hominids adapted.                                               
                                                                                             
              While a number of lines of evidence - archaeological,                          
              paleontological and genetic - suggest that anatomically modern                 
              humans first appeared in sub Saharan Africa just when and where                
              this occurred is unknown. What interests paleoanthropologists most             
              however is the process which lead to this emergence and here also              
              little evidence is available. Dr. McBrearty's research will address            
              this issue. Information to date suggests that the transition took              
              place during the Middle Pleistocene and the Kapthurin Formation                
              encompasses this time period. Prior work indicates that it contains            
              archaeological materials and fauna as well as human remains. Dr.               
              McBrearty's work will increase this data base and bring a wide                 
              range of modern scientific techniques to bear in order to make                 
              interpretations.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of Africa's past. It will provide data of                    
              interest to a large number of paleoanthropologists and shed new                
              light on the emergence of modern humans.
