Title       : Electronic Properties of Some Novel Mott Insulators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1994   
File        : a9213824

Award Number: 9213824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Kaplan kaplan@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. D. Mahanti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9294,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Electronic structure of two classes of novel Mott insulators will              
              be studied under this Materials Synthesis and Processing Initiative            
              grant: the crown-ether electrides and the layered transition metal             
              oxides.  Although these oxides are believed to be traditional Mott             
              insulators explained by the Hubbard model, in fact the ground state            
              of that model disagrees seriously with experimental Bragg neutron              
              scattering.  The assumptions of this model will be examined with               
              the objective of finding an appropriate replacement that will                  
              describe the observed spin density as well as the excited states.              
              A novel feature of the crown-ether electrides is that the anions               
              are simply the localized electrons themselves.  Calculations on                
              isolated crown-ether molecules suggests that the localized                     
              electrons will trace their lineage to a highly diffuse Rydberg-like            
              orbital occupied by the unpaired electron.  The diffuse character              
              of these molecular electrons may permit them to become localized in            
              the cavities formed "between" the molecular ions.  This                        
              proposition, as well as the spatial distribution of the ordered                
              magnetic moment in the transition metal oxides, will be explored               
              using ab initio Hartree-Fock theory as well as multi-band Hubbard              
              models using both variational and perturbation methods.                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical research will be conducted as part of the Materials                
              Synthesis and Processing Initiative.  The primary focus will be on             
              a theoretical explanation of a new class of electride materials -              
              the crown-ethers.  These materials have been synthesized at                    
              Michigan State and a firm theoretical explanation is required.  In             
              addition, research will be conducted on a related material, the                
              transition metal oxides, which is important as the precursor                   
              material for high temperature superconductors.
