Title       : Intertemporal Equilibrium: Theoretical Innovations and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1992   
File        : a9213991

Award Number: 9213991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Kehoe kehoe002@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project investigates the theoretical properties of                        
              intertemporal general equilibrium models and explores the                      
              possibilities for applying these models to analyze such policy                 
              changes as the free trade agreement currently being negotiated by              
              Canada, Mexico, and the United States.  The project has three                  
              components.  The first is a theoretical investigation of equilibria            
              of dynamic games with a large number of agents.  In this kind of               
              model, agents' actions do not have effects that can feed back by               
              changing all other agents' actions.  This feature makes these games            
              simpler to analyze than repeated games that focus on punishment                
              strategies and effects of reputation.  This simplicity allows the              
              introduction of state variables, such as wealth holdings and                   
              capital goods, that play an important role.                                    
                                                                                             
              The second component of the project is a theoretical and empirical             
              investigation of how an intertemporal general equilibrium model                
              with endogenous debt constraints can explain variations in                     
              individual consumption.  The economies with debt constraints will              
              be studied and the qualitative features of their equilibria will be            
              contrasted with those of economies with more traditional borrowing             
              constraints.  Two models will be constructed and calibrated to                 
              Consumer Expenditure Survey Data to study how well debt constraints            
              explain patterns in life-cycle consumption and responses of                    
              consumption to shocks in individual income.                                    
                                                                                             
              The third component of the project is the development of criteria              
              for evaluating the performance of applied general equilibrium                  
              models.  The results of this study would aid in the development of             
              a dynamic model to analyze the impact of a potential free trade                
              agreement on the economies of Canada, Mexico, and the United                   
              States.
