Title       : Studies on Wealth-Varying Intertemporal Elasticities of Substitution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9213930

Award Number: 9213930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masao Ogaki   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Atkeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project measures the systematic differences in the                        
              intertemporal allocation of consumption chosen by rich and the                 
              poor consumers and the impact that those differences have on the               
              intertemporal allocation of aggregate consumption.  The results                
              of this research could provide important new insights into the                 
              reasons why countries differ in economic growth rates, aggregate               
              consumption and savings.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Previous work by the investigators demonstrates that systematic                
              differences in the attitudes of the rich and the poor toward the               
              allocation of their consumption expenditure over time can lead to              
              significant effects of the level and cross-sectional distribution              
              of consumption on aggregate consumption growth and saving.                     
              This project studies wealth based variation in the intertemporal               
              allocation of consumption caused by differences in preferences                 
              and market imperfections.  The research on differences in                      
              preferences is a continuation of work by the investigators on                  
              measuring the aggregate impact of differences in the                           
              intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) across poor and                 
              rich consumers.  The previous work assumed complete markets.                   
              This project investigates whether or not preference parameters                 
              estimated and estimates of the aggregate IES under the complete                
              market assumption is severely biased by simulating data from an                
              economy with borrowing constraints.  Both differences in                       
              preferences and incompleteness of markets are incorporated into                
              the theoretical analysis.  The project distinguished empirically               
              between different models of incomplete markets by testing whether              
              the idiosyncratic impact of unemployment and illness on                        
              consumption is temporary or permanent.
