Title       : Dissertation Research: Protohistoric Interaction and CultureChange in the
               Central Ohio River Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9213382

Award Number: 9213382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
              Penelope B. Drooker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Gary Wright, MS Penelope Drooker will               
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will try to                    
              understand the effects of early indirect contact between European              
              colonists and Native Americans in the midwestern United States                 
              and will focus on the analysis of materials excavated from two                 
              Ohio archaeological sites. The Madisonville village/cemetary in                
              Hamilton County, Ohio dates to the early contact period and                    
              contains some 1400 burials within the same area as almost 1000                 
              storage pits.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              It yielded several hundred European-derived metal and glass                    
              artifacts. Excavated primarily over a period of three decades at               
              the turn of the century, it is the most populous and most                      
              completely excavated protohistoric site of the Fort Ancient                    
              culture. It probably spans the period from 15th to 17th                        
              centuries. MS Drooker will also examine a nearly site, Hahn's                  
              Field which is very similar but slightly earlier in time. No                   
              European derived artifacts were recovered and thus the two sites               
              taken together span the pre-contact to early-contact period. MS                
              Drooker will visit museums which curate the relevant materials                 
              and study these remains. She will integrate all available data -               
              documentation, maps, artifacts and human remains - into a cross-               
              referenced computer data base so that spatial relationships can                
              be determined. She will clarify the chronoloigcal relationships                
              and analyze early and late components to establish baseline                    
              social characteristics and exchange relationships. She will                    
              attempt to determine how these changed over time. Finally she                  
              will evaluate the results to obtain a better understanding of                  
              intra- and inter-regional interaction and change during the early              
              contact period in eastern North-America.                                       
                                                                                             
              While it is clear in the long run that Native American cultures                
              were destroyed in the colonization process, it is less often                   
              realized that, in some areas at least, an interactive process                  
              took place in which Native American groups adapted in a positive               
              way to European influence and integrated new elements into their               
              own culture. Areas such as the midwest where direct contact was                
              relatively late provide an excellent context in which to study                 
              this process. The two Fort Ancient sites are unique because they               
              provide a large data base which include both mortuary and                      
              cultural remains. In particular they offer material which allow                
              MS. Drooker to study changes in social organization, especially                
              social stratification, over time.                                              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new               
              light on the American past. It will increase our understanding of              
              the general processes which underly culture contact and change,                
              and will assist in the training of an extremely promising                      
              scientist.
