Title       : Numerical Study of Mesoscale Convection and Mei-Yu Front Near Taiwan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1995  
File        : a9213730

Award Number: 9213730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen-yih Sun   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Flash floods are major meteorological disasters which occur               
              around the globe.  Understanding of this phenomena is a challenging            
              problem because it is necessary to understand both complex dynamic             
              and microphysical processes at scales of motion that are smaller               
              than typically measured by conventional weather networks.  This                
              scale of motion is termed mesoscale by meteorologists.                         
                   The National Science Council of Taiwan has established a                  
              Multiple Hazards Mitigation Project whose meteorological component             
              is focussed on improving flash flood predictions -- especially                 
              flooding associated with a meteorological phenomenon known as the              
              Mei-Yu front.  A major field project to study the systems that                 
              cause flash floods, entitled the Taiwan Area Mesoscale Experiment,             
              was held in the Spring of 1987.  The project was cosponsored by the            
              National Science Council with participation of the National Science            
              Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration             
              of the United States.                                                          
                   Under a previous award the Principal Investigator developed               
              and applied a three-dimensional numerical model to the                         
              investigation of the characteristics of the Mei-Yu and its                     
              interactions with the topography of Taiwan and the synoptic                    
              environment.  The model was able to accurately simulate and reveal             
              details of the dynamics of flash flood events.                                 
                   The Principal Investigator will continue and expand on his                
              previous research.  Specific objectives include investigating:                 
              formation of the low-level jet and its interaction with the                    
              topography and mesoscale flows; the effects of diabatic                        
              heating/cooling on mesoscale circulations near the Mei-Yu; and the             
              interactions between the mesoscale events and the synoptic scale               
              forcing.
