Title       : Judgements of Responsibilities for Disaster Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1992 
File        : a9213737

Award Number: 9213737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76484              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie P. Hans 3024511236  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanne M. Nigg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Scientific advances in identifying, predicting and mitigating                  
              hazards are likely to produce significant changes in how the                   
              public assesses moral and ethical responsibility for disaster                  
              losses.  It should also affect the way in which those involved in              
              disaster mitigation, including design professionals, businesses,               
              and government officials, judge their own responsibility.  This                
              project begins an examination of the factors that influence                    
              judgments of responsibility for losses from both technological                 
              and natural disasters.  This initial period of the research will               
              be devoted to two tasks:  the development of concept papers                    
              addressing the major intellectual traditions that have                         
              contributed to understanding of judgments of responsibility; and               
              the identification of the principal dimensions (and the variables              
              that reflect components of those dimensions) of the attribution                
              of responsibility for disasters.  With the guidance of an                      
              interdisciplinary advisory group, in the first six months of the               
              project, the investigators will develop a series of concept                    
              papers reviewing major intellectual traditions that have been                  
              used to understand how people judge responsibility, and review                 
              case study materials in the archives of the University of                      
              Delaware's Disaster Research Center to identify potentially                    
              useful examples of disasters that can form the basis for initial               
              scenario development work.  Drawing on the papers and the hazards              
              literature, key dimensions that influence potentially different                
              attributions of responsibility will be identified.  The second                 
              half of the project will generate a set of relevant dimensions                 
              and a large number of scenarios.  The dimensions will then be                  
              varied experimentally to examine how they influence lay                        
              judgments.  Premiminary work will be conducted with convenience                
              samples .  However, to produce generalizable data from this phase              
              of the research, the investigators also plan to conduct some of                
              the secnario development work with paid subjects from the                      
              community and with representatives of one "stakeholder" group,                 
              most likely engineers.  The first year of the project will                     
              procude a set of scenarios to be used in experimental and survey               
              phases of the research.  The scenarios will be based on an                     
              analysis of the subjects' responses.  The concept papers will be               
              published in various outlets, and the early experimental analysis              
              should also result in publishable papers addressing the                        
              methodological issues involved in scenario-based research as well              
              as conceptual development of attribution processes for disaster                
              consequences.
