Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: A Request for ThermalRadiation Measurement
               Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9213183

Award Number: 9213183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Torrance ket1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Partial support is requested for the purchase of equipment to                  
              fund an interdisciplinary thermal radiation laboratory, to be                  
              used to support engineering research in the Program of                         
              Computer Graphics and the School of Mechanical and Aerospace                   
              Engineering. The equipment will allow new                                      
              computer-graphics-based algorithms for the analysis of radiant                 
              exchange. These algorithms have the potential for greatly                      
              enhancing the speed and accuracy of radiant calculations in                    
              complex geometries.  The CCD camera will be calibrated as a                    
              spectrophotometer to provide fast spectral images of an                        
              illuminated environment. Spectral information will be achieved                 
              by using broadband filters and computer-based spectral                         
              inversion. The measured images will be compared with                           
              calculated images. The equipment will allow detailed                           
              assessment of calculation methods in geometrically complex                     
              environments. The requested                                                    
              spectroradiometer and reflectometers will allow a variety of                   
              hemispherical and bidirectional reflectivities to be measured                  
              over a wide wavelength range. Such data is required as input                   
              for simulation algorithms. It will also be used to assess new                  
              wave-optics-based bidirectional reflectance models.
