Title       : CAREER: Institutional Structure, Civic Engagement, and Crime in Nonmetropolitan
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0237968

Award Number: 0237968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Lee lee@soc.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1037,1045,1187,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project develops a research and teaching program that examines
              the
relationship between non-economic institutional structures, civic
              engagement, and crime rates in nonmetropolitan communities. Accumulating
              evidence suggests nonmetropolitan communities or rural communities exhibit
              substantial variation in rates of crime over time and space. However,
              criminological theory and empirical research continues to focus on urban
              communities.  Consequently, students of sociology, criminology, and criminal
              justice are rarely exposed to issues of crime and its control outside of an
              urban context. These deficits persist despite the facts that the
              nonmetropolitan population is steadily growing, and that traditionally urban
              problems such as drug production and distribution (and their attendant
              problems) are spreading to nonmetropolitan areas.   The general objectives of
              the research are to: (1) articulate more thoroughly a conceptual model to
              explain variation in crime rates over time and space emphasizing the importance
              of community institutional structures and civic engagement for strengthening
              informal social control, and (2) provide a series of cross-sectional and
              longitudinal tests of the conceptual framework using Uniform Crime Report and
              Supplementary Homicide Report data and information from the Census of
              Population and Housing, the Census of Churches, and the Economic Census. The
              study also investigates variations in the explanatory power of the framework
              across crime types and for disaggregated crime rates (gender, age, race, etc.).
              

The educational component consists of developing an undergraduate course on
              rural crime. This class makes use of innovative instructional techniques,
              including experiential learning and assisted learning activities. These
              techniques will be augmented by the development of a research and teaching web
              site where students can access data on crime, institutions, and civic
              engagement for nonmetropolitan communities.  The PI will also develop a
              graduate course on rural crime and community organization.  The cumulative
              efforts of the ongoing research project will be integrated into this course.
              

The intellectual merits of the study lie in advancing a more concrete
              perspective on the social sources of community organization and applying it to
              crime in a generally neglected context - nonmetropolitan communities.
              Additionally, previously unanswered questions on the explanatory efficacy of
              the theory across sub-categories of crime are addressed. The project has
              significant broader impacts in that it will not only enhance the knowledge base
              on rural crime, but also increase the labor force marketability of a student
              body drawn primarily from rural areas.  Many of the students will go on to work
              in criminal justice and social service agencies in nonmetropolitan areas after
              graduation.  Study results can inform social policy on how to effectively
              engage institutions at the local level and cultivate civic engagement in
              communities at large. 

