Title       : RUI: Genetics of Bdellovibrio Bacteriovorus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0237852

Award Number: 0237852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152086             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark O. Martin momartin@oxy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1112,1156,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mark O. Martin of Occidental College to study
              the genetics of the bacterial predator Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus.  This
              unusual microbe exists in two forms:  a free swimming phase in search of other
              Gram negative bacterial prey cells to attack and invade, and an
              intraperiplasmic growth phase between the inner and outer membranes of prey
              cells.  Different genes are expressed in each portion of the life cycle of
              Bdellovibrio, and this project proposes to investigate these "predation" genes.
               A combination of functional complementation, reporter gene technology,
              transposon mutagenesis, and other molecular biological tools will be used to
              investigate the genetics of this fascinating bacterium.  A previously
              identified and unexpected alpha amylase gene from Bdellovibrio will be
              characterized with regard to structure, function, relationship to other
              amylases, and temporal expression throughout the organism's lifecycle.  In
              addition, transposon mutagenesis and in vivo expression technology will be used
              to identify and characterize Bdellovibrio genes involved with predation and
              intraperiplasmic growth.

It is expected that bacterial predation will be
              found to play a significant role in microbial ecology and population structure;
              thus, intensive study of Bdellovibrio will be an important first step in
              understand the roles that microbial predators play in nature.  The compartment
              in which Bdellovibrio grows and reproduces, the periplasm of prey cells, is
              unusual and difficult to study.  Bdellovibrio's adaptations to this environment
              will shed light on the nature of the periplasm in ways that cannot easily be
              matched by in vitro studies.  Additionally, the periplasmic life style of
              Bdellovibrio may show relationships to the diverse strategies used by bacteria
              that cause disease in animals and plants.  Importantly, this proposal involves
              undergraduate students at every step.  Because of the demographics of
              Occidental College, this grant will provide many opportunities for students
              from diverse backgrounds, including underrepresented minorities, to explore a
              unique research system.  Additionally, the techniques used in this proposal
              will be incorporated into the laboratory portions of relevant courses, to give
              all students the opportunity to explore microbial genetic analysis:  how
              research is actually carried out, and how results are interpreted, evaluated,
              and presented.

