Title       : Technology and Empire in the Nuclear Age: A Global and Local History of Uranium
               Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0237661

Award Number: 0237661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabrielle Hecht hechtg@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              After World War II, public discourse about the nuclear age invoked rupture: for
              better or worse, nuclear technology had changed the world forever. For the
              weakening colonial powers, another rupture loomed: the loss of empire. With an
              ambivalent eye on the U.S., British and French leaders began to argue that
              international power no longer rested on imperialism, but on nuclear might. For
              the half-century since then, possessing a national nuclear program has been a
              symbol of modernity. But what has global nuclear development meant for local
              communities? How have nuclear technologies shaped relationships between
              developing nations and nuclear powers? The history of uranium mining shows that
              colonialism and its complex dynamics were central to the technological and
              geopolitical success of the nuclear age. Hiroshima uranium came from the Congo.
              Britain had colonial ties to uranium-supplying regions in Africa. Uranium
              helped Australia and South Africa to ally themselves with the defense of the
              West. France could pursue an independent nuclear program partly because of
              reserves in its African colonies. Internal colonial dynamics figured too, as
              deposits were found on native tribal lands. And uranium played a key role in
              new colonial relationships between South Africa and present-day Namibia.
              Uranium's history makes visible actors often ignored in nuclear narratives:
              Malagasy lab technicians, Gabonese topographers, Namibian bulldozer drivers,
              South African ore sorters, Native American shaft sinkers, and Aboriginal
              landowners. This project offers a new perspective on the nuclear age by
              exploring the history of uranium mining as a set of interacting technological,
              political, and cultural practices in global, local, and comparative
              perspective. It focuses on four key zones: Francophone Africa; native lands in
              North America; Australian Aboriginal territories; and Namibia and South Africa.
              The project runs from the late 1940s to the late 1980s. How did the
              technologies and practices of uranium mining reflect and shape political,
              social, and cultural relationships in each of these zones? In what ways and to
              what extent were these zones linked? The project investigates each uranium
              mining site in its immediate local and national context. It examines how each
              site fit into an international network of atomic energy agencies, corporations,
              and other related institutions. And it explores the circulation of people,
              technologies, knowledge, and practices through: mining sites, multinational
              corporations, national and international atomic energy institutions, local and
              international technical training programs, and local and trans-national
              activist organizations. The project reshapes our understanding of how one of
              the most significant technologies of the Cold War became global, and explores
              in depth the local dimensions of that global reach. By examining the different
              ways that uranium companies positioned themselves as instruments of development
              and the ways that locals responded to that positioning, the project illuminates
              the changing meaning of development over time and place. By attending to the
              emergence of technical training programs and environmental and social impact
              studies, the research shows variance in their methods and meanings, thereby
              offering important frameworks through which to assess the use of such programs
              and studies. Finally, its focus on uranium contributes to an understanding of
              the proliferation of nuclear materials. In all these domains, the historical
              perspective offered by this project illuminates the long-term fate of
              technopolitical processes and may suggest frameworks for thinking about new
              policies.
