Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Dental Development and Life History of Malagasy Lemurs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0237126

Award Number: 0237126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary T. Schwartz gschwartz@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ever since the pioneering work of Adolf Schultz, primatologists have shown a
              sustained interest in the skeletal developmental correlates of life history
              variation among primates, and in their implications for understanding the
              evolution of life history. More recently, the fossil record has been the direct
              focus of such comparative work. New tools in dental microstructure are
              available for teasing out aspects of life history variation among extinct
              species and have begun to be applied with great success to subfossil lemurs.
              Teeth preserve within them a permanent record of their development enabling
              researchers to retrieve longitudinal developmental data from single adult
              specimens. This is not merely extremely useful for exploring life history
              variation among extinct species, but it promises to revolutionize our
              understanding of some aspects of the life histories of extant species as well.
              
Scientific merit: This study will bring the study of dental microstructure
              and other new analytical tools to bear on one of the most fascinating groups of
              extinct primates: the giant subfossil lemurs of Madagascar. Their closest
              living relatives, the extant lemurs, show remarkable variation in the timing of
              dental, craniofacial, and somatic growth and development, all within the
              context of a highly seasonal and unpredictable environments. These differing
              patterns of dental and skeletal growth relate to variation in lemur life
              history strategies - in particular, to the trade-off between adult female
              survival and reproductive effort. By combining data on the behavioral ontogeny
              of food processing (using new techniques in use-wear analyses), dental
              development and eruption (via radiography), and dental microstructural analyses
              of single adult specimens, this project will address questions never before
              asked of extinct primates: How long was gestation in giant lemurs? How rapidly
              did they grow? At what age did weaning occur in these species, and how
              prolonged was the weaning transition? Do frugivorous lemur species grow more
              slowly than like-sized folivores, as predicted by the ecological risk aversion
              hypothesis? Does the seasonal scheduling of growth in extinct lemurs cause a
              large proportion of adult size to be achieved before weaning, or do
              fundamentally different rates of infant growth characterize extinct lemur taxa
              as they do extant lemurs? Finally, advances in landmark-based 3-D geometric
              morphometrics (e.g., Morphologika, HETPAD), along with conventional analysis of
              trait-age matrices to chronicle the relationships between dental, brain and
              craniofacial development in extinct lemurs, allows us to test current
              hypotheses regarding the evolution of life history strategies in what is
              perhaps the world's most unique and diverse adaptive radiation of primates.
              Ultimately, this study will provide the evolutionary developmental framework
              for understanding the evolution of life history variation in primates.
              
Broader impact: An important broader impact of this study is graduate and
              postgraduate training. One of the PIs has a Malagasy graduate student who is
              studying lemurs and has expressed an interest in learning the techniques
              described here. The microstructural work required here will also provide ideal
              training for a two-year postdoctoral associate. Furthermore, the PIs have
              ongoing collaborations with others in the realms of Madagascar's paleobiology,
              lemur ecology, ecomorphology, heterochrony and skeletal ontogeny, and dental
              microstructure. We expect the work described here to intersect profitably with
              other research projects, and thus to inform research on the evolution of
              primate community structure in Madagascar, the patterns and causes of
              extinction, and the evolutionary developmental biology of primates. 



