Title       : CAREER: Direct Foliar Uptake of Atmospheric Nitrogen: Molecular to Ecosystem
               Considerations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0237674

Award Number: 0237674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed P. Sparks jps66@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Jed Spark's five-year CAREER award will establish an integrated
              research and education plan to investigate exchanges of gaseous reactive
              nitrogen compounds between the atmosphere and terrestrial ecosystems, the
              balances of which are intrinsic to the maintenance of life on earth.  Sparks
              and his students will focus on the magnitudes of these exchanges using studies
              at multiple scales, from the molecular-physiological with emphasis on
              mechanisms controlling exchanges, to the biogeochemical with emphasis on the
              mass balance of nitrogen cycles of ecosystems, to atmospheric nitrogen
              chemistry with emphasis on the reactivity and control over turnover times. This
              program will enable a new generation of Interdisciplinary scientists to be
              trained. 

Reactive nitrogen compounds derive from natural soil driven
              processes, lightning, emission from fertilizer application, and industrial
              sources and are of particular interest for three reasons. First, at high
              concentrations reactive oxidized nitrogen is known to be toxic to plants,
              although at lower concentrations such compounds have been shown to act as an
              "atmospheric fertilizer." Second, direct input of nitrogen through leaves into
              plants is not normally considered by ecologists, while it is conceivable that
              this could result in both short and long-term effects on photosynthesis,
              changes in litter quality, and changes in carbon and nitrogen allocation
              patterns within plants. Finally, nitrogen oxides play a central role in
              controlling the chemistry of the lower atmosphere by catalyzing the formation
              of ozone. 

Sparks will investigate the molecular and physiological
              mechanisms of foliar nitrogen uptake, quantify the magnitude and controls over
              canopy-level flux of reactive nitrogen over a range of ecosystems, and support
              the development of both regional and global biogeochemistry and air-quality
              models. Additionally, he will implement a two-phase education plan aimed at
              recruiting and training young scientists. He will first develop a web-based
              educational platform supported by the Cornell Adult University aimed at
              recruiting prospective students to the field. He then will support training of
              young scientists through participation in his research and participation in the
              Biosphere-Atmosphere Research Training program at the University of Michigan
              Biological Station. 

Making linkages between gene expression and
              biogeochemical processes, as will occur under this award, is a very important
              part of the future of ecosystem science and a suitably lofty goal as a theme
              for the early career development of this young scientist.



