Title       : Workshop -- Use of Sediment Quality Guidelines and Related Tools for the
               Assessment of Contaminated Sediments, Montana, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0237056

Award Number: 0237056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Schiefer schiefer@setac.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SETAC
	      1010 North 12th Avenue
	      Pensacola, FL  325013370    850/469-1500

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This SETAC-sponsored Pellston Workshop, Use of Sediment Quality Guidelines
              (SQGs) and Related Tools for the Assessment of Contaminated Sediments is the
              latest in a series of SETAC-sponsored workshops to examine the
              state-of-the-science of different assessment tools and to provide
              recommendations for improving assessments of sediment quality and ecological
              risks. This workshop will focus on the issue of how best to integrate
              information derived from multiple chemical and biological lines of evidence in
              sediment quality evaluations. These lines of evidence, which are developed
              through the application of different assessment tools, often include
              chemistry-based sediment quality guidelines (SQGs). 

Invited participants
              will explore the scientific underpinnings of five critical questions about
              sediment quality assessment. Participants will be organized into five technical
              workgroups, each focused on one of the following questions:

1. What are the
              scientific underpinnings and uncertainties associated with SQGs?
2. How well
              do SQGs represent the potential for effects or no effects observed on
aquatic
              biota?
3. How can SQGs be used in one or more frameworks to assess
              sediment
contamination?
4. How should other assessment tools that are
              available for evaluating sediment
contamination be used in combination with
              SQGs?
5. What are the assessment and management options for addressing
              particularly
complex sediment systems?

The Steering Committee will guide
              pre-workshop technical  activities, assign discussion-initiation papers, and
              facilitate the workshop. The proceedings of the workshop will then be published
              in a peer-reviewed book and distributed by SETAC. 
