Title       : CAREER: The Emergence of Sociopolitical Differentiation in Prehistoric
               Communities of the Southwestern United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0237579

Award Number: 0237579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401935             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kantner kantner@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation CAREER award, archaeologist Dr. John Kantner
              will investigate why social and political inequities appeared in a small,
              egalitarian community 1,000 years ago in what is now northwestern New Mexico.
              The research is guided by principles from a variety of disciplines, including
              anthropology, ecology, psychology, and economics, that together show how human
              behavior is guided by evolutionary and cultural forces that often lead to
              cooperation but also can result in competition and inequality. The model that
              Dr. Kantner will evaluate proposes that the development of new sociopolitical
              relationships is stimulated by specific contextual changes, such as climatic
              improvements or exposure to new religions, that affect how people evaluate
              their regular interactions with one another. Depending on the nature of the
              changes, human relationships can be restructured such that inequities develop.
              While this study considers this process in one specific prehistoric community,
              both the theoretical foundations for the research as well as the detailed
              explanatory model have wider implications for understanding human behavior.
              

The CAREER funding will allow Dr. Kantner to conduct five years of
              interdisciplinary archaeological research on the selected prehistoric Anasazi
              community. The investigations will include traditional survey and excavation of
              family households combined with the use of modern remote-sensing equipment and
              geochemical analyses in order to reconstruct the social and economic history of
              the community. To minimize destruction of irreplaceable archaeological sites,
              to avoid disturbing federally protected prehistoric cemeteries, and to make the
              most efficient use of the funding, a targeted sampling approach will be used.
              In addition to the archaeological fieldwork, computer-based geographical (GIS)
              techniques will be used for reconstructing what the climate and landscape were
              like through the community's history. The results of the research will include
              a detailed social, economic, and political history of the community as well as
              a precise paleoecological history. These two sequences can then be compared,
              allowing for a comprehensive evaluation of the model for the origins of
              village-level inequality. 

Undergraduate and graduate students from Georgia
              State University (GSU), an urban environment that accommodates a generally
              disadvantaged student body, will be integrated into all stages of the
              research-from field work to professional activity and public outreach. Much of
              the funding will therefore indirectly and directly support student training in
              archaeology and professional research. A portion of the CAREER funding will
              support the purchase of equipment and development of facilities for conducting
              modern archaeological research. Students will also assist in the development of
              an educational website providing updates on the research to the wider public
              and to other professionals. By the end of the five year research program, GSU
              will have an updated infrastructure for archaeological research and for
              teaching the science of archaeology, and Dr. Kantner will have completed a
              comprehensive case study of the emergence of sociopolitical differentiation,
              providing a foundation for future professional research and student learning
              experiences.

