Title       : CAREER: Wavelet Analysis of Scale Effects on Subsurface Flow and Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0237702

Award Number: 0237702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roseanna M. Neupauer rneupauer@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0237702
Neupauer

Spatial variability of aquifer properties affects the
              movement and spread of contaminants in the subsurface.  Since a complete
              spatial representation of the heterogeneous aquifer properties cannot be
              obtained, predictions of solute movement through porous media contain
              uncertainty.  An understanding of the spatial variability of aquifer properties
              and their effects on flow and transport is essential for making reliable
              predictions of solute transport, a necessary component of optimal design of
              remediation systems, risk assessment, siting of water supply wells, and others.
              

Aquifer heterogeneity occurs at multiple scales; however, measurements of
              aquifer properties are often made at only a limited number of scales. These
              measurement scales may not correspond to the scales that control subsurface
              flow and transport.  In this study, we will analyze dominant scales of aquifer
              properties that affect groundwater flow and solute transport and identify
              relationships between dominant scales and physical and chemical heterogeneity
              of aquifer properties.  Continuous wavelet transforms (CWT) will be used to
              extract scale information from data sets of the spatial distribution of aquifer
              properties and system states (hydraulic head and solute concentration). The CWT
              is a tool that extracts local information at multiple scales. The technique
              will be developed and tested using synthetic data sets and numerical
              simulations. It will subsequently be used with data from laboratory- and
              field-scale flow and transport experiments to identify dominant scales of
              aquifer properties; the evolution of dominant scales of system states; and the
              relationships between dominant scales, the degree of heterogeneity, and the
              effects on solute transport.  Knowledge of the dominant scales of flow and
              transport and the relationship between them and aquifer heterogeneity will
              facilitate more targeted sampling for aquifer characterization and improved
              predictions of subsurface flow and transport.

The educational goals are to
              teach students to recognize variability and uncertainty in physical systems and
              to perform engineering design and analysis that accounts for this uncertainty;
              to improve science and engineering education by emphasizing the practical
              applications of engineering and science knowledge; and to encourage women and
              underrepresented minorities to consider technical fields. They will be achieved
              through exposure to realistic, complex data sets for analysis and design;
              practical hands-on activities to accompany lectures; and outreach activities to
              promote science and engineering fields to underrepresented minorities and
              women.  

