Title       : Conference on Perception and Realization in Language and Gender Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0237734

Award Number: 0237734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Bucholtz bucholtz@linguistics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation supports the Conference on Perception and
              Realization in Language and Gender Research. This conference will held during
              the intersession of the 2003 Linguistic Society of America Summer Institute at
              Michigan State University. The conference will combine invited papers, panel
              discussions, poster sessions, and workshops. The goal is to increase awareness
              of international perspectives on the rapidly expanding linguistic subfield of
              language and gender and to forge ties between researchers in the U.S. and other
              countries by providing multiple opportunities for focus on a single question:
              How is the relationship between language and gender perceived and realized,
              both by speakers and by researchers themselves? This theme recognizes growing
              attention to the question of the empirical validity of any relationship between
              language and gender. Until recently, such a relationship was thought to be more
              or less fixed in gender difference and to obtain across many contexts of
              language use. Language and gender research emphasized this relationship by
              documenting specific gender differences in language use and developing
              explanations based on culture or power. In the past 15 years, researchers have
              focused less on differences and more on the role of context in the study of
              female and male speakers. This reframing of the field has produced a new set of
              research questions regarding perceived associations between gender and
              particular linguistic features as well as the realization of such associations
              in specific contexts of language use. These questions include: How can one be
              sure that a linguistic phenomenon is associated with gender? How and when are
              gender identities salient? To what extent do perceptions of gendered language
              use correspond to linguistic manifestations of gender identity?

The project
              will lead to scientific advancement in language and gender research by bringing
              together representatives of various theoretical, methodological, and
              disciplinary perspectives to address newly central issues in the field. In
              addition, the conference provides a rare opportunity to bring current concerns
              in language and gender to the linguistics community at large, and to provide
              education and training to graduate students at the early stages of their
              graduate careers. The conference will also support the education of
              undergraduates and the application of language and gender research findings to
              real-world problems, such as issues of gender and language in institutional
              contexts like the law, medicine, and education. Results of the conference will
              made available electronically as working papers as well as in traditional
              published form. To make conference results accessible and inexpensive for the
              widest possible audience, online publication will be especially promoted.


