Title       : CAREER: Self-Regulating Power-Aware Interconnection Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0237540

Award Number: 0237540
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Li-Shiuan Peh peh@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Power is becoming increasingly as important, if not more important than
              
performance in many digital systems ranging from PCs and servers to
              
Internet routers and embedded systems-on-a-chip. While there has been
              
substantial research exploring the power efficiency of the processing 
and
              memory elements of digital systems, research investigating the
              power
consumption of communication elements has been lagging. As a wide range
              
of digital systems becomes increasingly interconnected, it is now
both
              timely and critical to explore power-aware interconnection networks.

In this
              proposal, we outline our plans to research, develop and build 
self-regulating
              power-aware interconnection networks that trade off 
power and performance
              automatically while meeting design constraints. In 
these networks,
              power-aware router and link mechanisms export knobs by 
which network power
              and performance can be adjusted. Policies then 
control these knobs to deliver
              network power-performance that meet 
design goals. Self-regulating power-aware
              networks alleviate designers 
from the daunting task of reconciling two highly
              divergent goals -
high performance, and low power.

In highlighting and
              demonstrating the importance of power awareness in 
networks, our proposed
              research advances a deeper understanding of 
networks from a fresh
              perspective, with a potential for high-impact 
contributions in research. In
              addition, we see our research leading to 
power efficiency being an integral
              part of networking curriculum.


