Title       : CAREER: Functional Nanoscale Architectures by Self-Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0237860

Award Number: 0237860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin Nuckolls cn37@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,7202,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project entitled CAREER: Functional Nanoscale Architectures by Self-Assembly
              aims to educate students in chemical approaches to nanoscience through an
              integration of educational and research objectives.  The thrust of the research
              is to design new types of monodisperse oligomers of overcrowded aromatics that
              can fold themselves into well-defined conformations. The synthesis of these
              multimers will be expanded to create monodisperse oligomers 8 to 20 subunits
              long.  Due to their unique structure these oligomers could provide new motifs
              for self-assembly in lipid bilayers and in bulk.  These oligomers will be
              investigated as one dimensional semiconductors and nanoscale piezoelectric
              elements.  Integrated within the research plan, is begin to modernize the
              chemistry curriculum to have the chemical elements of nanotechnology.  Proposed
              is an advanced organic chemistry lab for junior level undergraduates that would
              use organic synthesis and self-assembly as a tool to teach the concepts of
              polymer structure/function relationships, self-assembly/surface patterning, and
              liquid crystallinity.  Some of the web-based, multimedia modules and
              nanoscience laboratories created for undergraduate education will be used to
              reach underrepresented groups in New York area high schools.

This project
              will educate future scientists and engineers through a chemistry program that
              integrates both educational and research objectives.  The educational
              objectives will create web-based, multimedia modules and laboratory experiments
              to begin the modernization and revitalization of the undergraduate chemistry
              curriculum.  Some of the elements used in the undergraduate curriculum reform
              will be used to reach underrepresented groups in New York area high schools. 
              The research objectives in this proposal will train graduate and undergraduate
              students in cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research that designs, synthesizes,
              and studies new molecules that self-organize into novel structures. These
              unique oligomers could act as nanoscale wires, switches, and devices for energy
              conversion. This proposal is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research
              and the Chemistry Division.
  




