Title       : CAREER: Super Junction Power Semiconductor Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0237420

Award Number: 0237420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zheng Shen johnshen@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Advances in power semiconductor technology in the past two decades have led to
              the rapid proliferation of power electronics into telecommunications,
              computers, consumer, transportation, industrial applications, and all forms of
              environment-friendly energy conversion. However, the performance of state of
              the art power semiconductor devices is quickly approaching the theoretical
              limits of silicon. This CAREER proposal aims to investigate an innovative
              device concept termed super junction (SJ) that is capable of improving the
              power handling capability of conventional silicon power devices by orders of
              magnitude, and effectively integrate the research with education activities.
              

The research project has five objectives: (1) to investigate novel
              super-junction MOSFET structures through extensive device modeling and
              simulation, which overcome the limitations of the current device design and
              fabrication methods; (2) to develop a practical SJ fabrication process by
              integrating the high aspect ratio MEMS techniques with conventional planar DMOS
              processes; (3) to extend the basic super-junction concept into other device
              types including the high voltage, fast-recovery Schottky freewheeling diode;
              (4) to study circuit application issues that are inherent to the unique
              characteristics of SJ devices such as electromagnetic interference (EMI) and
              safe operating area (SOA) degradation; and (5) to extend the super-junction
              concept to SiC and other wide bandgap semiconductor materials. The unique
              contribution of the proposed research is in the co-development of novel
              super-junction device and processing concepts; the integration of MEMS and DMOS
              technologies; the integrated study of material, processing, device, and
              circuit; the interactive use of modeling and experimental means; and the close
              university-industry partnership. The outcome of the proposed research will
              significantly advance knowledge in the field of power semiconductors and power
              electronics and provide a foundation for the next-generation, high-efficiency,
              low-cost, light-weight, and compact power electronics technology to meet the
              society's needs in conserving energy and environments.

The rapid
              proliferation of power electronics will generate a serious demand for
              power-electronics-proficient electrical engineers in the United States. The
              education plan addresses these emerging needs. The primary goal of the CAREER
              education plan is to integrate the proposed research into the existing power
              electronics and solid-state electronics curriculum. It consists of five
              components: (1) developing new courses to meet the emerging educational needs
              in power electronics, (2) improving and enriching existing courses by
              incorporating research materials into lectures and projects, (3) integrating
              research and teaching through student participation in research, (4) mentoring
              students, especially women and underrepresented minority students, and
              providing community services, and (5) facilitating close interaction between
              students and industry. The proposed education plan will help meet the emerging
              demand for human resource development and significantly enhance the
              university's research and education infrastructure. The student mentoring and
              community outreaching activities will broaden the participation of
              underrepresented minority groups in science and engineering.

