Title       : CAREER: Functional Genomic Analysis of Germ Cell Development and Regeneration in
               Planarians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0237825

Award Number: 0237825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $639256             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip A. Newmark pnewmark@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1111,1187,9177,9178,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0237825
Newmark

The specification of primordial germ cells is the first step
              required for the successful propagation of sexually reproducing species.  In
              spite of the biomedical and evolutionary implications of understanding how the
              germline is formed and how totipotency is established and maintained in germ
              cells, we are far from understanding these processes in detail.  In the
              best-studied invertebrates and many vertebrates, germ cells are specified by
              maternally supplied, cytoplasmic determinants.  In mammals, however, germ cell
              specification proceeds epigenetically, requiring inductive interactions.  The
              mechanisms linking these different modes of specification remain unclear.  The
              research outlined here will investigate the epigenetic specification of germ
              cells using planarians- classic subjects of regeneration studies- as a model. 
              Planarians can regenerate complete organisms from tiny body fragments; their
              germ cell lineage displays similar plasticity.  Planarian germ cells form from
              adult stem cells only when the flatworm attains the appropriate size.  This
              research will utilize genetic differences between wild-type sexual planarians
              and an asexual strain that lacks all reproductive structures and reproduces by
              transverse fission.  Expressed sequence tags will be generated from the sexual
              planarians, and microarray analyses will identify genes expressed
              preferentially during sexual reproduction.  The cell types in which these genes
              are expressed will be defined by automated in situ hybridization.  Functional
              assays using double-stranded RNA will be used to identify genes required for
              germ cell specification and differentiation.  These experiments will provide
              insight into the mechanisms by which germ cells are specified via inductive
              interactions and the extent to which these mechanisms have been conserved
              evolutionarily.

The educational component of this proposal includes science
              outreach to local elementary school students.  Planarians will be used in
              demonstrations that will reinforce many of the key biological concepts that
              elementary school students are expected to master.  The demonstrations should
              also provide students with a sense of the curiosity and wonder that drive
              scientific research.  A new graduate core course in cell biology will be
              developed; this course will be taught from an experimental perspective,
              highlighting readings from the primary literature and emphasizing critical
              thinking skills.  Finally, to increase the scientific literacy of students from
              the humanities and social sciences, a new course will be developed, using news
              media coverage of biotechnology as a framework for teaching basic concepts of
              biology.

