Title       : CAREER: Understanding the Complexities of Animated Content
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0237706

Award Number: 0237706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Metoyer metoyer@cs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Understanding the Complexities of Animated Content
Abstract

As
              immersive graphics environments become more viable as useful training and
              education tools, we must be able to understand animated content well enough to
              provide naive content creators with the ability to create compelling synthetic
              scenes. This understanding requires that we answer the following questions. How
              do we create characters that perform natural motions based on high-level
              direction? How do we direct synthetic characters at a high level? How do we
              structure interactive spaces for spatial and temporal interactions between
              humans and synthetic characters?

To answer these questions, we will conduct
              research in the following areas: motion capture re-sequencing, character
              interfaces and character programming. We will restrict ourselves to a
              particular domain and build an interactive space in order to study the above
              research questions. We have chosen quarterback training for the sport of
              American football as the specific problem domain for the following reasons.

              Quarterback training requires compelling 3D content in order to produce
              convincing training situations.
 Quarterback training is a physical task and
              involves spatial and temporal interaction between the coaches and players
              (where players include the real quarterback and the synthetic characters).

              Game preparation requires time-critical training content creation.

              Quarterback training requires use by domain experts (coaches and players) who
              may be naive computer users.
 We have access to domain experts in quarterback
              training through the Oregon State University football program.

 Our research
              will result in algorithms for generating natural motion from motion capture
              data based on high level input, guidelines for classifying character
              interaction techniques, and methods for directing characters within the
              interactive space. We plan to evaluate our research through various
              quantitative measures and usability studies to determine the quality of content
              and the ability of naive content creators to create and interact with the
              content within our interactive space framework.


