Title       : Experimental and Numerical Investigation of the Mechanisms of Local Extinction
               Using Flame Kernel-Vortex Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0237406

Award Number: 0237406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Roberts wlrobert@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tarek Echekki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1312,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

The objective of this research is to investigate, both
              experimentally and computationally, the local extinction processes occurring in
              premixed flames using a novel flame kernel-vortex configuration.  The
              kernel-vortex interaction provides a rich configuration to study at least two
              important mechanisms responsible for extinction:  flame-flow field topologies
              (curvature and strain);  and flame-flame interactions (or mutual flame
              annihilation processes).  Conditions of positive and negative unsteady strain
              rate and curvature may be generated simultaneously within the same interaction,
              providing the ideal condition for comparing the flame's response to different
              types of flame stretch.  Moreover, the relative size of the expanding kernel to
              the vortex results in an evolving contribution of the vortex to flame wrinkling
              and its advection during the kernel evolution.  The two complementary
              (experimental and computational) approaches are coordinated to provide improved
              understanding of the role of flame and flow field topologies (mainly unsteady
              strain and curvature effects) and mutual flame annihilations on local flame
              extinction, and to identify experimental observables that measure the local
              burning intensity in premixed hydrocarbon flames.  Three important elements
              represent the main thrusts of the
work and its technical merit:  (1) An
              experimental study of extinction processes during flame kernel-vortex
              interactions.  The study relies on a broad range of experimental conditions
              that span different flame and vortex strengths.  Simultaneous measurements of
              intermediate species, temperature, and velocity provide a more robust link
              between flame and flow-field topologies and the local flame response;  (2)
              Numerical studies of the general structure as well as the structure of two
              important regions in the flame kernels that are subject to quenching by
              unsteady strain or mutual flame annihilation.  The numerical studies are used
              to identify relevant experimental conditions and explore, using detailed
              chemistry, the chemical mechanisms involved during extinction.  Initial
              conditions for the detailed chemistry simulations are provided by the selected
              experimental conditions;  and (3) The combined approaches provide complementary
              information to identify conditions and mechanisms for local extinction.  An
              equally important endeavor is to use the simulations to identify candidate
              experimental observables that may be used to quantify the burning intensity of
              hydrocarbon premixed flames for unsteady and extinction conditions.

Broader
              impact

The kernel-vortex offers a realistic and advantageous configuration
              to develop models for flame extinction that will be of value to our
              understanding of turbulent flames in general and turbulent kernels
              specifically, such as those observed in spark-ignited internal combustion
              engines and other practical combustion devices.  The methodology proposed can
              have a broad impact on similar problems in combustion science and related areas
              of research where neither computational nor experimental approaches alone can
              adequately explain observations.  The paradigm of coordinated
              experimental-computational approaches provides unique opportunities for the
              education of graduate students in both approaches as the project requires.


