Title       : CAREER: Visualization Processes in Learning Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0237629

Award Number: 0237629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Kozhevnikov maria@psychology.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project revolves around the idea that learning physics is the most effective
              in an interactive learning environment involving two related components that
              are usually kept separate: a real-world experiment and a computer-based
              visualization. In this project, we will create a learning environment that
              combines microcomputer-based laboratories (MBLs) with immersive virtual-reality
              technology. While MBLs will provide students with the possibility of real-world
              experimenting and data collection, supported by real-time graphing tools,
              virtual reality technology will be used to support the visualization of both
              visible and invisible physical processes and abstract concepts (e.g., vectors
              of forces, field lines or energy levels) underlying the same experiment
              students observe in MBLs. The research objective of the current project is to
              investigate how different aspects of computer-based visualization, supported by
              immersive virtual reality and MBLs, affect and interact with student-generated
              visual/spatial representations and students' qualitative understanding of
              abstract physics phenomena.

In terms of broader impacts, the project will
              bring new insights as to how to use visualization to facilitate student'
              conceptual understanding. In addition, the project will give a theoretical
              basis for design and evaluation of educational materials involving different
              visual/spatial representations. Tools and materials we develop in the project
              will make it easier for faculty around the country to develop students'
              visualization skills and qualitative reasoning in introductory physics
              classes.

The educational objective of the proposal is to develop educational
              software and curriculum materials in the area of introductory mechanics with a
              focus on visualization processes, which allow students to participate actively
              in their own learning and to construct scientific models.

