Title       : Building Measures of Ideology and Democratic Performance in Western Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0237820

Award Number: 0237820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52593              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heemin Kim hkim@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In established democracies, the process by which citizen preferences are
              translated into government policy is supposed to follow a similar pattern. 
              Citizens express their preferences in elections. This expression of preferences
              determines the composition of the parliament and the government.  The
              government makes policy decisions.  Voters react to the policies and their
              implementation by expressing 
their preferences through votes, and the cycle
              continues.  At each stage of this process, different types of political
              institutions, such as electoral systems, regime types, the modes of coalition
              bargaining, and the modes of public policy making, work either to reinforce or
              to distort the preferences or ideological orientations in the previous  stage. 
                When good indicators of public opinion, parliament ideology, government
              ideology, and government policy are available, the democratic performance of
              political 
systems can be  measured  by  the  congruence  between  citizen's 
              policy preferences  and  government policies. 
Many scholars have attempted to
              assess democratic performance under different political institutions. Their
              work has left room for improvement, however, since the measures of ideology
              they employed were available only for a limited number of countries and/or time
              periods.    Further, determining the democratic performance of political
              institutions necessarily entails cross-national comparisons  (since different
              countries have different institutions) and cross-time comparisons  (since
              countries may adopt new institutions).    It is questionable whether the
              measures employed by previous studies allow meaningful cross-national and
              cross-time comparisons. 
In this investigation, the researchers assess
              democratic performance of 25 Western democracies measures of ideology that
              allow valid cross-national and cross-time comparisons and that are consistently
              available for more countries and/or longer time periods than the existing
              measures.  They start by utilizing a continuous measure of party ideology for
              25 Western democracies   developed earlier and   based on party manifestos data
              compiled by the Manifesto Research Group.  The researchers have already created
              a yearly series of voter ideology scores for these countries by combining
              election results with the corresponding measures of party ideology.  They have
              also built a continuous measure of government ideology for 17 countries by
              taking a weighted average of party ideology scores, where the weights are the
              proportion 
of total cabinet portfolios held by each party.  They continue
              this research program by collecting data for the number of parliamentary seats
              for each party in each country in the sample, for the postwar period through
              the late 90's.  This allows the investigators to  build a  continuous  measure 
              of  parliament  ideology  for Western democracies  by  taking  a weighted
              average of party ideology scores, where the weights are the proportion of total
              parliamentary seats  held  by  each  party.    They  also  complete  their 
              measure  of  government  ideology  by  collecting cabinet  portfolio  data  for
               eight  countries  for  which  government  ideology  scores  have  not  yet 
              been calculated. 
The  data  set will  advance  the broader  research  goal 
              -- uncovering  the  impacts  of  different  political  institutions  on 
              democratic  performance  by  utilizing  measures of ideology and widely
              available data on policy outcomes and institutional features in Western 
              democracies.    This  research  adds  to  the  existing  knowledge  about  the 
              political institutions that best translate people's preferences into government
              policy: for example, large or small electoral districts, proportional
              representation or single-member plurality electoral rules, direct or indirect
              elections  (such  as  electoral  college  system),  unicameral  or  bicameral 
              legislatures,  parliamentary  or presidential  systems,  unitary  or  federal 
              systems,  etc.    These data will  be  valuable to  political scientists and
              policy makers alike. 


