Title       : CAREER: Flexible, Ultra-Thin, Packaged Antennas and Arrays for Next Generation
               Wireless Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0237783

Award Number: 0237783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammod Ali alimo@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0237783
Ali

The primary objective of this research is to investigate,
              fabricate, and evaluate flexible, ultra-thin,  packaged  antennas  and  arrays
              for future  generation wireless applications. Such antennas and arrays will be
              needed for use in wireless microsensors for pathogen and bio-agent detection,
              in E-911 (emergency 911) integrated ultra-thin, lightweight, mobile phones for
              location identification, and in wearable, ultra-thin, multi-functional wireless
              devices for the police, firemen, and ambulance personnel to ensure enhanced 
              "homeland  security."   Flexible, ultra-thin, packaged antennas will also play
              an important role in the development of miniature, ultra-thin GPS (global
              positioning system) and RFID  (radio frequency identification device) modules
              for implantation under the skin of the terminally ill (Alzheimer patient) and
              the disabled to pinpoint their locations and monitor their condition. 
              

Current state of the art in antenna  research does not address the 
              challenges associated with  flexible,  ultra-thin,  packaged  design  which 
              include  narrow  bandwidth (due to reduced thickness), degradation in pattern
              and polarization  (due  to  proximity  to metals  and  displays), and  loss  in
               gain (due to proximity to lossy materials).  Fundamental research is required
              to understand the basic properties of a wide variety of antenna configurations
              both prior to and after packaging/embedding in order to target and address
              issues such as, design for broader bandwidth, higher gain, optimum pattern
              coverage, and good axial ratio (for circularly polarized antennas). To  realize
              these goals, a variety of antenna configurations including non-traditional
              resonant and non-resonant slots, ultra-thin patches, and PIFAs (planar
              inverted-F antennas) will be fabricated and studied primarily on flexible
              substrates (thin-film flexible polymers and liquid crystal polymers (LCPs)) 
              both  prior  to  and  after  packaging/embedding.  Antennas  will  also  be
              investigated on uniquely modified printed circuit boards to significantly
              reduce thickness without sacrificing performance.   Novel, ultra-thin,
              circularly polarized antennas will be explored for operation in E-911
              integrated mobile phones, in  wearable devices, and in implanted GPS and RFID 
              modules.  Antennas  will  be  studied  using  full-wave  electromagnetic 
              simulation  prior  to fabrication. Upon fabrication they will be characterized
              for input impedance, pattern, and gain.  

This research will bring forth
              fundamental advances in knowledge  and  innovation on miniature, ultra-thin,
              packaged antennas and arrays for future generation wireless devices, which will
               directly  benefit  the  U.S.  economy.  The  findings  of  this  research 
              will  be  disseminated through seminars given in local libraries, articles
              published in technical and non-technical literature, web-based databases,
              CD-ROMs, and through conference presentations. The proposed project will
              significantly enhance capabilities for research in microwave engineering at the
              University  of  South  Carolina  (USC) and provide the basic infrastructure
              required to obtain future competitive federal grants and to educate and train
              qualified microwave engineers. The major thrusts of the educational component
              of this proposal for the next several years will include the development of (1)
              a senior-year undergraduate/graduate level microwave engineering laboratory 
              course, (2) a  graduate course on microwave active and passive circuit design,
              and (3) the reorganization of a graduate course on "Antennas and Radiation" to
              make it equally suitable for undergraduates. This project will actively involve
               undergraduates, high-school students, and middle and high school teachers,
              female and underrepresented minorities by making their research experiences
              exciting, fun, and rewarding.  


