Title       : Exploration of Eukaryotic Microbes in Sulfide-Enriched Sedimets at Redox
               Boundaries in the Black Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0237931

Award Number: 0237931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Bernhard   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stefan M. Sievert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Black Sea is the largest known oxygen-depleted, sulfide-enriched basin on
              Earth.  Although hydrogen sulfide is usually toxic, oxygen-depleted marine
              waters rich in sulfide can have surprisingly high densities of eukaryotic
              microorganisms (e.g., foraminiferans).  This modest NSF award will support work
              on a single research collecting cruise in the southwestern Black Sea to explore
              microbial communities at points where the sediment/water interface intersects
              with the disappearance of oxygen in the water column.  Populations of
              eukaryotic microbes will be quantified and characterized, as well as examined
              for the presence of symbiotic bacteria.  Environmental conditions will be
              determined by using chemical data that will be collected from the same samples
              (as part of other NSF projects, G. Luther, University of Delaware).  Results
              will provide a view of what may be a very unique bottom-dwelling Black Sea
              microbial community, with many organisms previously unknown to science, thereby
              providing a foundation for future, more multidisciplinary detailed studies in
              the area.  

Oxygen depletion caused by human activities is becoming more
              widespread in marine waters.  Characterizing microbial consortia in the Black
              Sea may lead to a better understanding of the role of these communities in
              other waters where the process is less desirable, and could suggest new
              remedies.  Other broader impacts of this project include the involvement of an
              undergraduate student from an institution in an EPSCoR state, and interaction
              between the PI and possible foreign collaborators. Results will be integrated
              into coursework taught in future classes at the University of South Carolina. 
              

