Title       : Theory of Fluids, Phase Transitions, and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0237104

Award Number: 0237104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark R. Pederson                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin Widom bw24@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Benjamin Widom at Cornell University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to pursue research on the theory of fluids,
              phase transitions and interfaces.  He will extend the understanding of
              interfacial tensions in binary fluids, continue efforts in the area of
              hydrophobicity, and investigate the interfaces of phase-separated solutions
              consisting of two polymers and a solvent. His theoretical approach relies on
              classical density-functional theory coupled with statistical mechanical and
              thermodynamical analyses. Progress in this field is both timely and difficult
              due to the complicated interactions between atomistically large solute
              molecules and the solvent.  Work in this area is important to the understanding
              of biological processes and has proved to be useful in environmentally friendly
              methods for oil recovery.

This project will determine the conditions needed
              for two disparate polymers to mix together or separate into two liquids.   Such
              an understanding is necessary for developing strategies for environmentally
              friendly means for oil recovery.  Understanding the mechanisms and
              manifestations associated with the repulsion between polymers and water (e.g.,
              hydrophobicity) will yield key insights and identify important questions in the
              emerging field of computational biology.  In particular, hydrophobic forces are
              primarily responsible for protein folding.


