Title       : CAREER: Directional Multiresolution Image Processing: Theory, Algorithms and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0237633

Award Number: 0237633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Minh N. Do minhdo@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0237633
Minh N. Do
U of Illinois @ Urbana Champaign

The enormous
              growth of visual information in digital form has produced an urgent need for
              more powerful and effective image processing applications.  At the foundation
              of many of these image processing tasks is an efficient representation that can
              capture significant image information using a small description.  Recently, it
              has become evident that the commonly used separable extensions from
              one-dimensional transforms, such as Fourier and wavelet, are not necessarily
              best suited for images.  There is strong motivation to search for more powerful
              schemes that can capture the intrinsic geometrical structure that is key in
              pictorial information.  Achieving this step will lead to fundamental advances
              in a number of areas in image processing.

This project involves developing
              new "true" two-dimensional representations that can deal more effectively with
              typical images having smooth contours.  The focus is on the development of
              directional and multiresolution image expansions using non-separable filter
              banks, in much the same way that wavelets were constructed from filter banks. 
              In essence, the investigator pursues non-separable extensions of wavelets and
              multiresolution techniques so that they can capture the directional information
              -- an important and unique feature of multidimensional signals.  In parallel,
              newly developed image representations are explored in a variety of
              applications, where substantial improvements over current methods are expected.
               The educational part of the project maximizes the benefits of the research
              results and recent related discoveries through:  designing a new course to
              teach fundamental processing methods that were
specially developed for
              multidimensional signals; developing computational toolboxes and reproducible
              experiments to train students using these methods proficiently; and exposing
              students to well-designed projects to gain hands-on experiences.


