Title       : Dynamics of Intraseasonal Extratropical Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0237304

Award Number: 0237304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Robinson robinson@atmos.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will investigate dynamical mechanisms governing intraseasonal
              variability in the extratropical winter atmosphere.  A leading example of this
              variability is the North Atlantic Oscillation - a meridional dipole in
              sea-level pressure (and related fields) in the extratropical Atlantic, which
              influences, notably, the European surface temperatures and precipitation in
              winter.  The relationship of these regional modes with the annular (or
              hemispheric scale) modes of variability (e.g., Arctic Oscillation) is unclear,
              although its implications for extratropical variability and predictability are
              considerable.  Dr. Robinson (U of Illinois) will investigate this relationship,
              including the role of tropical intraseasonal variability in influencing
              extratropical predictability, from numerical experiments with idealized
              dynamical models; these models can resolve the involved nonlinear interactions.
               These models provide an opportunity for systematic investigation of the
              fundamental dynamical issues, and Dr. Robinson will conduct a suite of
              experiments to fully investigate the involved mechanisms and interactions.  The
              project will advance theoretical understanding and modeling of dynamical
              processes governing wintertime intraseasonal variability in the Northern
              extratropics, and potentially influence operational strategies for extended
              range weather forecasting.
