Title       : CAREER: Interface Control and Three Dimension Mechanisms of Branch-Limited
               Eutectic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0237566

Award Number: 0237566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph E. Napolitano ralphn@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project seeks to advance the fundamental understanding of microstructural
              transformation in materials with emphasis on eutectic solidification. Major
              objectives are to identify, characterize and quantify the complex
              three-dimensional mechanisms involved in local adjustment and self-optimization
              of irregular growth morphologies. The project will develop a more complete and
              general view of coupled growth phenomena. Several solidification techniques
              will be used to grow eutectic structures under various types of thermal and
              geometric constraints. State-of-the-art characterization techniques, including
              optical and electron microscopy, serial micromilling, diffraction-based methods
              and in-situ imaging will be utilized to investigate the 3-D adjustment
              mechanisms and their relationship to the relevant anisotropic interfacial
              properties. Computational methods will also be employed for the investigation
              of various specific morphological features such as interface curvature, missing
              orientations, faceting behavior, growth mode transitions, and triple-junction
              morphology. Technological importance of eutectic solidification provides a
              clear source of motivation for students, and the visually striking
              microstructures that typically evolve during eutectic solidification serve as
              graphic illustrations of transition dynamics, providing very effective teaching
              examples.

The topic of eutectic solidification offers a wealth of rich
              problems involving multicomponent thermodynamics, solid-liquid and solid-solid
              interfacial phenomena, morphological stability, chemical and thermal diffusion,
              and nucleation phenomena. The educational efforts are designed to establish a
              set of standard practices that will facilitate integrated research and teaching
              with the involvement of education professionals, leaders of student
              organizations, and representatives from various community youth organizations.
              By involving youth organizations, such as the Boys & Girls Clubs of America, an
              effort will be made to engage the disadvantaged and underrepresented segments
              of our youth population.

