Title       : Workshop on the development of a Tsunami Scenario Simulation Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0237039

Award Number: 0237039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry H. Yeh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine M. Petroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0237039, Harry Yeh, University of Washington
"Workshop on the development of a
              Tsunami Scenario Simulation Program"

This action is to provide support for a
              workshop, be held in September 2002 in Seattle, WA, to discuss the development
              of a collaborative research plan for comprehensive and integrated scenario
              simulations for tsunami hazard mitigation.  The simulations include tsunami
              generation, propagation, runup/rundown motion, warning transmission to the
              general public in the affected areas, evacuation and rescue simulations, human
              behavior simulations, and short-term and long-term societal and environmental
              impact simulations.

The goal of the scenario simulation exercises is to give
              researchers an awareness and experience of all aspects of tsunami science and
              hazards planning.  In setting up and running the simulations, and in evaluating
              the results, critical problems will be identified for improvement in each
              specialized area and in the interaction between disciplines.  The exercises
              will provide a valuable common background from which to forge and maintain
              coherence in the broadly distributed, multi-disciplinary tsunami hazard
              mitigation community.  In addition, the integrated, highly visual character of
              the simulations will be of great value for K-12 education on tsunami hazards,
              and for general public information.

The simulation exercises will include
              physical models, numerical models, informatics (the study of the structure,
              behavior, and interactions of both natural and artificial computational
              systems), human behavior models, communication simulations, and other exercises
              that will integrate the tsunami source with its eventual effects on communities
              and the environment. This activity is by nature a multi-university,
              multi-community, and multi-disciplinary effort.

The objective is not to
              determine specific tsunami mitigation measures for specific coastal towns and
              cities.  Instead, the objective is to set up a fully integrated scenario for a
              hypothetical situation (which could be based on an existing real coastal
              community) to be investigated by researchers from a wide variety of
              disciplines, working to solve a common problem from different viewpoints.  The
              outcome will provide the participants, sponsors, and coastal communities with
              valuable experience, lessons learned from the model event, and will enhance and
              maintain further research collaboration for tsunami hazard reduction. 
              Involvement in the scenario simulation, and work on the common problem, will
              lead each researcher to interact closely with researchers in other specialized
              areas.  The researchers will obtain a broader picture for tsunami research, and
              identify critical problems and linkages to be examined for improvement.

The
              outcome from of the workshop will be a comprehensive research plan for the
              earthquake engineering and hazards planning communities, in particular for
              those investigators who deal with tsunami hazard prediction and mitigation.

