Title       : Systematics of Fishes of Subfamily Lctiobinae (Teleostomi: Catostomidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0237013

Award Number: 0237013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417258             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry L. Bart hank@museum.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Hurley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Royal D. Suttkus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT

DEB-0237013

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Henry Bart, David
              Hurley, and Royal Suttkus at Tulane University to study the taxonomy and
              evolutionary relationships of fishes in Subfamily Ictiobinae (buffalofishes and
              carpsuckers).  As presently defined, the subfamily includes seven or eight
              living species, distributed throughout eastern North America and Mexico. 
              However, there are problems with the current taxonomy.  Most modern workers
              consider the group to be much more diverse than presently recognized. 
              Ictiobines are an important component of large river ecosystems.  They play an
              important role straining small invertebrates from bottom sediments and
              converting these organisms to fish biomass.  Ictiobines (especially
              buffalofishes, genus Ictiobus) are also important food fishes for humans in
              many parts of their range.  Historically, they were the dominant group of
              fishes in large rivers of eastern North America in terms of overall biomass. 
              However, their numbers have been declining in recent years due to pollution,
              extensive modification of the large rivers they inhabit, and the success of
              ecologically similar, exotic carps.   Human modification of large river
              habitats may be contributing to a problem of hybridization where closely
              related species occur together.  It will be difficult to address conservation
              needs of ictiobines without a good understanding of natural diversity in the
              subfamily and the impact of hybridization on this diversity.

The
              investigators on this grant will examine morphological and genetic variation
              within currently recognized ictiobine species.  They will formally describe any
              newly discovered species, and will provide characters and taxonomic keys to aid
              others with species identification. They will sequence portions of the
              mitochondrial and nuclear genomes of ictiobines to assess degrees of genetic
              divergence, extent and impact of interspecific hybridization, and phylogenetic
              relationships among species.  Lastly, they will use the phylogenies to examine
              morphological evolution and speciation patterns within the group.  The project
              combines the talents of a senior fish taxonomist with extensive experience in
              traditional methods of taxonomic revision, a more junior taxonomist/systematist
              familiar with modern systematic methods and data analysis, and a molecular
              biologist experienced with the vast array of molecular techniques, including
              molecular systematics.  


