Title       : Problems in Bioinorganic and Oxygen Atom Transfer Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0237419

Award Number: 0237419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $855000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Holm holm@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Prof. Richard H. Holm of Harvard University focused on
              molybdenum/tungsten hydroxylases and oxotransferases.  The catalytic centers
              contain mononuclear Mo or W atoms bound to one or two pterin-dithiolene ligands
              (often called molybdopterin).  The experimental approach involves  the 
              synthesis  of  low  molecular  weight  representations or analogs of  the 
              catalytic  sites  of  enzymes,  which  are  fully  characterized  before being
              studied  in  reactivity investigations.  The natural ligand is represented by a
              synthetic dithiolene, which functions as an ene-1,2-dithiolate when bound to
              molybdenum  or  tungsten  and  closely  simulates  the  electronic  environment
               engendered  by  the  pterin-dithiolene.  

Through analog systems, the
              project examines reactions of the enzymes nitrate reductase, formate
              dehydrogenase, arsenite oxidase, acetylene hydratase, sulfite oxidase, and
              aldehyde oxidase, among others.   This involves the synthesis  of  new  active 
              site  analogs  in  oxidized  and  reduced  states, including  uncommon
              monodithiolene complexes, and kinetics determinations with attendant evaluation
              of rate  constants  and  activation  parameters.  Kinetic and other 
              information  is  used  to  deduce  probable mechanisms  for  the  reactions 
              investigated.    Also under investigation are the synthesis and oxo transfer
              reactivity of the non-physiological metals niobium, tantalum, and rhenium in
              their higher oxidation states.  

The essential components of enzymes
              involved in global carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles and catalyzing the
              transfer of a single oxygen atom will be studied through analog complexes. 
              Some of these enzymes, such as the sulfite and xanthine oxidases, occur in
              humans; and their malfunction leads to significant health risks.  Graduate and
              postdoctoral students will be trained in synthesis, characterization and
              mechanism and in regard to the interrelationships between model and biological
              systems.


