Title       : CAREER: Colonizing Land Via the Estuarine Route: Ontogeny of Osmoregulation and
               Settlement Behaviors in Three Brackish Water Fiddler Crabs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0237484

Award Number: 0237484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $574286             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renae Brodie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1228,9150,9177,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Colonizing land via the estuarine route: ontogeny of osmoregulation and
              settlement behaviors in three brackish water fiddler crabs

Renae J.
              Brodie
University of South Carolina

The colonization of land is one of the
              most significant evolutionary events in the history of animal life. While
              vertebrates are conspicuous members of terrestrial faunas, the most prolific
              and diverse land animals are actually invertebrates that have evolved from
              marine ancestors. One of the first challenges faced by colonizing marine
              invertebrates is the need to modify larval stages so they recruit near adult
              terrestrial habitats. Larval settlement behaviors must change and larvae must
              evolve the capability to tolerate physiological stresses that they encounter on
              land. In completely terrestrial animals, these early life stages develop on
              land within protective egg membranes or inside the adult parent.  This study
              will examine changes in larval behavior and physiology in Uca minax, a
              freshwater fiddler crab that is at an intermediate stage of land invasion.
To
              examine these changes, U. minax will be compared to two less terrestrial
              relatives, Uca pugilator and Uca pugnax. All three species undergo larval
              development in coastal marine waters. Using molecular genetic techniques, these
              fiddler crab species will be tracked from when they leave open coastal waters
              and enter South Carolina's north inlet estuary, until they join adult
              populations as juveniles. This will resolve the mystery of whether young crabs
              settle directly into adult habitats, move in gradually as they develop and
              grow, or settle randomly throughout the estuary, dying out in areas that are
              not suitable for them. Once patterns of settlement are established, larval
              responses to adult odor cues in different salinity environments will be
              investigated in the lab.  A different suite of behavioral responses by U. minax
              compared to the other two species may help to explain how it invades adult
              freshwater and terrestrial habitats.
To determine if young U. minax are
              physiologically adapted to survive low-salinity conditions, survivorship of
              larval and juvenile U. minax in a series of salinities (ocean-strength to
              freshwater) will be compared to that of U. pugilator, U. pugnax and U.
              uruguayensis, a distantly-related species from Brazil. Osmoregulatory ability
              (ability to control internal salt concentrations) at these salinities will also
              be assessed. In this way, it will be possible to explore the evolution of
              osmoregulatory changes in development that accompany the invasion of land in
              fiddler crabs.
In addition to yielding evolutionary insights, this study will
              have ecological and educational impacts. Fiddler crabs are dominant players in
              southeastern estuaries, where they are important prey for birds and fishes, and
              modify landscape topography and species composition in areas where they burrow
              and feed. A more detailed understanding of the dispersal patterns, behavior and
              physiology of young fiddler crabs will facilitate the monitoring of estuaries.
              The educational benefits of this work will come from a strong effort to
              increase the level of participation of people of color in biological research.
              To this end, graduate and undergraduate students of color will be recruited
              from the University of South Carolina and nearby Historically Black Colleges
              and Universities to assist in the proposed research. Also, undergraduate and
              graduate students will turn aspects of the scientific work into hands-on
              activities for K-12 students that will be developed for a Web site about marine
              and terrestrial invertebrates with the assistance of local elementary-school
              children. 

