Title       : Improvements to the Kansas State University Ornithology Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0237267

Award Number: 0237267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett K. Sandercock bsanderc@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Sandercock at Kansas State University to
              make
improvements to the Kansas State University Ornithology Collection. The
              Ornithology
Collection currently contains 1172 round skins, 188 mounts, 30-40
              spread wings, and 20-30
nests that are a representative sample of the avifauna
              of the Great Plains ecoregion. The
collection holdings are valuable because
              they include many bird specimens that were collected in
Kansas during the late
              1800s and early 1900s, including two specimens of the now extinct
Eskimo
              Curlew. The goal of this project is to conserve and improve the resources of
              the
Ornithology Collection for use in undergraduate teaching and public
              education.
The objectives of the project are threefold. First, an urgent need
              of the Ornithology
Collection is improved storage facilities. The study skins
              are currently stored in wood frame
cabinets that are at least 30 years old and
              not airtight. Mounts are currently housed in wooden
display cabinets that were
              salvaged when the collection was moved to Ackert Hall in 1969. A
majority of
              the direct costs of this grant (56%) are for new museum storage cabinets that
              will
ensure that the collection will be protected from insect damage. Second,
              another major need of
the collection is cataloguing of the existing specimens.
              The long-term goal for this collection is
to transfer or exchange older
              specimens of potential research value to major natural history
museums, such
              as the nearby Museum of Natural History at the University of Kansas.
              To
facilitate transfers, the contents of the Ornithology Collection will be
              inventoried into an
electronic database that will be made available on the
              Internet. A portion of the direct costs
(35%) will be used to hire and train
              three undergraduate curatorial assistants to complete this
task. Last, a final
              need for the collection is acquisition of new materials to replace
              older
specimens of research value. The remaining direct costs (9%) are for
              curatorial supplies to
prepare and store new materials.
This project is
              scientifically important because it will make the museum holdings of
              the
Kansas State University Ornithology Collection available to the scientific
              community for the
first time. Access to study skins will be of greatest value
              to researchers conducting retrospective
analyses of museum specimens, but the
              collection also contains valuable specimens that will fill
gaps in historical
              sampling efforts. The project will have broader impacts by
              offering
comprehensive training in the techniques of museum curation to three
              undergraduate students.
The resources of the Ornithology Collection also serve
              an important role in undergraduate
education and outreach programs for the
              public. Museum specimens are regularly used as
teaching materials in three
              core undergraduate courses in the Division of Biology: Principles of
Biology
              (Biol 198), Organismic Biology (Biol 201) and Ornithology (Biol 543).
              Avian
specimens are also an important resource for public outreach programs
              coordinated by the
Division of Biology. Mounts and study skins will be used in
              permanent exhibits in Ackert Hall,
in displays for annual open house events at
              Kansas State University, in displays for field trips of
grade school students
              from the Riley Town school district, and in environmental education
programs
              for K-12 students and teachers at nearby Konza Prairie Biological Station.
              Long-term
conservation of the museum holdings will benefit local communities
              in northeast Kansas.
