Title       : Repatriation of Data from Mexican Specimens at the University of Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0237447

Award Number: 0237447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Reinthal pnr@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of Arizona under the direction of
              Peter Reinthal to collect, compile and repatriate data and digital photographs
              of biological specimens originating from Mexico for an international database
              project.  The Zoological Collections at the University of Arizona have one of
              the largest holdings of biological vertebrate specimens (fish, amphibians and
              reptiles, birds and mammals) from Mexico of any institution in the world. 
              These specimens represent important scientific information for researchers who
              are attempting to understand, study, map and conserve biodiversity.  These
              specimens also were collected over many decades and can not be replicated or
              replaced.  Support for this project will enable us to digitally photograph
              specimens and incorporate the photographs and data from each specimen in a
              collaborative effort with CONABIO, an international biodiversity database
              project based in Mexico City, and the University of Arizona collection
              database. Such efforts will make this important scientific information
              available to the scientific community and general public.

Specifically,
              specimens from all four vertebrate collections will be digitally photographed
              and the photographs will be incorporated into our BIOTA database currently used
              at the University of Arizona.  All
photographs and data regarding these will
              be electronically incorporated into a biodiversity database project currently
              underway at CONABIO.  The University of Arizona will become established as a
              CONABIO node institution.

The information generated by this project will
              fill an important gap in our understanding of biodiversity in North America. 
              This project will make information and photographs of these important
              specimens
available for scientists, educational institutions, government and
              non-government scientists and managers and the general public. Importantly,
              Mexican scientists and researchers will now have research access to these
              significant Mexican specimens through their national biodiversity database.

