Title       : CAREER: Specification and Analysis of Geometric Variability in Engineering
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0237501

Award Number: 0237501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward P. Morse emorse@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)proposes to support an integrated
              program of research and teaching that will both strengthen professional
              engineering design activity and enhance engineering education by broadening the
              understanding of the role of variation control as a fundamental part of the
              design process. The educational component of this award promotes the explicit
              recognition of process and product variability as a common thread through the
              design curriculum.  This will prepare our students for their senior design
              capstone project and beyond, where they must not only draw on the
              decision-making skills developed in the first three years, but must also deal
              with the reality of specifying parts unambiguously so that they can be
              manufactured by others. Research in the role of geometric variation, especially
              as it propagates through assemblies, will complement naturally the educational
              efforts described above.  This research focuses on advancing a more thorough
              and fundamental understanding of the "physics of mechanical assembly" and its
              application through the extension of current modeling and analysis methods. 
              

The basis for this research is a novel mathematical assembly model,
              GapSpace, that represents both contact and clearance conditions in an assembly.
              The broader impacts of these activities will include: (a) involvement of
              engineering and non-engineering students in the process of modeling and
              analyzing geometric variation, (b) collaboration with other educational
              institutions - universities, community colleges, and institutions serving
              underrepresented groups - in the dissemination of teaching techniques and
              materials related to geometric tolerancing, (c) outreach to K-12 students and
              teachers in "science summer camp" programs, (d) continued participation in the
              development of National Standards that reflect accurately the current state of
              knowledge in geometric control and measurement, and (e) partnering with
              industry to validate research results and facilitate the transfer of new
              analysis methods to practitioners.


