Title       : CAREER: Transforming the Politics of Place: GIS, Knowledge Production, and
               Community-Based Organizations in Urban Governance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0237980

Award Number: 0237980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425771             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah A. Elwood selwood@depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      1 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The role of community-based organizations in the governance of U.S. cities has
              changed in recent decades.  These changes have been most evident in their
              growing responsibilities for planning, problem solving, and service delivery
              tasks that directly affect neighborhood space and structures.  In concert with
              these changes, these groups increasingly have used geographic information
              system (GIS) technology for mapping, analyzing, and demonstrating neighborhood
              needs and conditions.  This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER) award is
              motivated by the need for greater theoretical and practical understanding of
              these closely related developments.  This project will examine the priorities,
              strategies, and goals for urban change and neighborhood revitalization advanced
              through such GIS-based spatial knowledge production by community-based
              organizations.  It will consider how the production and application of
              GIS-based spatial knowledge alters the role and power of community
              organizations, neighborhoods, and their residents within the decision-making
              processes through which urban spatial change is negotiated, planned, and
              implemented.  It also will explore the implications of these changes for the
              relationship between the state and institutions of civil society in urban
              governance, particularly the construction of the authority and knowledge of
              these actors.  The project has three integrated research, educational, and
              community development objectives.  First, it aims to advance knowledge in urban
              geography and societal studies of technology by developing stronger theories
              regarding the urban spatial and political impacts of GIS technologies and
              GIS-based knowledge production by community-based organizations. Second, the
              project aims to develop effective experiential and service learning pedagogies
              in geography education that will enhance the capacities of students to connect
              conceptual and applied geographical knowledge and to critically reflect upon
              the societal significance of their active learning efforts.  Finally, it aims
              to establish a model for fostering sustained and effective GIS-based spatial
              knowledge production capacities in community organizations, a key challenge
              given the financial and technological constraints such organizations typically
              face.  These objectives will be accomplished through participatory research and
              educational activities carried out in collaboration with two
              community-development organizations in Chicago.  Working with staff and
              residents from these organizations, the investigator and her colleagues will
              create a spatial data library for use in their neighborhood revitalization
              activities.  As part of experiential learning activities in two geography
              courses taught by the principal investigator at DePaul University,
              undergraduate students will work with these organizations to plan and implement
              GIS-based spatial analysis projects using these data, and community
              organization staff will receive GIS training.  The project's research questions
              will be answered through qualitative analysis of data gathered using several
              techniques:  participant observation of student-community interaction during
              the spatial analysis project activities; ethnographic interviewing of
              participating organization staff, neighborhood residents, local government
              officials with whom the organization works; and content analysis of maps and
              reports produced for the community-based project.

The potential significance
              of this project is multi-faceted.  It should develop important urban geographic
              knowledge about the changing activities of grassroots citizen organizations in
              urban governance processes that shape neighborhood needs and conditions, by
              showing how their role and power in this context is affected by use of GIS and
              other computer mapping and analysis technologies.  Through the educational
              activities, university students' skills for and commitments to public service
              and active citizenship will be enhanced, as will their critical reflection upon
              the social and political implications of their conceptual and applied learning.
               Two community organizations in an impoverished Chicago neighborhood will
              enhance their technological and knowledge infrastructures through the project's
              investment of hardware, software, training, and data needed for long-term
              sustained GIS capabilities.  In its broader societal contributions, the project
              will develop knowledge and practices intended to help to answer fundamental
              questions about how to improve quality of life in American inner city
              neighborhoods, and create strategies that encourage robust democratic practices
              that involve neighborhood residents in the very decisions that affect them and
              their neighborhoods.  The project also will provide an excellent opportunity
              for a productive young researcher to undertake a long-term project that
              integrates high-quality research and education.

