Title       : CAREER: Adaptive Resource Management in Highly Dynamic Real-Time Systems with
               Physical Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0237884

Award Number: 0237884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marco Caccamo mcaccamo@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Caccamo
0237884

This CAREER project is a combined research and educational
              project in the area of resource management for highly dynamic real-time systems
              with physical constraints.   The new millennium heralds the convergence of
              communication, computing, and intelligent control of the physical environment. 
              The rapid advancement of computing and wireless technologies will enable us to
              employ cooperative real-time nodes that must operate without human
              intervention.  These nodes frequently reside in hostile environments for
              accomplishing tasks ranging from space monitoring and surveillance to
              environmental protection.  Under this challenging vision, there will be an
              extensive deployment of highly dynamic and physically constrained real-time
              node, connected together through communication networks.  This project is aimed
              at the development of new resource management techniques for dynamic,
              constrained real-time systems.  

The research follows four avenues:  1)
              Collaborative scheduling:  Distributed rate adaptation and collaborative
              resource reclaiming techniques are explored to mitigate the effects of higly
              dynamic workloads in a distributed system with tightly-coupled real-time
              collaborative tasks running on different nodes.  2) Prioritized medium access
              control (MAC) with rate-adaptive messages:  Traditional MAC protocols are not
              suitable for real-time nodes collaborating through wireless networks because
              messages exchanged inside the network are largely periodic and need guaranteed
              bounded delay.  This research considers how to prioritize access to guarantee
              bounded delay, and how to implement distributed rate adaptation.  3) Power
              management:  The research explores how to exploit the predictable schedule of
              the wireless channel as an effective way to limit power consumption using sleep
              mode.  4) Template design:  Off-line template design will be explored for
              managing multiple physical constraints such as energy and thermal bounds in
              real-time CPU and network resource scheduling.


The broader impacts of this
              CAREER project are both technical and educational.  The theory and techniques
              developed in this project will have a broad impact, as they enable a wide
              spectrum of critical real-time applications.   The educational goals of the
              project are to transfer the research results to undergraduate and graduate
              courses, industry-sponsored workshops, and the national security and commercial
              sectors.  The educational plan is aimed at providing undergraduate and graduate
              students knowledge and skills to ensure their technical leadership in the
              real-time community.  This plan is realized by revising an existing
              undergraduate course and introducing a new graduate course, as well as
              developing widely-available Open Source toolkits and curriculum materials for
              research and educational use.

