Title       : CAREER: Signal Processing for Multiuser Multiantenna Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0237727

Award Number: 0237727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aylin Yener yener@ee.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0237727
Aylin Yener
Pennsylvania State University- Univ. Park

The
              importance of wireless access is ever increasing. The wide social impact of
              becoming tetherless ranges from providing constant reachability in emergency
              situations; to providing better educational services in schools with wireless
              network access. Future wireless systems are expected to provide much higher
              capacity due to emerging applications that demand data oriented and multimedia
              communications services. This research involves the exploration of attainable
              performance limits of wireless communication systems. The scarcity of wireless
              bandwidth dictates that future systems must utilize multiple antennas in
              addition to temporal and frequency resources. The premise of this research is
              that a significant improvement in wireless system capacity can be achieved by
              designing transmitters and receivers that jointly optimize all system
              resources.

The investigator considers interference limited multiuser
              wireless communication systems where users ``share'' the transmission medium in
              a non-partitioned manner. The signal processing framework developed is for a
              most general shared channel where multiple transmit and receive antennas are
              used, code division grants sharing of time and frequency resources, and
              multiple data streams are transmitted per user. The
focus is on understanding
              the performance limits under different channel/system constraints as well as
              methods that achieve these limits. The research issues considered include:
              characterization of the maximum number of users that can be supported when
              jointly optimum temporal-spatial transmission and temporal-spatial reception
              techniques are employed; characterization of the optimum transmitters
(and
              receivers) and design and analysis of algorithms that converge to these
              transmitters (and the corresponding receivers); investigation of the robustness
              of the techniques and results under different channel/system conditions as well
              as when partial/inaccurate information is available about these conditions;
              implementation of the resulting algorithms on a wireless testbed.


