Title       : Development of the Oklahoma Vascular Plants Database and Website
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0237433

Award Number: 0237433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Hoagland bhoagland@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy K. Buthod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ian H. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Tyrl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne J. Elisens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to the University of Oklahoma under the direction of
              B. Hoagland to develop a database of plant specimens for the state of Oklahoma
              that will be accessible via the worldwide web.  The approximately 250,000
              species   housed in herbaria at state research institutions are a valuable
              resource for state scientists, personnel at state and federal agencies, and the
              public at large.  These specimens also represent an important North American
              resource for many groups of plants.  At the present time, the information
              contained in these specimens can be accessed only by visiting state herbaria or
              by requesting information from curators.  In order to make this information
              widely and quickly available to researchers and the public, a comprehensive,
              web accessible, Oklahoma Vascular Plants database is to be developed.  Specific
              objectives of the undertaking are: (1) to database all Oklahoma plant
              specimens; (2) to develop web-based access to their information; (3) to
              georeference all specimens; and (4) to bar code all specimens.
	Databasing of
              the plant specimens will be conducted by trained undergraduate and graduate
              students supervised by the projects principal investigators.  Databasing will
              build upon an existing database of 80,000+ specimens.  Web access tools will be
              developed so that researchers at all Oklahoma colleges and universities can
              input specimen records into the database in the future.  These web tools also
              will allow individuals to search the database for information on particular
              species, map the county distributions of species, and  develop  plant species
              lists for any  county.  After the plant specimens have been entered into the
              database, a computer program will be used to assign latitude and longitude
              coordinates to them, a process known as georeferencing.  This will facilitate
              the mapping of species' distributions using Geographic Information Systems
              (GIS).  Finally, bar code labels will be affixed to each specimen as it is
              being databased as an aid in management of the herbarium specimens. 
	The
              significance of the Oklahoma Vascular Plants database is rapid access to
              information.  When completed, the database and website will facilitate the
              acquisition and dissemination of information regarding Oklahoma plants not only
              to workers in the state, but to those throughout the United States and the
              world.  Increased access to plant specimen data by government, educational, and
              non-government organizations will; (1) guide activities of the Oklahoma
              Biological Survey; (2) help track the status of rare, threatened, and
              endangered plants; (3) allow the incorporation of plant collection data into
              GIS databases; and (4) facilitate rapid accumulation and dissemination of
              biodiversity information.  Furthermore, the database will have direct use by
              the general public.  Landowners will be able to access the website and acquire
              information about the species known to be present in their counties.  The
              project also will enhance Oklahoma's science and education infrastructure by
              providing training in biological databasing and data sharing via: (1) work
              experiences for students and researchers; (2) collaboration among state
              scientists; and (3) training workshops for state researchers. 

