Title       : CAREER: Visual 3D Acquisition, Modeling and Rendering of the Real World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0237533

Award Number: 0237533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Pollefeys marc@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The long term goal of this research problem is to tackle these problems.  The
              proposed project is to develop automatic visual 3D modeling approaches that can
              deal with objects, people and complete environments, including complex shapes,
              reflectances and non-rigid motions.  The resulting models should make it
              possible to render new images, possibly with different lighting, and to perform
              3D measurements, opening up a wide range of applications.  An important aspect
              will consist of also recovering camera motion and calibration during
              acquisition.  

More specifically the research will address the following
              topics: (1) removing limitations of existing approaches and increase
              flexibility and speed, (2) extension from static to dynamic scenes using single
              and multi-camera approaches, (3) extension towards capturing complete
              (immersive) environments using standard and/or panoramic cameras and (4)
              extensions towards recovering more complex reflectance properties and
              disentangling reflectance and illumination.  This research will be developed
              towards making it possible to simply capture the appearance of real objects,
              people and environments, adapt some properties if necessary (e.g. pose,
              lighting) and then seamlessly (re)combine different real and virtual scene
              elements.  

The educational component forms an integral part of this
              project.  Existing courses will be further enhanced and additional courses will
              be developed to provide a complete computer vision course offering.  Important
              aspect will be to ensure integration and complementarity with the computer
              graphics courses provided within the department and to closely link courses and
              research.  To ensure a broader dissemination, I intend to publish a book and to
              organize courses at specialized conferences as well as to provide application
              results for exhibits open to the broader public.  

