Title       : CAREER: A Unifying Interior-Point Approach to Sensitivity Analysis and
               Reoptimization in Conic Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0237415

Award Number: 0237415
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emre Alper Yildirim yildirim@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
              project is to develop a unifying framework to study sensitivity analysis of
              convex optimization problems in conic form and reoptimization after a data
              perturbation. The emphasis will be on the use of interior-point methods with
              the following goals: (1) obtaining provably reliable information about
              sensitivity analysis of a large class of optimization problems with a very
              modest computational effort and (2) developing reoptimization strategies that
              take advantage of the information gained by solving the original optimization
              problem with provably better worst-case complexity estimates. In both cases,
              the theoretical work will be incorporated into efficient, state-of-the-art
              optimization solvers. In addition, applications of convex optimization in
              various areas will be investigated. The main focus here will be on the design,
              analysis, and implementation of efficient algorithms for problems arising in
              computational geometry and discrete optimization.  The educational component of
              this project includes reworking the graduate nonlinear optimization course,
              starting a nonlinear optimization seminar, introducing new graduate courses,
              and writing a textbook on recent advances in sensitivity analysis.  The work on
              sensitivity analysis will lead to an innovative approach that will accurately
              characterize the behavior of an optimal solution under perturbations in a
              fairly large class of optimization problems, thereby avoiding possible costly
              mistakes due to the use of mostly inaccurate sensitivity information provided
              by today's commercial solvers. This work is likely to lead to further insight
              into convergence issues in interior-point methods. The development of effective
              reoptimization strategies will help to design and implement faster algorithms
              for a wide variety of optimization problems that require solutions of closely
              related subproblems. These algorithms include branch-and-bound methods,
              sequential quadratic programming algorithms, and decomposition methods to solve
              structured large-scale optimization problems. Application of continuous
              optimization techniques in computational geometry and discrete optimization
              will widen the domain of problems for which efficient algorithms can be
              designed.

This project will provide significant enhancements to the value of
              interior-point methods by enabling their use for the purposes of sensitivity
              analysis and reoptimization, two areas of immense practical importance that
              were previously considered to be the shortcomings of such methods.
              Collaborations with researchers in computational geometry and discrete
              optimization will lead to synergy among different disciplines.  The ideas
              resulting from this project will be disseminated in a timely manner through
              publications, software development, and participation at national and
              international workshops and meetings. Graduate students will be involved
              through seminar participation and dissertation research with the researcher. 
              New developments will be integrated into courses taught at both undergraduate
              and graduate levels.
