Title       : SGER: Spatial Patterns of Flood Sedimentation in Response to an Extreme Event:
               Guadelupe River, Texas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0237050

Award Number: 0237050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Hudson pfhudson@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Although floodplain research has been a mainstay of fluvial geomorphology, much
              is not known about the importance of large flood events to floodplain
              construction.  This is particularly significant with respect to the
              interpretation of the influence of climate change (both in the past and looking
              ahead to the future) on drainage systems, because flood deposits serve as proxy
              evidence for flooding and landscape response.  Humid coastal plain fluvial
              systems have been studied intensively, but the semi -arid and arid drainage
              systems of Texas may be particularly sensitive to large rainfall events, and
              far less research has been devoted to floodplain processes in these settings. 
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support a project that
              investigates flood sedimentation in the Guadalupe River valley of east central
              Texas, which experienced an extreme flood event in early July 2002.  The
              project considers the influence of downstream drainage basin controls on the
              pattern and character of flood deposits.  Most of the project will be field
              based, with supplemental data obtained from USGS 1:24,000 topographic maps and
              digital orthophotos.  The thickness of the flood deposits will be measured in
              the field, and particle size analysis of flood sediments will occur in the
              University of Texas geomorphology laboratory.  Total-stations surveying will be
              used for mapping the floodplain topography and location of sediment samples. 
              The drainage basin controls on flood sedimentation will be examined by
              considering the floodplain topography, valley dimensions (gradient and width),
              flood regime (discharge, stage, length of inundation), and the planform channel
              morphology.  The influence of riparian vegetation on sedimentation will be
              considered by comparing the canopy cover and tree density within each site, and
              between sites.

The project is expected to contribute theoretically to
              understanding of the importance of large events to floodplain construction.  It
              will assess how various controls influence the spatial dimensions of flood
              deposits (volume and particle size).  Regionally, the project will increase
              understanding of floodplain sedimentation in western Gulf Coastal Plain fluvial
              systems.. this project will provide valuable opportunities for student
              involvement in the fieldwork, and through follow-up activities, it will enable
              the investigator to be more effective in teaching fundamental field techniques,
              fluvial geomorphology, and analytic approaches using geographic information
              systems.  The project also will yield data that may prove to be quite useful
              for local officials as they plan future flood-prevention and -control
              strategies.

