Title       : Molecular Systematics of the Lampsilini (Bivalvia: Unionoida): Evolution of
               Ancient Sex-Specific Extension of the cytochrome c oxidase II Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0237175

Award Number: 0237175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter R. Hoeh whoeh@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0114000   Endangered Species                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
DEB - 0237175

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Walter R. Hoeh at
              Kent State University to study the molecular systematics and mitochondrial DNA
              (mtDNA) inheritance in the freshwater mussel (bivalve) tribe Lampsilini. 
              Doubly-uniparental inheritance of mtDNA has been found in marine and freshwater
              mussels.  This system has been studied extensively in marine mussels but
              relatively little work has been done on the species-rich freshwater fauna. 
              Studies of the doubly-uniparental inheritance system indicate that mtDNA
              gender-switching events are common in marine mussels; however, recent work
              suggests that these gender-switching events are absent in freshwater mussels. 
              This situation may be related to a 600 nucleotide extension of the COII gene in
              freshwater mussel male-transmitted mtDNA.  Using DNA sequencing techniques,
              this project will examine the evolution of the COII extension in the
              Lampsilini, a group of freshwater mussels that are of particular interest
              because it contains some of the most interesting morphological adaptations
              within bivalves as well as a secondary reduction of the COII extension in a
              species within this tribe.  This project's specific objectives include: (1)
              construct robust estimates of lampsiline phylogeny, (2) investigate the
              evolutionary pattern of reduction of the COII extension, and (3) examine the
              molecular evolution of the male- and female-transmitted mtDNAs.  These
              objectives will facilitate tests of lampsiline evolutionary relationships,
              determine the lability of the COII extension, determine the extent to which the
              COII extension prevents gender-switching, and increase our understanding of the
              forces underlying molecular evolutionary change.  

The completion of these
              specific objectives has broad implications, including: conservation of
              freshwater mussels, one of the most imperiled faunas in the world; the
              evolution of doubly-uniparental and standard maternal mtDNA inheritance;
              evolution of morphological sexual dimorphism in the Lampsilini; and mechanisms
              underlying molecular evolution.  In addition, the proposed research will
              provide training for a young evolutionist/systematist.  

