Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genome Sequencing and Comparative Analysis of
               Acidobacterium Capsulatum and Verrucomicrobium Spinosum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0237365

Award Number: 0237365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi L. Ward nward@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen E. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Heidelberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1629      BE: Non-Announcement Research
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr Naomi Ward, Dr Karen Nelson, and Dr John Heidelberg of The Institute for
              Genomic Research (TIGR) have been awarded a grant to sequence the genomes of
              the bacteria Acidobacterium capsulatum and Verrucomicrobium spinosum. These
              organisms are representatives of the acidobacteria and verrucomicrobia groups,
              which, due to their widespread distribution and relative abundance in soil and
              water, are attracting growing interest from microbial ecologists. Acidobacteria
              appear to be sensitive to chemical changes in their environment (i.e. addition
              of fertilizers to soil) and may serve as indicators for soil nutrient levels.
              There is evidence that verrucomicrobia may be key participants in the methane
              cycle and hence indirect contributors to global warming. In addition, some
              verrucomicrobia are involved in symbiotic relationships (partnerships) with
              other organisms such as nematodes, in which the bacteria appear to manipulate
              to their own advantage the ratio of males to females produced. Other
              verrucomicrobial symbionts defend their ciliate host from predators by shooting
              out a specialized harpoon-like structure. To date, there are no completed
              genome sequences from members of these two groups. The goal of the project will
              be to identify genes present in the genomes of these two organisms, and assign
              a function to the genes. The sequencing approach will involve a so-called
              random shotgun strategy, in which the DNA is broken into fragments and the DNA
              sequence of the fragments determined randomly. The resulting individual
              sequences will be assembled into one piece using computer software that
              recognizes overlaps between the different sequences. Any gaps left in the
              sequence will be filled in to produce a complete molecule. Comparisons can then
              be made with existing genomic databases, to identify the genes present. 
The
              results of this project are expected to have far-reaching impacts on the
              scientific community, firstly because the sequence data will be made publicly
              available through the TIGR Website, and secondly because the groups represented
              by these two organisms are of interest to virtually all researchers working to
              determine the microbial diversity of soil and water. These researchers can use
              the sequence information to formulate hypotheses about the distribution and
              ecological role of these bacteria. The sequence data will also serve as a
              resource for those researchers seeking to understand the symbiotic
              relationships of verrucomicrobia. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award
              funded through a collaborative program between the National Science Foundation
              and the Department of Agriculture.


