Title       : CAREER: From Designed Molecules to Functional Materials and Innovative Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0237578

Award Number: 0237578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco M. Raymo fraymo@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,7202,9161,9179,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research program addresses the design of molecules which will permit the
              development of functional materials and devices. Fluorescent and photochromic
              compounds will be embedded into solid polmer matrices. The resulting
              molecule-based materials will be integrated into device configurations designed
              to execute logic operations relying exclusively on optical inputs and outputs.
              These solid-state all-optical logic gates will process multiple optical
              signals. Electron deficient surface coatings will be assembled from
              electroactive and fluorescent building blocks. The resulting molecule-based
              materials will recognize and immobilize electron rich substrates at
              solid/liquid interfaces, providing new avenues for sensor development. Students
              will be trained in the multidisciplinary fields of nanoscience and
              nanotechnology through a combination of lecture and laboratory investigations.
              A research forum for regional colleges and a research opportunity program
              targeting minority students will provide cohesiveness and foster exchanges and
              collaborations.

With the support of this CAREER Award from the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Francisco Raymo, of the Department
              of Chemistry at the University of Miami, is exploring the preparation of
              molecule-based materials and devices. Professor Raymo is developing new
              strategies for all-optical multi-channel signal processing which will
              complement current optical fiber technology. He is also preparing novel
              materials designed to permit facile detection and recognition of selected
              molecules, forming the basis of new sensor technologies. Professor Raymo is
              training students, both in the laboratory and in the lecture hall, in the
              modern techniques and concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology. In addition,
              he is bringing research opportunities to minority students and coordinating
              multi-institutional exchanges and collaborations.
