Title       : The Characterization of the Methanothermobacter Thermautotrophicus Origin of
               Replication and its Associated Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0237483

Award Number: 0237483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zvi Kelman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Every proliferating cell must duplicate its genetic information accurately and
              only once per cell cycle. Any process that falls short of or exceeds these
              limits results in cell death or abnormal proliferation. The long-term goal of
              this research program is to understand the mechanisms governing DNA replication
              in eukarya, and this research project will focus specifically on the origin of
              replication, a specific location on the chromosome where replication initiates.
              Whereas DNA replication has been well characterized in bacteria, viruses and
              bacteriophages, many aspects of the process in eukarya, particularly in the
              initiation phase, are still unknown. The complex eukaryotic cell cycle entails
              numerous regulatory signals and factors from the first step of origin
              recognition to the final step of cell division, making it difficult to study
              individual components and events. An organism that may help to circumvent some
              of the complexity of eukaryotic replication is a prokaryote with
              eukaryotic-like replication processes,the archaeon Methanothermobacter
              thermautotrophicus (Mth). Archaeal DNA replication appears to be more similar
              to the eukaryal rather than the bacterial process. However, the archaeal DNA
              replication apparatus appears to require fewer proteins and complexes. Thus,
              archaea may provide a good model system for understanding the enzymology of
              eukaryotic replication. The research will focus on the mechanisms of the
              initiation of DNA replication in Mth.Both wild-type and mutant recombinant
              proteins will be used in in vitro experiments designed to:1) isolate and
              identify the origin binding proteins,2)
understand how the origin is
              recognized and bound by the initiation proteins; and 3) identify the functional
              motifs in the archaeal origin. A long-term goal is to develop an in vitro
              replication system for Mth; the information gained from these biochemical
              studies will be directly applicable to such a system.

