Title       : Reassessing Microbial Evolution in Light of Horizontal Gene Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0237197

Award Number: 0237197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johann Peter Gogarten gogarten@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Horizontal or lateral gene transfer (HGT) denotes the exchange of genetic
              information between organisms as opposed to vertical inheritance, i.e. the
              passing of genes from parent to daughter cells.  This project will study the
              relative contributions of HGT and vertical inheritance to microbial evolution. 
              First, the extent of intra-gene mosaicism will be explored.  Individual genes
              can be mosaic as a result of recombination.  Preliminary data indicate that in
              the case of ribosomal RNA intra-gene mosaicism might not be a rare event. 
              Statistical tests will be developed to assess how frequently intra-gene
              mosaicism occurred during microbial evolution.  These tests will utilize
              simulated sequence evolution incorporating different models with varying
              amounts of HGT and recombination.  Second, genome evolution will be simulated
              to address the following question: Are the confidently detected instances of
              HGT the tip of an iceberg, the bulk of which remains below the detection limit?
              Or are many of the alleged transfer events artifacts due to compositional bias,
              convergent evolution and unrecognized gene duplications?  The simulations will
              include different frequencies of recombination and will utilize different
              models to simulate sequence evolution.  Simulations that take the detection
              levels for horizontal gene transfer and intra-gene mosaicism into consideration
              will move the study of horizontal gene transfer beyond a compilation of
              anecdotal evidence.  Third, a relaxed molecular clock model will be used to
              analyze the early evolution of prokaryotic life.  Time estimates and their
              credibility intervals will be obtained for individual gene families.  Dates for
              key evolutionary events estimated from compatible datasets will be combined to
              achieve more accurate divergence time estimates
