Title       : CAREER - New Methods for Simulating Biomolecules of Several Microns in Length
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0237796

Award Number: 0237796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $672154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianpeng Ma jpma@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1164,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A substantial part of molecular functions involves motions in a wide range of
              length scales, e.g., from the vibrations of chemical bonds to global
              conformational changes of supermolecular complexes to macroscopic muscle
              contractions. The goal of this research is to introduce several new
              computational methods for describing the motions at any desired length scale
              without losing the details of atomic calculations, which is an unprecedented
              simulation capacity. The central method is substructure synthesis method that
              regards a given structure as an assemblage of substructures acting together in
              some ways. The choice of substructures is arbitrary, and sometimes quite
              natural, such as domains or subunits in supermolecular complexes. First, the
              vibrational modes for each substructure are determined by solving an eigenvalue
              problem. Next, various substructures are joined together by a set of
              constraints to enforce geometric compatibility at the inter-substructure
              interfaces. The modes for the assembled structure can then be computed by the
              Rayleigh-Ritz principle using a set of low-frequency substructure modes.
              Computationally, this represents a much more desirable problem than solving the
              full eigenvalue problem for the assembled structure. This new methods will be
              applied to F-actin, a typical filamentous system of several microns, to study
              its mechanical and dynamic properties at any length. This will also help
              interpret the experiments that measure molecular elastic properties. 

The
              new methods for simulating motions in a wide range of length scales will not
              only have an impact on the study of molecular dynamics, but also will
              significantly contribute to the fields of bioengineering and chemistry.
              Moreover, since some concepts in the proposed methods are related to those in
              the mechanical engineering field, their implementation as methods for
              describing motions of complex molecules requires knowledge of multiple
              disciplines including biology, physics, and engineering. The success of this
              project will therefore be an excellent example of creative thinking and problem
              solving benefited from interdisciplinary communication. The beneficiaries will
              not only be the trainees who are directly involved in the project, but also a
              larger audience with diverse background who are commonly interested in problems
              in life sciences and engineering, but from very different perspectives.
              Particularly, it will expose undergraduate students to concepts of
              interdisciplinary research. Finally, a broader community will be reached via
              public distribution of the computer software developed in this work. 

