Title       : Investing in Multidisciplinary University Activities through Hawaii EPSCoR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0237065

Award Number: 0237065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8995525            (Estimated)
Investigator: Deane E. Neubauer elaws@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Laws  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald K. Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The University of Hawaii has proposed a plan for Research 
Infrastructure
              Improvement (RII) with the overarching theme of 
"Biodiversity in an
              Integrated Environment".  The project involves the 
collaboration of the
              University of Hawaii campuses at Manoa and Hilo. 
The effort will be directed
              at three research thrust areas that are 
consistent with the state's
              commitment to a research agenda that 
targets responsible stewardship of its
              island ecosystems:  evolutionary 
genetics, ecosystems, and information
              technology for environmental 
research.  The research agenda will focus on
              Hawaii's native and 
introduced invasive species and consider the impact of
              human activities 
on ecosystem functionality and biological diversity.  
              Hawaii 
investigators will use new molecular and technical approaches to study
              
timely and substantive environmental research questions.  A partnership
              
with Kamehameha Schools will enable researchers, educators and students
              
access to land of tremendous diversity for enriched research and
              
educational experiences.  An Environmental Information Technology 
Research
              Network will be established to store and retrieve spacial 
data that can be
              used to model ecosystem processes throughout the 
Hawaiian Islands and serve
              as a central clearinghouse for biological 
resource datasets.

Hawaii's RII
              effort will strengthen and increase interactions and 
collaborations among
              researchers within the state as well as with US 
mainland researchers and
              integrate research in biodiversity with 
educational and outreach activities. 
              K-12 students and teachers will 
interact with university researchers in field
              work designed to increase 
math and science interest and learning in Hawaii's
              youth, particularly 
Native Hawaiian students.  Infrastructure support will
              also include 
funding of faculty and student travel, start-up funding for new
              
faculty, "seed funding' to promote competitive collaborations among
              
investigators and support for research experiences of community college
              
students.


