Title       : Studies of Reactive Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0237256

Award Number: 0237256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $620000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Platz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project targets high energy, short lived, reactive molecules for study. The
              molecules of interest are generated by photolysis of synthetic precursors and
              the stable products of their chemical reactions are identified. Through
              UV-visible and infrared spectroscopic studies at time scales ranging from
              nanosecond to picosecond, complemented by Density Functional Theory
              calculations, four main objectives will be targeted. The rates with which
              photochemically generated reactive intermediates lose heat to solvent will be
              measured, and possible rearrangements to more stable isomers as they cool will
              be explored. New reactive intermediates will be probed by nanosecond time
              resolved flash photolysis of precursors at 77K. Specific solvation of carbenes
              in coordinating solvents will be examined. Carbenoids and nitrenoids derived
              from the reactions of carbenes and nitrenes with salts will be characterized by
              both time resolved spectroscopy and by chemical reactivity studies.

With
              this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program continues support
              for the research of Professor Matthew S. Platz of the Department of Chemistry
              at Ohio State University. Professor Platz creates and studies interesting
              highly reactive and short-lived molecules. Although such molecules are of basic
              scientific interest, they have much practical value in making larger molecules.
              They are also used by biochemists to attach small probe molecules to larger
              ones such as proteins, by materials scientists and in industry as photoresists
              and in lithography. Students working on this project will be educated to become
              problem solvers who will eventually apply their skills to solving problems in
              the chemical and pharmaceutical industries and in academe.
