Title       : CAREER: Low-cost Arrayed Gas Sensors Using Inkjet-printed Organic Transistors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0237596

Award Number: 0237596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivek Subramanian viveks@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, there have been some initial demonstrations of organic
              transistor-based gas sensors.  These initial demonstrations have established
              that sensors using different organic active layers show different responses to
              different odors and gas-phase toxins.  While individually these sensors do not
              offer much specificity, they may potentially be arrayed to form an electronic
              nose, offering high sensitivity and selectivity to a wide range of analytes, in
              a manner analogous to a dog's nose.  In particular, it may be possible to form
              ultra-low cost sensors suitable for such cost-sensitive applications as
              distributed environmental monitoring and content monitoring of food and
              pharmaceutical packages.  This may be achieved by fabricating the entire
              organic sensor array using a low-cost printing technology on a low-cost
              flexible substrate.  Such a technology will usher in an era of unprecedented
              public safety, reduced product wastage, and proactive environmental protection
              since the sensors may be deployed in ubiquitous sensor networks due to their
              extremely low cost and flexibility.  

Within this proposal, the
              investigators will develop the device and materials technologies necessary for
              an arrayed sensor system, and will use these to demonstrate an integrated
              low-cost electronic array offering high sensitivity and specificity. 
              Specifically, they will develop a manufacturing technology for forming these
              sensors on low cost plastic substrates entirely using inkjet printing.  Diverse
              families of active layer materials will be arrayed to form high specificity
              sensor arrays on low-cost plastic substrates, ensuring low cost while
              simultaneously providing high specificity and sensitivity.

An undergraduate
              and a graduate student will be involved in performing this work.  The
              interdisciplinary nature of this work will further the knowledge base of both
              students.  In particular, the mentoring of the undergraduate student will be
              emphasized through critical review programs and experimental design and
              metrology tutorials.  

The results of this proposal will also be used in a
              University-sponsored high-school outreach program.  High-school students will
              be invited to visit the laboratory and to gain hands-on experience with
              inkjet-based circuit fabrication.  This will increase the level of interest in
              science and engineering among local high-school students.  Furthermore, the
              investigators will devote much effort to enabling transfer of the technology to
              researchers in industry and other academic groups through publications,
              web-based technology dissemination, and industrial interactions.  

An
              integral part of the educational component of this program focuses on the
              recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority groups.  The PI will
              travel regularly to the eastern and southeastern United States to meet with
              minority students at HBCU's to advise on opportunities for advanced studies in
              EECS at Berkeley.  A representative from BGESS (the organization of the Black
              Graduate Engineering and Science Students at UC Berkeley) will accompany him to
              facilitate this.  This activity will be used to substantially increase the
              enrollment and retention of underrepresented groups in EECS at Berkeley.

