Title       : Microbial Observatories: Collaborative Research Linking Microbial Discovery to
               Biogeochemical Processes: An Oligotrophic Oceanic Microbial Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0237713

Award Number: 0237713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Giovannoni steve.giovannoni@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Carlson (University of California Santa
              Barbara) and Giovannoni (Oregon State University) to investigate the cell
              biology and Biogeochemical activities of the major microbial groups in the open
              ocean.  This project will focus geographically on the Bermuda Atlantic
              Time-series Study (BATS) site, which for the past decade has been a test bed
              for the development of advanced molecular techniques for measuring microbial
              diversity, and is one of the longest time-series studies of oceanographic
              conditions on the planet.  The rich data set from BATS provides important
              physical, chemical and biological information that is used by the microbial
              observatory to understand how ocean conditions affect the activities of
              planktonic microorganisms.  The ocean microbial observatory will apply a new
              high throughput cultivation technology developed at Oregon State University to
              identify, count and cultivate the major oceanic microbial groups that have not
              previously been cultured.  Technologies will also be employed to characterize
              the quality and quantity of organic substrate utilization by these
              microorganisms.

Heterotrophic microorganisms use dissolved organic carbon
              (DOC) to grow.  The global dissolved organic carbon (DOC) pool is estimated to
              be 685 Gt C, a value comparable to the mass of inorganic C in the atmosphere. 
              Small perturbations in the metabolism of DOC by microorganisms could impact the
              balance between oceanic and atmospheric carbon dioxide, providing a strong
              impetus to understand how the dynamics and diversity of microorganisms affect
              DOM production, consumption and distribution in the oceans.  The genomic DNA
              sequences, biochemical properties and patterns of  DOC utilization of these
              organisms will be studied in the laboratory.  This data will be used in field
              studies that document and explain natural patterns of change in microbial
              communities and DOC.  In addition this project will also host summer courses at
              the Bermuda Biological Station for Research designed to expose graduate
              students to state-of-the-art molecular biology and oceanographic techniques.

