Title       : CAREER: Theoretical Investigations of Non-Equlibrium Processes in Chemistry and
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0237105

Award Number: 0237105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark R. Pederson                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anatoly Kolomeisky tolya@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Anatoly Kolomeisky of Rice University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to pursue research and disseminate knowledge in
              the area of non-equilibrium processes relevant to a microscopic chemistry-based
              understanding of biology.   He will study the dynamics of polymer translocation
              across nanopores, extend models to explain why the ligand-receptor bond rupture
              as a function of loading rate deviates from Hooke's law, investigate molecular
              motors, and determine the mechanisms for polymerization in biologically
              interesting filaments.   This field lies at the interface of chemistry, physics
              and biology and the research will be closely coupled to the training of
              undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students.

The underlying role of
              physical chemistry in biology remains an intellectually challenging problem
              area of great relevance to future biochemical technologies.  Problems addressed
              in this proposal will allow for a better understanding of targeted delivery of
              pharmaceuticals and subsequent dispersal.   A related area in need of a
              microscopic understanding is how conversion of energy into motion proceeds in
              biological systems. Examples of such processes, all of which are facilitated by
              molecular motors, include cell division and transport, molecular contraction
              and genetic transcription.  Kolomeisky plans to extend his research on
              molecular motors.   Imparting the knowledge and requisite skills to a
              multidisciplinary array of chemical, biological and physical scientists will be
              accomplished by introducing a course on biophysical chemistry that is aimed at
              the advanced undergraduate or beginning graduate level student.  Early interest
              in this new area will be raised by outreach to high school students and
              teachers.

