Title       : Mechanistic Studies of TiO2-based Mn/Ni Catalysts for the Low Temperature SCR of
               NOx with NH3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0237172

Award Number: 0237172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiotis G. Smirniotis Panagiotis.Smirniotis@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Medium temperature DeNOx  processes have been widely utilized throughout the
              world since the selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NO by ammonia is widely
              recognized as a key chemical transformation for environmental protection.
              Hoewever, water and sulfur dioxide poisoning are important challenges for SCR
              catalysts that will be used to process alternative fuels and chemical
              feedstocks.  Prior work by the principal investigator has demonstrated that
              Mn/TiO2 is active at temperatures as low as 80 oC and is resistant to water. 
              Addition of Ni to this catalyst appears promising in order to enhance sulfur
              dioxide tolerance.  The research will provide a fundamental understanding of
              Mn-Ni/TiO2 systems based on key mechanistic and spectroscopic investigations. 
              Transient kinetic methods will be utilized in order to provide new insights
              into the reactions pathways and to establish the basis for high selectivity. 
              The principal investigator will also use advanced instrumentation capabilities
              such as in situ FTIR spectroscopy with labeled compounds to determine adsorbed
              species and reactive intermediates.  Other surface analysis techniques are
              skillfully incorporated into the proposed work.  The combination of approaches
              is characteristic of excellent, modern catalysis research.

The broader
              impacts of this research include education of students in advanced catalysis
              and characterization techniques and involvement in relevant technological
              applications.  Students will be involved in poster and paper presentations and
              in preparation of numerous publications.   The principal investigator is
              committed to recruiting under-represented minorities for the research program,
              including working with a new ethnic engineering office at the University of
              Cincinnati.

