Title       : CAREER: Feedback Control Theory for Biological Pattern Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0237708

Award Number: 0237708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tetsuya Iwasaki iwasaki@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Objective: The overall goal of this career proposal is to explore the purely
              interdisciplinary subject
of feedback control system design for generation of
              rhythmic patterns found in animal locomotion,
and to develop effective
              pedagogical methods for inspiring engineering students with benefits
              of
biological knowledge in the context of systems and control.
Specific
              Goals:
I. Develop an orbital trajectory analysis method for a class of
              nonlinear systems arising from
modeling of biological pattern generators.
II.
              Establish a method for designing a dynamical system that achieves pattern
              generation with a
prescribed oscillation profile.
III. Revise the dynamics
              and control curriculum to provide a broader view of systems
              through
crossdisciplinary training in neuroscience.
IV. Integrate the
              bio-control research into the science and engineering education at broad
              levels
including K-12 and college undergraduate.
V. Broadly disseminate the
              results of the proposed activities.
Methods and Procedures (Keyed to the
              Specific Goals):
I. Mathematically formulate an oscillation analysis problem
              and derive a solution using tools
from robust control theory. Examine the
              degree of conservatism exploiting the biological knowl-edge
of particular
              central pattern generator (CPG) architectures.
II. Use the analysis result in
              I as a basis for developing a general theory for the design of CPGs
utilizing
              linear matrix inequality methods. Test the applicability of the design
              conditions against
the CPGs known from biology.
III. Improve an undergraduate
              course on systems modeling by introducing neuronal modeling
and pattern
              generation mechanism. Develop a new graduate course on robust and nonlinear
              control
for regulation and biological oscillation.
IV. Develop research-based
              educational tools through multidisciplinary, teamworking, senior
thesis
              projects. Use the tools to stimulate K-12 and undergraduate students'
              intellectual curiosity
into engineering and science through a series of
              outreach/educational activities.
V. Utilize conference presentations,
              publications in archival journals, invited seminars, and
possibly tutorial
              workshops in major international conferences.
Intellectual Merit: The central
              theme of feedback control theory has been the regulation around an
equilibrium
              point of a dynamical system. In contrast, much less attention has been paid to
              control
specifications involving periodic motion (or oscillation) generation
              despite their practical impor-tance.
The basic research outlined in this
              proposal will provide an initial stepping stone toward a
new control paradigm
              that focuses on autonomous pattern generation by feedback dynamics.
              In
particular, the project will establish a systematic method for analysis and
              design of pattern genera-tors
through the exploitation of biological knowledge
              on neuronal oscillators.
Broader Impact: The crossdisciplinary research
              activities over biology and control fields are in-tegrated
into educational
              activities at all levels. The revised curriculum will provide
              undergraduate
and graduate students with a broader perspective on engineering
              problems. The senior thesis project
will develop students with team-oriented
              problem-solving skills in a multidisciplinary environment.
The outreach
              activities will contribute to improve scientific literacy of K-12 students.

