Title       : CAREER: Designing Effective Teams in the Engineering Classroom for the
               Enhancement of Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0237135

Award Number: 0237135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $587568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie G. Adams sadams2@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this career-development project is to develop, 
test
              and validate a model of effective teaming for the engineering classroom.  The
              goals of the model are to facilitate teamwork in the classroom; to measure
              individual growth when learning a subject and learning how to work in a team;
              and to measure teamwork effectiveness.  The primary goal of the education
              component of the project is redesign engineering management courses; develop a
              new cross-listed undergraduate/graduate course on the principles of group/team
              dynamics; develop and implement faculty training workshops on the application
              of the model; and the development of interactive web training modules to
              provide ongoing tutorials on problems and issues encountered by teams. 

In
              response to a plea from employers for engineering graduates prepared to 
work
              in teams and redefined program outcomes from the Accreditation Board for
              Engineering and Technology (ABET), more teaming activities are being
              incorporated into the engineering classroom.  To build on her previous work,
              the PI has developed her plan to analyze the nature of teamwork in the
              engineering classroom, develop a measure to assess teamwork and use that
              measure to investigate methods of promoting team development.  Pennsylvania
              State University, the National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
              (NCIIA) and the PI.s own University of Nebraska-Lincoln will make their
              engineering students available for data collection. The proposed model is novel
              because it will focus on both the individual.s and the team's mastery of
              effective teaming constructs.  The activities will strengthen the ability of
              engineering educators to fully prepare students to utilize teams in science,
              mathematics, engineering and 
technology.  
 

