Title       : CAREER: Structural-functional Analysis of the V-ATPase Subunit d by
               Site-directed Mutagenesis and Overexpression in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0237217

Award Number: 0237217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $657388             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karlett J. Parra-Belky kparrabelky@bsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ball State University
	      
	      Muncie, IN  47306    317/289-1241

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1108,1166,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Vacuolar H+-ATPases (V-ATPases) are proton pumps required for normal cell
              growth, organelle acidification, and ion homeostasis, and they consist of a
              peripheral complex, V1, and a membrane-bound complex, V0.  This research
              focuses on establishing the roles and functions of the subunit d of the V0
              complex in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Yeast provides an excellent
              system to explore V-ATPase assembly, catalysis, and regulation by using
              genetics, cellular, and biochemical techniques.  Specifically, amino acid
              substitutions in conserved regions of subunit d will be used to probe the
              structural and functional importance of these regions. Subunit d interactions
              with V1 and V0 will be further explored by overexpressing subunit d in cells
              that carry intact V-ATPases (wild-type), V0 alone (vma2), and V1 alone (vma3). 
              These studies will contribute to the elucidation of both the structure and
              regulatory mechanisms of V-ATPases.

Broader Impact: This project is designed
              to make significant contributions to both the understanding of V-ATPases and to
              strengthening of undergraduate education.  The latter goal includes enhancing
              the undergraduate curriculum by including research-based experiments in the
              biochemistry lab courses.  This activity will provide opportunities for
              critical thinking and scientific discovery in the classroom.  Student
              participation will be encouraged with possibilities for academic credit,
              stipends, awards, and co-authorship of resulting publications. Intrinsic to the
              project is the goal to enhance diversity by fostering the participation and
              retention of students that are underrepresented in sciences.  The project will
              also involve summer research by high school students.  These activities would
              enhance student retention at Ball State University and encourage diversity.

