Title       : Memory and Hippocampus: Anaylsis of Retrograde Amnesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0237053

Award Number: 0237053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Clark reclark@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1191,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Robert E. Clark, Ph.D.
NSF Proposal Number: 0237053
NSF Proposal Title:
              	Memory and Hippocampus:  Analysis of Retrograde Amnesia

A considerable body
              of work has been directed toward understanding how a brain structure known as
              the hippocampus contributes to memory function.  A phenomenon that has been
              especially important to this tradition of work is temporally-graded retrograde
              amnesia (TGRA). TGRA refers to the finding that information (memories) learned
              long before the onset of memory impairment are often spared relative to
              information learned more recently.  For example, humans who have sustained
              damage to the hippocampus, have little or no memory for facts and events that
              was learned just prior to their brain damage, but retain memories that were
              learned well before the damage.  Accordingly, memory that is initially
              hippocampus-dependent, gradually becomes hippocampus-independent.  A critical
              question is how hippocampal activity participates in this process.
These
              experiments provide a systematic investigation of when and for how long the
              hippocampus must be active to support memory.  Using rats, reversible lesions
              will be used to selectively inactivate the hippocampus (by infusing a drug that
              disrupts hippocampal function without damaging the neurons).  Accordingly, the
              hippocampus can be turned on or off during different phases of the learning and
              memory process.  That is, reversible lesions will be applied during different
              portions of the learning, retention, or retrieval phase of memory to determine
              if and when hippocampal activity is important for memory.  These reversible
              lesions are created and sustained for long periods of time with implanted
              osmotic minipumps (devices that can slowly deliver the drugs to the hippocampus
              continuously for many days).  
These results will provide important insights
              into how hippocampal activity following learning contributes to the
              establishment of long-term memory.  Clarifying this pattern of memory loss
              (TGRA) is critical for understanding how memory is organized and stored in the
              brain.  The proposed activities will provide research training for graduate
              students and post-doctoral students in psychology, cognitive science, and
              neuroscience.

