Title       : FRG: Single-Molecule Spectroscopy Studies of Polymer Melt Rheology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0237247

Award Number: 0237247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $630000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald G. Fuller ggf@rio.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Waymouth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Moerner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award describes a program of research aimed at applying single-molecule
              spectroscopy to problems in tbe dynamics and rheology of polymer melts.  This
              will be accomplished through a collaboration of three research groups: Waymouth
              (synthesis), Moerner (single-molecule spectroscopy), and Fuller (rheology). 
              The outcome of this research will provide direct measurements of orientation
              and translation of single monomer units attached to polymer chains at strategic
              locations.  Liner chains, tagged with fluorophores at the ends or at the
              center, will be studied.  Star and H-shaped chains will also be considered to
              understand the consequences of long chain branching.  These branched
              architectures will either be tagged an the ends or arms, or at the branched
              points.

The dynamics of quiescent melts, or of melts subjected to either
              simple shear flow or extensional flow will be measured.  These data will offer
              the first direct measurements of orientation dynamics and translation of
              individual polymer segments.  The ability to track orientation and
              translational fluctuations of entangled segments is important to understanding
              the process of tube renewal and constraint release.

The high level of
              multidisciplinary integration and collaboration in this project will provide a
              valuable and stimulating educational environment for graduate students.  In
              addition, this research program will provide new information about the
              fundamental behavior of entangled polymer melts, which will be useful in the
              broader contexts of melt flow processing and extrusion.

