Title       : Relaxation Dynamics of Multiarm Polymer Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0237052

Award Number: 0237052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynden A. Archer archer@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Experimental studies of stress relaxation dynamics of well-defined branched
              polymer liquids have long been recognized as important for understanding
              structure-processing relationships in commercial long-chain branched
              polyolefins. When these studies are performed using well-characterized
              entangled branched polymers they can provide direct insight into more general
              relationships between molecular architecture, relaxation dynamics, and
              rheology. The objective of the proposed research is three-fold. First, to
              determine the effect of branch point motion and constraint release on the
              linear rheology of model branched polymers. Second, to advance fundamental
              understanding of nonlinear rheology of entangled branched polymer liquids in
              shear and extensional flow. Finally, to devise methods for visualizing motion
              and stress relaxation processes in branched polymer liquids. 

Benefits of
              the proposed research extend beyond its direct impact on scientific
              understanding of branched polymer dynamics. The research, for example,
              addresses a problem of considerable industrial importance at a time when
              advances in metallocene catalyst chemistry are allowing unprecedented control
              of molecular architecture in commercial branched polymers. Fundamental
              understanding of structure-processing relationships in these materials will
              help reduce expensive trial-and-error experimentation now required to optimize
              existing processes for new materials. The proposed research also comes at a
              time when the first rigorous treatments of architecture effects on polymer
              processing and properties are beginning to appear in textbooks.  This research
              will impact education in a variety of ways. Knowledge developed by study will
              improve the quality and scope of information about branched polymer physics
              written in text books and taught in the classroom. The proposed fluorescence
              microscopy experiments using branched DNA will also provide an excellent
              demonstration tool for modern courses in polymer science. Finally, the graduate
              and undergraduate student researchers who will work on the project will receive
              training in several emerging areas of polymer science and engineering. 

