Title       : In-Situ TEM and SEM Studies of Fundamental Deformation and Failure Processes of
               Nano-Grained FCC Metals Using MEMS Stages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0237400

Award Number: 0237400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian M. Robertson ianr@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T. A. Saif  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant is on a study of the mechanical properties of nano-grained Cu, Al and
              Ni using MEMS stages with emphasis on in-situ testing to characterize the
              underlying deformation mechanisms that involve dislocation-dominated versus
              grain-boundary controlled as small grain sizes are approached. Another
              objective is to investigate the failure modes in nano-grained materials since
              dramatic changes are expected as the crack tip dimension becomes comparable to
              the grain or particle size. Understanding these processes at this length scale
              are important if reliable devices and new structural materials are to be
              constructed intelligently from these nanoscale building blocks. A major goal of
              the project is to use a novel microelectromechanical-based tensile test device
              that was designed and fabricated at the University of Illinois to measure the
              mechanical properties and to simultaneously observe the operative deformation
              and fracture process of two- and three-dimensional nanograin structures. The
              same device will be used in both the scanning and transmission electron
              microscopes, and thus it will be possible for the first time to directly
              correlate macroscopic mechanical properties with deformation and fracture
              processes in ultra-fine grained materials as a function of grain size. The aim
              is to investigate these aspects in FCC metals such as Cu, Al and Ni. In
              addition to the experimental studies, molecular dynamics simulations will be
              made to predict deformation mechanisms as grain size is reduced to nanometer
              size. The model predictions will be correlated with the experimental
              results.

The outcome of the proposed program will provide the foundation for
              developing new physical-based models for predicting the mechanical response of
              structures and devices containing nanosized grains and particles. The grant
              involves graduate student participation along with outreach program that has
              been in place at the University of Illinois.

