Title       : CAREER: New Stoichiometric and Catalytic Metal-Mediated Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0237249

Award Number: 0237249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Chirik PC92@CORNELL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              program supports research and educational activities in chemical synthesis by
              Professor Paul Chirik and his research group in the Department of Chemistry and
              Chemical Biology at Cornell University.  The goal of the research is to develop
              transition metal reagents to induce reactivity in otherwise inert molecules. 
              Professor Chirik and coworkers are particularly interested in learning how the
              environment around the metal center can be manipulated to induce reactivity
              with elemental nitrogen, phosphorus and aliphatic carbon-carbon bonds. 
              Ultimately, these studies may allow construction of new pharmaceuticals and
              other commodity and specialty chemicals from underutilized natural resources. 
              Educational activities connected with this research are designed to demonstrate
              the vital role chemical synthesis plays in modern society.  These concepts will
              be presented as part of an introductory chemistry course for engineers, a
              graduate course for first year students, as well as in community programs
              designed to reach children and adults in the local area.

This research
              strives to fix elemental nitrogen, which can be derived from air, and elemental
              phosphorous, directly into organic molecules through new methods that could
              lead to more energy efficient industrial processes. Educational activities will
              be developed to demonstrate to students both in higher education and in the
              surrounding community the vital role that chemical synthesis plays in modern
              society.  

