Title       : SBIR Phase II: Low-Cost, High-Efficiency Power Amplifiers for Magnetic-Resonance
               Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0237474

Award Number: 0237474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Raab f.raab@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GMRR
	      50 Vermont Avenue
	      Colchester, VT  054463125    802/655-9670

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II will develop and test a
              prototype low-cost, high-efficiency transmitter for magnetic-resonance-imaging
              (MRI) systems. Existing MRI transmitters use conventional power amplifiers
              (PAs), which makes them inefficient and consequently large, heavy, and
              expensive. Phase I has demonstrated the feasibility of using developed
              high-efficiency amplification techniques to produce significantly more power
              from a given transistor, thus lowering the cost. Also demonstrated was the
              feasibility of using these amplifiers to produce the pulsed-RF signals used by
              MRI. Phase II will develop a prototype transmitter that combines
              high-efficiency power amplification with digital signal processing to provide
              both low cost and superior signal quality. This in turn will produce superior
              image quality, resulting in improved diagnostics. The transmitter will be
              organized into broadband RF-power modules that can be combined in
              building-block fashion to produce transmitters for different MRI applications.
              The prototype transmitter will be configured into a manufacture able form to
              facilitate transition to Phase-III commercialization. Finally, the prototype
              transmitter will be tested in an MRI system and images obtained will be
              compared to those obtained with a conventional transmitter.

The primary
              commercial application for the new transmitter is medical imaging. Every MRI
              system includes a high-power RF transmitter. The manufacturers of MRI systems
              purchase transmitters from smaller manufacturers. The RF transmitter is the
              most expensive subsystem, and keeping the cost down is of great interest. The
              building-block approach allows all market segments to be addressed, beginning
              with the lower-power "1-T" systems for specialized applications and moving
              subsequently to higher-power "3-T" systems for high-resolution whole body
              scans. The combination of lower cost and superior signal quality is expected to
              make the proposed transmitter very attractive to systems manufacturers.
              Secondary applications include security systems such as suitcase scanners and
              communication radios for both civilian and military applications.
  

