Title       : CAREER: Educational Program in Neuromuscular Biomechanics and Uncovering the
               Neuromuscular Biomechanics of Dexterous Manipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0237258

Award Number: 0237258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco Valero-Cuevas fv24@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0237258 Valero-Cuevas This five-year CAREER Development project establishes
              the foundation for interdisciplinary education and research in neuromuscular
              biomechanics at Cornell University. The project develops two objectives: (a)
              uncover the neuromuscular biomechanics of dexterous manipulation; and (b)
              integrate engineering and neuroscience into an interdisciplinary educational
              network.

              Dexterity is defined in the engineering sense of being able to
              perform stable dynamic manipulation. Research objectives focus on using
              engineering science to rigorously characterize dexterous manipulation, and to
              distinguish between the relative contributions of passive and active biological
              elements of the hand to stabilize manipulation. To achieve these goals, an
              integrative and interdisciplinary approach will combine nonlinear dynamics,
              robotics, biomechanics, and neurophysiology in a unique manner. Three specific
              investigations are proposed: (1) Analyze human dexterous manipulation
              experimentally using bifurcation theory. (2) Characterize brain and muscle
              activity during dexterous manipulation using functional MRI and
              electromyography. And, (3) use a computer biomechanical model of a multi-digit
              hand to predict the limits of dexterity with and without neural activity, and
              test these limits using a robotic manipulator. 

              Understanding the neuromuscular biomechanics of dexterous manipulation in humans will
              revolutionize understanding of biological motor function, aid in the diagnosis
              and treatment of hand impairment, and greatly expand the capabilities of
              robotic hands. The PI's previous work established a theoretical, computer
              modeling, and experimental foundation for the neuromuscular biomechanics of
              static force production of individual digits. This foundation will be expanded:
              (1) by using nonlinear dynamical analysis (to enable the use of reduced order
              models) to study the transitions from dynamical stability to instability in
              this complex system and (2) by integrating cerebral, muscular and biomechanical
              measurements in the context of a comprehensive computer model of multi-digit
              manipulation. The understanding gained from studying the human hand will be
              instrumental to improving dexterous manipulation in humans (clinical
              applications) and machines (robotic manipulators). 

              The educational objective is to develop an interdisciplinary educational network that
              integrates engineering and neuroscience, which will have a broad impact on
              bioengineering education. The educational methodology will promote discovery in
              neuromuscular biomechanics among a diverse population spanning from high school
              students to practicing researchers and clinicians. Education and research will
              be integrated by: 1) Creating an undergraduate and graduate educational program
              in neuromuscular biomechanics to improve and broaden the engineering
              curriculum, 2) Actively promoting opportunities for high school and
              undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to become involved in
              neuromuscular biomechanics research and 3) advocating the importance of
              engineering concepts and methods to researchers and clinicians in neuroscience,
              motor control, hand therapy, and hand surgery. 

