Title       : Collaborative Research: Nested Events and Embedded Phylogeographic Structure
               within the Southern Regional Deserts of North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0237166

Award Number: 0237166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine A. Forster                    
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199972             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett R. Riddle riddle@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   A grant has been awarded to Dr. Brett Riddle at the University of Nevada
              Las Vegas to investigate detailed biogeographic structure in highly arid
              adapted small mammals (pocket mice, cactus mice, antelope ground squirrels, and
              Merriam's kangaroo rat) across the Peninsular, Sonoran, and Chihuahuan warm
              deserts in southwestern North America. These small mammal groups represent a
              total of 20 species that collectively contain in their genomes a signature of
              the events (including cycles of geographic isolation and dispersal) that record
              a long historical association between earth history and biotic diversification.
              These events include geological tectonic activities instrumental in the
              origination of regional deserts several millions of years ago, as well as
              cycles of climatic transformations within the most recent 2 million years (the
              Pleistocene epoch). We will use DNA sequences from the mitochondrial genome
              across some 1656 specimens to examine patterns of geographic distribution of
              evolutionary lineages embedded within these 20 species, and use comparative
              analytical tools to ask to what extent the diversification of this aridlands
              mammal biota is attributable to: 1) Neogene vicariant or dispersal events; 2)
              events associated with pluvial-interpluvial cycles of the Pleistocene; or 3)
              post-Pleistocene filter-barriers. 

     Our analysis of small mammal
              biogeographic history will provide a general framework for addressing the
              evolutionary biology, ecology, and conservation biology of the southern
              regional deserts of North America and hence be applicable to other biotic
              groups that demonstrate similar distributional patterns and long-term
              adaptation within these aridlands. Elucidation of these historically derived
              patterns and processes of biological diversification will be critical to
              formulating the understanding of biodiversity required for conservation
              management planning in these increasingly impacted and threatened desert
              regions.
