Title       : Functional Genomics of High Pressure Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0237059

Award Number: 0237059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Bartlett dbartlett@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1112,1156,9104,9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Douglas Bartlett of Scripps Institution of
              Oceanography, University of California, San Diego to identify and characterize
              genes and proteins which enable some species of microorganisms to flourish in
              deep ocean environments where the pressure can be as great as one thousand
              times greater than that which exists on the surface of our planet and where the
              temperature is close to freezing.   Most of the proposed work will be performed
              on a deep-sea bacterial species whose entire genome sequence will soon be
              completely known.  In order to accomplish the research goals mutant cells
              unable to grow at high pressure will be isolated and the basis of their
              pressure sensitivity will be ascertained using state of the art bacterial
              genetic and molecular biology techniques.  Proteins whose abundance is
              controlled by pressure will be identified using a semi-automated biochemical
              process.  The properties of genetically engineered mutants that cannot make
              certain pressure-regulated proteins will be examined so that the role of these
              proteins in microbial growth at high pressure can be better
              understood.

Bacteria possess a greater variety of genes than any other life
              forms and many of these genes have value in medicine and biotechnology. 
              Microbes from the extreme environment of the deep ocean will undoubtedly
              possess novel genes of practical value.  For example, it is already known that
              many deep-sea bacteria have genes for the production of omega-3 polyunsaturated
              fatty acids, and these molecules are useful for human cardiovascular health and
              the prevention of certain diseases.  Characterizing the genes and proteins
              which enable life in the abyss, which represents the largest part of Earth
              where life is found, provides the opportunity for learning fundamental details
              of how life can exist under dramatically different physical constraints.  In
              addition, the work performed as a part of this grant may provide details on how
              life could exist outside of our planet where low temperatures and high
              pressures exist, such as within the aquatic environment of Jupiter's moon
              Europa.  

