Title       : CAREER: Opportunistic Communication: A Design Paradigm for Wireless Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0237549

Award Number: 0237549
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pramod Viswanath pramodv@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Demand for wireless communication services has been growing much faster than
              additional resources (such as bandwidth) are allocated. Besides scarce
              available bandwidth, wireless system designers have to deal with several unique
              challenges, not commonly found in wireline
networks, such as  interference
              caused by transmissions and user specific time and frequency varying channels.
              Managing the limited resources through a harmonious design
of the physical
              and networking layers is a central problem in the design of wireless systems
              and a very relevant one. The intense research activity over the past decade
              addressing  this issue can  be
roughly dichotomized into two  parts: the
              physical layer work focusing mostly on point to point     communication  and
              the networking  layer work of resource allocation using an abstraction of the 
              physical layer. Further,  engineering design of wireless systems, for the most
              part, has centered around making individual point to point links reliable and
              developing a networking layer using an appropriate model of the physical layer.
               This  project   takes  a fundamental physical  layer view of  the  wireless
              network communication problems and sheds insight into novel design
              techniques
at both the physical and the networking layer, yielding a
              significant boost to the overall system capacity. One novel viewpoint is
              multiuser diversity,   a  form of diversity inherent in a   wireless
network.
              In a system with many users whose channels vary independently, there is likely
              to be a user whose channel is near its peak at any one time. By scheduling
              transmissions only to users with
the  best channel, multiuser diversity gain
              is harnessed.  This form of "opportunistic communication" provides a sharp 
              boost   to the system throughput. Through the lens of   multiuser
diversity, 
                channel fluctuations are  preferable, in sharp contrast  to the   point to
              point communication view. This project conducts a systematic study of the  
              role of multiuser diversity: schemes to artificially induce and  harness it.  
              Other specific  problems studied include a fundamental  view of the multiple
              antenna downlink (broadcast) channel and an ad hoc networking   model. Teaching
              is an integral part of this project and  is partly   carried out through
              the
development of four courses. 




