Title       : 4th US-China-Japan Symposium on Lifeline Earthquake Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0237444

Award Number: 0237444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne S. Kiremidjian ask@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to support the travel of several of the US
              participants to Qingdao, China, to participate in the 4th US-Japan-China
              Symposium on Lifeline Earthquake Engineering on October 28-31, 2002. Twelve
              papers are presented from US participants who have submitted papers to the
              symposium. Of those, three participants are supported by the Pacific Earthquake
              Engineering Center (PEER), three are supported by the Mid-America Earthquake
              Center (MAE) and three are supported by the Multidisciplinary Center on
              Earthquake Engineering Research (MCEER). This project supports the travel funds
              for the remaining three participants plus partial publications costs for the
              conference material.

A joint agenda for research in lifeline earthquake
              engineering is developed as a result of the symposium. The research agenda is
              agreed upon by the representatives from the three participating countries. The
              challenges in lifeline earthquake engineering are identified and specific
              approaches are proposed. Use of innovative technologies and the new
              laboratory/instrumentation at the NEES sites will be a particular new focus for
              the research agenda to be discussed at the symposium. The broad impact of the
              symposium are (1) the identification of specific research needs that are
              relevant to the US; (2) research areas where collaboration between the US,
              China and Japan are particularly suitable and desirable; and (3) mechanisms for
              developing joint research programs between specific institutions in the US and
              respective organizations in China and Japan. Findings from the symposium are
              included in the symposium proceedings volume, which will be made public and
              will be used in subsequent activities.

Four women are included in the US
              delegation one of which is a starting assistant professor and one is a young
              research scientist. Results of the symposium will enable the development of a
              concrete plan for lifeline earthquake engineering research with a specific
              focus on the development of advanced technologies that will take the field to
              the next level of advancement.

Lifelines, which include transportation,
              water, sewage, power, and communications
systems are key to for any civilized
              nation's survival, particularly after major disasters.
This area of earthquake
              engineering has received little attention in the past decade.
Events of the
              September 11, 2001, have demonstrated, as all other prior major
              earthquake
events and natural disasters, that the ability of a community to
              recover from a major
disaster depends extensively on the availability and
              rapid recovery of the infrastructure of
the region. Thus, it is important that
              this research be pursued.  Research results will continue to make significant
              changes in the design and performance of civil infrastructures.

