Title       : CAREER: Investigating Circuit and Physical Level Issues in High-Performance Deep
               Submicrometer Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0237822

Award Number: 0237822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yehea I. Ismail ismail@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Semiconductor technologies exhibited explosive growth in complexity and speed
              over the last two decades. Since the early 1980s, the operating frequencies
              have increased from a few megahertz to several gigahertz and the operating
              frequencies of leading microprocessors are expected to exceed 10 gigahertz in
              few years. Also, the spacing between devices and interconnect have dramatically
              decreased due to the continuous scaling down of the technology feature size.
              These trends have led to issues and challenges in the design and analysis of
              high performance integrated circuits that previous generations did not exhibit.
              Most of these issues are at the circuit and interconnect (physical) levels.
              Also, these issues are expected only to increase in importance in future
              generations of integrated circuits since frequencies and device densities will
              only increase. 
	This project involves a five-year plan to develop rigorous
              research among many of these high-performance deep submicrometer issues, which
              is necessary for correctly designing future generations of integrated circuits
              with operating frequencies in excess of ten gigahertz. This research is also
              directly applicable to many emerging technologies and nanotechnologies due to
              the common issues at such high frequencies. This research specifically
              investigates the following issues: 1-Increased coupling and crosstalk noise, 2-
              Frequency dependent interconnect models, 3- High temperature effects on the
              performance of integrated circuits and the reliability of interconnect, and
              4-Physical design techniques including noise and power as parameters. 
	As
              part of this effort, the education plan aims at creating a dynamic curriculum
              that copes with the advances in the VLSI field, since the VLSI field is one of
              the fastest changing areas of knowledge. Another goal of this education plan is
              to increase and stress intuitive understanding in VLSI education which is
              necessary for efficient problem solving and innovation. Another primary goal of
              the education plan is to encourage collaboration between industry and academia
              via internships and industrial research partners. 


