Title       : CAREER: Improved Service Through Improved Logistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0237726

Award Number: 0237726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Campbell ann-campbell@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award presents research
              and education goals for three themes in the area of logistics being used in a
              variety of ways to improve customer service, for example by making it more
              reliable, convenient, or faster, while at the same time creating higher profits
              for the vendors.  These three themes are:  1) Reliable service through vendor
              managed inventory.  Under a vendor managed inventory policy (VMI), a consumer
              allows a vendor to set the timing and quantity of deliveries in exchange for
              more reliable service.  The research focuses on improving solution
              methodologies in terms of efficiency and quality and extending solution
              methodologies to include practical complexities, such as customers being served
              from multiple depots.  These efforts involve creating new decomposition schemes
              and using mixed-integer programming and vehicle routing heuristics to solve the
              resulting subproblems; 2) Consumer direct through dynamic routing and pricing. 
              Providing the convenience of goods delivered to the front door often comes at a
              high price.  The research focuses on creating technology for order delivery
              based on dynamic routing and scheduling algorithms and using incentives to
              influence customer behavior during order capture; and 3) Express delivery
              through time directed hub location and allocation.  Promising faster delivery
              times is beneficial for customers and can create a competitive advantage. 
              Faster delivery times may be achieved by improved hub location and allocation
              choices in hub-and-spoke networks.  The research focuses on analyzing the
              complexity of the embedded optimization problems and algorithm development. 
              

These three themes represent interesting and challenging research areas and
              provide a firm foundation for a career in logistics.  VMI requires innovative
              approaches to handle size and complexity of real-life instances.  Consumer
              direct involves dynamic decision making under uncertainty, an increasingly
              important issue.  Time sensitive hub location and allocation introduces new
              models with many applications. Material from these themes will be used to
              create teaching materials for courses at both undergraduate and graduate
              levels, including a collection of interactive case studies, which will be made
              publicly available.  The activities of this project will impact society by the
              project's very nature: the improvement of customer service.
