Title       : Student Travel for 2nd International Conference on Cat-CVD (Hot Wire CVD);
               Denver, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0237714

Award Number: 0237714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry A. Atwater haa@daedalus.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A conference on Cat-CVD (Hot-Wire CVD) Processing, http://www.nrel.gov/cat-cvd2/
              , will be held in Denver, CO September 10-13, 2002. The conference objective is
              to provide a forum for discussion to assess and understand the deposition of Si
              and other thin film related materials by the Cat-CVD (Hot-Wire CVD) process, to
              address deposition related processing issues, and investigate new applications
              which may lead to industrial utilization of this rapidly maturing technology.
              
The program is organized as a workshop-style conference to provide an
              interdisciplinary forum for device engineers, solid state physicists, and
              materials scientists to discuss topics of common interest both formally through
              invited and contributed presentations, and informally during a variety of
              events including a poster presentation session. Objectives are to stimulate
              communications among the community of researchers addressing Hot-Wire CVD
              Processing and its relationship to technology. A variety of disciplinary
              backgrounds-chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science, is
              represented and contrributes positively to the intellectual content of the
              Conference. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future
              directions, it is expected that new ties will be established between
              universities, government research institutions, and industry.
%%%
An
              evaluation of the progress and status of Hot-Wire CVD Processing and related
              device issues along with current assessments of the most important developments
              will be of significant value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of
              electronic materials in computing, data processing, and communications. To
              promote and sustain the growth of such technologies, it is vital to attract the
              support, enthusiasm, and interest of young researchers and students. To this
              end, sessions will be held sequentially, and special efforts made to ensure
              information exchange in an informal setting. Leading scientists in the Si field
              have committed to attend the conference, so there will be opportunity for
              interactions between researchers of all levels of experience in Cat-CVD.
              
***

