Title       : CAREER: Sparse Spatial Reasoning for High-Throughput Protein Structure
               Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0237654

Award Number: 0237654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Bailey-Kellogg cbk@cs.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award.  The research will
              develop new methods for analyzing the structure of protein molecules,
              interpreting spatial data sets containing significant noise and sparse
              information content.  Despite many experimental and computational advances,
              traditional structure determination protocols remain very difficult, expensive,
              and time-consuming.  Consequently, in order to increase the throughput of
              structure determination, researchers are pursuing minimalist techniques that
              provide much less structure information much faster; examples include mutation
              studies, indicating at which positions amino acid substitutions significantly
              affect the protein's function; cross-linking mass spectrometry, providing crude
              proximity information for some positions in the protein; and electron
              microscopy, elucidating the protein's surface/volume at relatively low
              resolution.  These minimalist experiments then place more burden on associated
              algorithms for experiment planning and data interpretation.

This project
              pursues new theory, representations, and algorithms to address data
              interpretation and experiment design problems in domains characterized by
              sparse spatial data.  A significant component of the research is the case study
              application of minimalist protein structure determination.  The education plan
              addresses the need to build bridges between computer science and the life
              sciences in order to attack problems of this combined
              computational-experimental kind.

A spatial reasoner will be developed,
              leveraging key problem structure to efficiently and effectively plan and
              interpret experiments.  It will represent data, models, and biophysical
              knowledge with multi-level, multi-dimensional topological and geometric objects
              and constraints.  This representation will allow algorithms to match features
              of data and models, overcome problems of noise and scarcity by uncovering
              consistent feature sets, target clarifying queries in response to conflicts,
              and plan additional experiments.  This approach will thus support closed-loop
              integration of modeling and experiment -- experimental evidence will trigger
              evaluation of model features and even optimization of models themselves, while
              model analysis will trigger specific data interpretation questions and even new
              experiments.

The education component of this project brings together
              students from computer science and the life sciences to train them for
              interdisciplinary computational biology research. Additional and revised
              coursework, to be developed in conjunction with the Computer Science Department
              and Computational Science and Engineering program at Purdue, will combine
              advanced computational techniques and biological applications. The training
              will provide life science students with the necessary algorithmic background
              and computer science students with the necessary exposure to and experience
              with motivating biological problems.  Research opportunities, course projects,
              and other learning opportunities will further involve students in the many
              challenging and fascinating biological problems requiring advanced
              computational techniques.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports the
              early career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to
              become an academic leader of the twenty-first century.  The research will lead
              to scientific contributions in the structural and functional understanding of
              biomolecular machinery.  The challenges faced in developing, applying, and
              extending algorithms for this application will lead to core contributions in
              reasoning about physical systems, where many similar tasks in planning,
              modeling, predicting, and controlling face similar problems with sparse, noisy
              spatial data.

