Title       : CAREER: Stochastic Partial Differential Equations and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0237724

Award Number: 0237724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey V. Lototsky lototsky@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The research goals of this project are to develop new analytical, statistical,
              and numerical methods for stochastic partial differential equations. There are
              three directions in the proposed research: Wiener Chaos decomposition for
              linear and nonlinear equation, analysis of stochastic partial differential
              equations in domains, and statistical inference for stochastic partial
              differential equations. Wiener Chaos decomposition is a stochastic analog of
              the classical Fourier method and is a powerful tool in the study of stochastic
              equations, from both analytical and numerical points of view. In particular,
              Wiener Chaos decomposition is the key component of several new numerical
              algorithms for nonlinear filtering and of an efficient computational procedure
              for statistical moments of the stochastic Navier-Stokes equation. Analysis of
              stochastic partial differential equations in domains is necessary for
              development of a complete theory, similar to the one for deterministic partial
              differential equations. In addition to purely theoretical results about
              existence and uniqueness of solutions, this analysis leads to new numerical
              methods for such equations. Methods of statistical inference make it possible
              to relate an abstract equation to a concrete problem from applications. Unlike
              finite-dimensional systems, a consistent estimation in a stochastic partial
              differential equation is possible even when both the observation time and the
              amplitude of noise are fixed.
	Stochastic partial differential equations are
              both an interesting mathematical object and an effective modeling tool in
              various branches of applied science, such as ecology, finance, meteorology, and
              navigation. Equations studied in this project can describe, for example, the
              term structure of interest rates, the propagation of an oil spill in the ocean,
              and the motion of the target on the radar screen. The research objectives of
              the project are to study mathematical properties of stochastic partial
              differential equations and to develop effective computational and statistical
              methods for relating an equation to a model. The educational objective of the
              project is to increase understanding of stochastic partial differential
              equations among the students and researchers both inside and outside of the
              mathematical community. This educational objective will be achieved by
              developing several basic and special topics courses and by organizing a
              research seminar on applications of stochastic partial differential
              equations.

