Title       : CAREER: Conformations of Beta-Sheet Folding Intermediates: The Discrimination
               Between Productive Folding and Aggregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0237945

Award Number: 0237945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $831073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Clark pclark1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1164,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this CAREER project is to develop general models for b-sheet
              formation and stabilization.  Several all-b-sheet proteins are unusually
              thermostable, and many function in harsh extracellular environments where
              unusually high stability is required for activity.  Many of these proteins have
              simple structural topologies (for example, the parallel b-helix), which,
              together with their thermostability, make them attractive subjects for use as
              'molecular scaffolds' for designing new functionalities.  However, these
              proteins have an Achilles' heel: while the native protein may be thermostable,
              the folding intermediates are often quite thermolabile, and prone to
              aggregation.  A prerequisite for adapting these proteins for alternative
              functions is to understand how they operate.  Yet little is known about the
              details of b-sheet formation, particularly parallel b-sheet formation.  This
              project will use biochemical and biophysical approaches such as fluorescence
              spectroscopy, protease sensitivity, and changes in molecular radius to examine
              the conformations of folding intermediates for two all-b-sheet proteins with
              very stable yet difficult-to-form native states.  This work will uncover the
              features of b-sheet folding intermediates that (1) promote correct folding to
              the native structure, and (2) suppress the off-pathway aggregation reaction. 
              The results of these studies will have broad application to the design of
              correctly folded b-sheet proteins for biotechnological purposes.

The
              education goals of this project focus on introducing students at all levels to
              the interdisciplinary approaches of modern scientific research and development.
               The specific objectives include updating the undergraduate curriculum to
              incorporate a new upper-level undergraduate elective in protein biophysics, and
              a new general chemistry course for first year students, focused on the
              interdisciplinary approaches of modern scientific discovery.  Current efforts
              to recruit female and minority researchers will be continued and expanded.


