Title       : CAREER: Teaching Elementary School Science as Argument (TESSA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0237922

Award Number: 0237922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deh-I Hsiung                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $579740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla M. Zembal-Saul czem@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Renewed emphasis on scientific inquiry in school science has shifted attention
              from science as exploration and experiment to science as argument and
              explanation (NRC, 1996, p. 113). Increased interest in argumentation in school
              science stems from the potential to engage students in authentic scientific
              practices, situate knowledge in its original context, help students learn about
              science and scientific practices, and engage students reflective, sense-making
              activities that support meaningful science leaning. Unfortunately,
              argumentation practices in school science are rare, even more so in elementary
              school that high school. The reality is that most beginning elementary teachers
              have not learned science in this way and are unlikely to have the subject
              matter and pedagogical understandings and abilities needed to support children
              in giving priority to evidence and argument as part of their science learning
              experiences.

The Teaching Elementary School Science as Argument (TESSA)
              project is investigating the development of an electronic learning environment
              designed to support beginning teachers in learning science content and learning
              to teach science. These resources include an argument articulation component
              (i.e., tools for assisting prospective teachers in constructing evidence-based
              arguments as part of their science learning) and a teaching science as argument
              component (i.e., tools that explicitly connect prospective teachers' science
              learning experiences to the development of pedagogical knowledge and abilities
              for teaching science to children in ways that give priority to evidence and
              argument). TESSA resources are being integrated into science courses and
              science methods courses for prospective elementary teachers. In these contexts,
              we are examining how prospective teachers use the electronic resources and how
              the resources mediate participants' development as they learn to teach science
              as argument. Results of these design studies will inform the revision of TESSA
              resources, as well as modifications to course assignments and activities. In
              addition, the project is investigating two aspects of beginning teachers'
              learning: (a) how beginning teachers learn science concepts and learn about
              science as they engage in constructing evidence-based arguments, and (b) how
              beginning teachers learn to give priority to evidence and argument when
              teaching science to children. The differences in foci reflect distinctions in
              teacher knowledge (i.e., subject matter knowledge versus subject-specific
              pedagogy). These learning studies track beginning teachers over time, from a
              specialized life science course, to a science methods course that is part of an
              intensive, field-based, internship program, and finally into their first years
              of teaching. Continued research in this area will contribute to the development
              of substantial theory about learning to teach science as argument and how
              electronic resources support teacher development. This work is being undertaken
              with the assistance of science education graduate students who are receiving
              training in both science teacher education and research methods appropriate for
              studying teacher learning.

