Title       : ATOL: Collaborative Research: Assembling the Fungal Tree of Life
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0228725

Award Number: 0228725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545136             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Spatafora spatafoj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0228725
Spatafora
Fungi make up one of the major lineages of life, and include
              important decay organisms and pathogens of humans, plants, and animals. There
              are roughly 80,000 described species of Fungi, but the actual diversity in the
              group has been estimated to be as high as 1.5 million species. This
              collaborative project by five major investigators and their numerous colleagues
              worldwide will generate the first global synthesis of the phylogenetic history
              of the fungi, which is necessary to expand our knowledge of the history of life
              on Earth as well as the origin of ecosystems and adaptive features that can
              have a direct impact on human health. Assembling the Fungal Tree of Life (the
              AFToL project) will significantly enhance our understanding of the fungal
              kingdom, especially ancient relationships that are not resolved among the
              chytrids, zygomycetes, ascomycetes, and basidiomycetes. The AFToL project will
              develop large data sets of molecular and non-molecular (morphological,
              anatomical, life-history) characters, which will be accessible via the
              world-wide web in continuously updated databases. Molecular characters to be
              acquired include DNA sequences for seven nuclear genes sampled from
              approximately 1500 species, representing all major groups of Fungi.
              Nonmolecular characters to be sampled include cellular machinery associated
              with nuclear and cell division and cell wall biochemistry. The AFToL project
              will be based in five laboratories at four universities with the core
              responsibilities of the participating laboratories as follows: David Hibbett
              (Clark University), collection of molecular data from Basidiomycota; Francois
              Lutzoni (Duke University), collection of molecular data from Ascomycota
              including lichens and bioinformatics; David McLaughlin (University of
              Minnesota), collection and databasing of morphological characters; Joseph
              Spatafora (Oregon State University), collection of molecular data from
              Ascomycota; and Rytas Vilgalys (Duke University), collection of molecular data
              from Chytridiomycota and Zygomycota. The AFToL project will involve more than
              115 members of the international fungal systematics community in 23 countries
              for all stages of the project, from selection of taxa to collection and
              analyses of data. It will be the policy of the AFToL project that all validated
              data will be released via the web as soon as they have been generated. 
Fungi
              play crucial ecological roles as decayers, mutualistic symbionts, and
              pathogens, including pathogens of humans. The economic significance of fungi is
              almost incalculable; they perform vital "ecological services" and their
              functional roles are the subject of diverse applied disciplines, including
              agriculture, medicine, and drug discovery, to name just a few. A phylogenetic
              database for Fungi will facilitate the creation of powerful diagnostic and
              forensic tools for environmental surveys and other applications, and will
              enable the discovery of the many fungal species that remain undescribed.
              Training and outreach activities are an important aspect of the AFToL project
              and will take several forms including graduate and post-doctoral training,
              support for visiting graduate students, undergraduate training, summer courses
              for high school teachers, and website resources for K-12 educators.

