Title       : HPNC: High Speed Internet Connectivity at Baylor University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0228882

Award Number: 0228882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Truell W. Hyde Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carliss Hyde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter M. Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reagan Ramsower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 4088      High Perf Netwk Connect-SciEng
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Baylor University proposes to access a high performance network connection to a
              GigaPOP in Texas (UTD) in order to establish a local connection to the Abilene
              network.  
This high-speed connection will allow the university access to
              Internet2 providing Baylor researchers and students with a powerful array of
              previously unavailable tools, linkages and information sources. The Baylor
              Internet2 project will include as a collaborator, Texas State Technical College
              Waco (TSTC).  TSTC is a regional data and video network hub with significant
              existing hardware and personnel support infrastructure.  The combined human and
              technical resources of Baylor University and TSTC along with the commitment of
              both institutions to use the Abilene network connection to enhance existing
              research, workforce development and educational outreach efforts will provide a
              framework to support continuation of these exciting applications well beyond
              the life of this project. 
 
The HPNC Proposal is an integral part of Baylor
              University's Vision 2012, an ambitious ten-year plan for moving the university
              forward in both innovative education and pure research.  Vision 2012 includes a
              significant investment on the part of the university administration in new
              tenure-track faculty and post-doctoral positions, faculty research release time
              and lab infrastructure.  As part of this vision, a state of the art science
              facility 
(~$110 million dollars) will come on-line during the same time that
              the HPNC Proposal is scheduled for implementation.  Immediate impact areas for
              the HPNC Proposal include theoretical modeling in plasma and shock physics,
              theoretical modeling in superstring and m-theory, STEM educational outreach
              projects, advanced data connections, scalable multicast key exchange for
              layered data delivery, multicast protocol components, virtual routing
              infrastructure, spatial analysis and visualization, and innovative applications
              of distance learning technology. 
 
Baylor's collaboration with TSTC enhances
              the overall proposal by providing another layer of use for the HPNC project
              while also leveraging an NSF investment.  With its focus on workforce
              development, a connection to Internet2 would allow TSTC to provide incumbent
              worker training in a wide variety of technical areas such as robotics,
              electronics, chemical instrumentation, safety, and certification standards to
              name but a few. Additionally, the college could enhance its existing coursework
              in e-commerce, computer networking and computer architecture.  New areas of
              endeavor (already in the planning stage) such as virtual reality technology for
              simulation and training would also be made possible through this technology. A
              final area of impact for TSTC would involve its deaf and hearing impaired
              student population.  For such students, classroom experiences and real-time
              interpreting services via Internet2 as well as the transition into the
              workplace would be greatly facilitated by the increased bandwidth and resulting
              real-time video linkage possibilities provided by such a connection. 

