Title       : HPNC: HPNC for Science Research at Loyola University Chicago
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0228926

Award Number: 0228926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Watson ewatson@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Yost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan Pickett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chandra N. Sekharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George K. Thiruvathukal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 4088      High Perf Netwk Connect-SciEng
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will connect Loyola University Chicago to the Abilene high
              performance network via the Metropolitan Research and Educational Network
              (MREN) in Chicago. 
This advanced network connectivity will deliver high
              performance network services to the laboratories, research work areas and desks
              of researchers at Loyola University Chicago for carrying out meritorious
              science research projects.
 
The requirements for this advanced network
              connectivity are driven by four proposed science research projects:  one in
              neuroscience, one in biology and two in computer science.  The four researchers
              are co-PIs.  The Vice President for Information Services at Loyola University
              Chicago will be the principal investigator. 
 
These meritorious science
              research projects are presently constrained by high latency, limited bandwidth
              and problems with prioritization in using Internet 1 (or now called the
              commodity Internet).  To proceed, these projects need high performance network
              connectivity through the Abilene network because they require high bandwidth,
              very low latency and the full breadth of Quality of Service (QoS) initiatives. 
              Moreover, these projects involve essential collaboration with connected
              Internet 2 universities and research centers, nationally and internationally.
              
 
Loyola University Chicago has developed a plan to extend the use of the
              proposed high performance network connection beyond the early adopters, i.e.,
              these four research projects.  This plan will enable researchers from the
              Chemistry department, and the schools of nursing, education and medicine to
              access and use the advanced networking resources to conduct their meritorious
              research that will require services, such as distributed high performance
              computing, remote visualization and imaging, and tele-collaboration, and
              involved collaboration with universities and research centers who are connected
              to Internet 2, nationally and internationally. 


