Title       : U.S.-Mexico Dissertation Research: Ontogenetic Variation In Plant Response:
               Consequences For Herbivores and Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0228229

Award Number: 0228229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Marquis robert_marquis@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0228229
Marquis

This Americas Program thesis enhancement project will
              support dissertation research by Ms. Karina Boege, under the supervision of Dr.
              Robert J. Marquis of the University of Missouri-St. Louis, with the assistance
              of Dr. Rodolfo Dirzo of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, UNAM in
              Mexico City. The research will evaluate the consequences of changes in plant
              quality, architecture, and tolerance associated with plant development. Changes
              in plant quality and architecture may modify the relative importance of plants
              as food (i.e., bottom-up forces) and shelter (i.e., influencing top-down
              forces) as they affect herbivores. As a result, the amount of herbivory a plant
              suffers may vary during plant ontogeny. Moreover, changes in tolerance will
              influence plant performance at different developmental stages as affected by
              herbivore attack.

Specific objectives of this study are to: 1) quantify
              developmental changes in defensive and nutritional traits of Casearia
              corymbosa, a neotropical tree in the tropical dry forest of Chamela, Mexico; 2)
              evaluate how ontogenetic variation in defensive traits, plant size, and
              resource availability for C. corymbosa affects herbivore density, community
              structure, and leaf damage, through the modification of plant quality as food
              for herbivores and the impacts of one component of the third trophic level
              (insectivorous birds); 3) assess the consequences of such changes for plant
              performance at different developmental stages; and 4) determine the degree to
              which different ontogenetic stages differ in tolerance to herbivore attack, and
              evaluate if such differences are promoted by changes in carbohydrate allocation
              to different plant organs.   

The analysis of the interactive impacts of
              bottom-up and top-down forces as influenced by plant ontogeny provides an
              opportunity to describe the simultaneous effects of factors that have been
              identified to independently influence herbivory received by plants. In
              addition, the evaluation of both defensive and tolerance strategies at
              different ontogenetic stages allows a clearer understanding of the impacts of
              herbivory on plant fitness, integrating the different resistance strategies
              that plants may express during life-history to reduce the negative impacts of
              herbivory. Overall, this study will contribute to our understanding of the
              factors that may influence the evolution of plant resistance traits mediated by
              herbivores and their natural enemies. 

