Title       : Scaling Up Mathematics: The Interface of Curricula with Human and Social Capital
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0228343

Award Number: 0228343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5999817            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Kay Stein mkstein@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frits Pil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carrie Leana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia Coburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will study scaling-up of curriculum adoption in elementary school
              mathematics.  The researchers propose to develop a theoretically-driven model
              of the conditions necessary for successful scale-up of interventions using a
              human and social capital approach.   Specifically, the investigators will
              explore:

1.	How human and social capital within the school interact to
              affect the breadth, depth and endurance of curricular implementation;
2.	How
              the characteristics of the curriculum moderate the relationship between human
              and social capital and implementation;
3.	How district strategies influence
              the human and social capital in schools via the structure and organization of
              professional development opportunities and curriculum roll-out
              strategies;
4.	How the breadth, depth and endurance of implementation of a
              research-based curriculum ultimately influence student achievement.

To
              assess these questions, the investigators propose to examine the scale-up of
              two research-based elementary-level mathematics programs in four urban school
              districts (including three conventional districts and the Edison Schools). 
              They will use a quasi-experimental, nested, mixed method design to examine the
              conditions and factors that support and impede the successful large-scale
              implementation of promising programs as well as the changes in student
              achievement that ultimately result from implementation. The design leverages
              the multiple levels at which scale-up plays out (teacher, school, and
              district). The interdisciplinary team of researchers undertaking the study at
              LRDC and RAND is forging connections across multiple disciplines, including
              cognitive psychology, educational sociology, organizational behavior, human
              resource management, statistics, and public policy.

