Title       : Analysis and Potential Theory in Metric Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0228807

Award Number: 0228807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99196              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy T. Tyson tyson@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Tyson's proposed research concerns linear and nonlinear potential
              theory in nonsmooth (i.e., non-Riemannian) environments.  It consists of three
              parts. Part I is a joint project with Ilkka Holopainen and Nageswari
              Shanmugalingam. Certain conformally invariant compactification operations arise
              naturally in the context of nonlinear potential theory. Understanding the
              structure of these compactifications should have important consequences for the
              boundary behavior of quasiconformal maps. These questions will be explored in
              the setting of metric spaces of bounded geometry, which is a general framework
              encompassing both smooth and nonsmooth examples. In Part II, Tyson will
              consider quasiconformal geometry and analysis on Dirichlet spaces. The goal is
              to relate the already well-developed theory of Dirichlet forms to the recently
              developed theory in the bounded geometry case. Work of Kigami, Strichartz and
              others has shown that Dirichlet spaces include various nonsmooth, fractal-type
              objects which are not covered by previous developments in quasiconformal
              analysis on metric spaces. Part II is joint work with Pekka Koskela and
              Shanmugalingam. In Part III, Tyson will consider specific applications of
              nonlinear potential theory in sub-Riemannian spaces, specifically, Carnot
              groups. These applications include sharp constant questions for geometric
              inequalities as well as strong A-infinity deformations of geometry. Part III is
              a joint project with Zoltan Balogh.
This proposal is part of a larger
              investigation into nonsmooth analysis which is being carried out by a number of
              research groups worldwide. In informal terms, analysis is the mathematical
              study of motion and change; its historical roots lie in the development of the
              Calculus by Newton and Leibniz. The modern subject of analysis can be traced
              back to the pioneering work of Laplace, Cauchy and Poincare (among others). The
              classical setting for analysis is flat Euclidean spaces; this is the subject
              typically covered in multi-variable calculus. The Euclidean theory serves in
              turn as a model for analysis on curved spaces (surfaces and higher-dimensional
              manifolds); here the smooth structure of the underlying Riemannian space
              permits one to transport the Euclidean theory directly. In contrast, the
              proposed research focuses on nonsmooth and fractal-type settings. In extending
              the theory to this more general context the principal difficulties are twofold:
              first, the relevant concepts and definitions must be reformulated in an
              intrinsic manner suitable for such an extension, and second, new techniques and
              ideas must be introduced to prove basic results in the absence of the usual
              ambient Euclidean structure. The motivation for carrying out such an extension
              stems from the desire for better mathematical models for the nonsmooth and
              disordered media which arise in applications. Put simply, although classical
              smooth calculus has served for many years and throughout the sciences as an
              essential tool in the mathematical study of physical processes, it is
              reasonable to expect that further insight will be gained if the underlying
              mathematics is developed a priori on spaces of minimal inherent smoothness.
