Title       : U.S.-Brazil Collaborative Research: Non-Equilibrium and Isospin Effects in
               Nuclear Fragmentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0228058

Award Number: 0228058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15800              (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Lynch Lynch@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              ManYee B. Tsang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5913,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this U.S.-Brazil collaborative project funded by the Americas Program,
              William G. Lynch and ManYee B. Tsang of Michigan State University and William
              A. Friedman of the University of Wisconsin will work with Raul Donangelo and
              Sergio Souza of the theory group at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. 
              These researchers will make a coordinated study to interpret experimental
              multifragmentation data.  The major focus of this investigation is on the
              identification and modeling of non-equilibrium phenomena that influence
              investigations of the isospin dependence of the liquid-gas phase transition and
              of the nuclear equation of state.  The research involves detailed comparisons
              of data to state-of-the-art equilibrium Statistical Multifragmentation Models
              and to the Expanding Evaporating Source models that have been developed by the
              PI's.  It also involves comparisons to new non-equilibrium models that will be
              developed by this collaboration during the project.  The results will help to
              determine the degree to which the equilibrated freezeout configuration assumed
              by most equilibrium models is accurate and to develop formalisms with which one
              can analyze data with significant non-equilibrium contributions.

This
              collaborative investigation of non-equilibrium phenomena is a well-focused
              theoretical effort that extends the experimental work done at the National
              Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University as
              well as at other laboratories.  The project requires the expertise of both the
              U.S. and Brazilian principal investigators and is key to interpreting data from
              not only reaction programs at NSCL but also research at other in-flight rare
              isotope facilities.

