Title       : NCAM Dissemination Project to Community Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0228116

Award Number: 0228116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Powlik                            
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Goldberg Larry Goldberg@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

NCAM Dissemination Project to Community Colleges

This Demonstration,
              Enrichment and Information Dissemination project is a collaboration
between
              the CPB/WGBH National Center for Accessible Media (NCAM) and the League
              for
Innovation in the Community College. NCAM will work with the League to
              disseminate and
institutionalize use of resources that can make
              technology-enabled science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) learning
              resources accessible to students, faculty and
administrators at community
              colleges.
Project goals are to elevate the issue of accessibility within the
              community college system;
disseminate NSF-funded demonstration models,
              guidelines, tools and resources that enable
creation of accessible STEM
              content; and encourage the community college system to
participate in the
              development and implementation of accessible specifications for
              distributed
learning platforms.
NCAM will conduct presentations and workshops
              at annual League conferences, offer on-site
Accessibility Forums at member
              colleges, and deliver online training and resources through the
League's
              Web-based learning community, Transformational Learning
              Connections
(LeagueTLC). Products and demonstration models that will be shared
              include:
* distributed learning industry specifications and standards
*
              developers' guidelines to creating accessible content, focused on math and
              science solutions
* accessible online physics curriculum with multimedia
              lectures, quizzes, and electronic texts
* demonstration models of accessible
              math and science content within software
* access authoring tools including
              shareware and commercial products and tutorials
Project activities will
              strengthen capacity within community colleges to create and utilize
accessible
              math and science content in technology-enabled learning. Guidelines and
              technical
resources will facilitate community college creation, maintenance,
              control, packaging and
presentation of accessible digital content.
Results
              will serve a wide array of users of online community college content " people
              with
sensory disabilities, people with learning or print disabilities who
              benefit from multiple modes
of presentation, and people with physical
              disabilities who use assistive technologies for
navigation and control of
              content.
Accessible content and systems will improve the quality of learning,
              teaching and/or work life
for all of these users, whether they are community
              college students, faculty members and/or
administrators.
Through this
              initiative, the League for Innovation in the Community College will encourage
              use
of its resources to connect and empower learning between innovative
              leaders and model
programs in community colleges that are recruiting and
              preparing students with disabilities for
STEM careers. This Project will also
              serve to build support and generate strategies within the
League to mount a
              major learning thread on accessibility at one of the League's conferences.
