Title       : IMACS Workshop on Adaptive Methods for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0228309

Award Number: 0228309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine Mavriplis                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Flaherty flaherje@cs.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Adaptive methods for partial differential equations (PDEs) are the most
              effective computational approach for a large class of PDEs that arise in many
              important applications in science and engineering. This area has grown steadily
              during the past two decades. This workshop will bring together leading
              researchers from around the world to address both theoretical and computational
              aspects of adaptive methods for PDEs and to foster stronger collaboration
              between mathematicians, engineers and scientists. Topics include a posteriori
              error estimation, adaptive h-p refinement, adaptivity with complex geometry,
              implementation of adaptive codes, moving mesh techniques and applications,
              adaptive spectral methods, nonlinear analysis, adaptive modeling and
              applications of adaptive methods. 
 
This project will supplement Canadian
              funding to support the IMACS Workshop on Adaptive Methods for Partial
              Differential Equations to be held at the Fields Institute of Mathematics in
              Toronto in August 2002. IMACS is the International Association for Mathematics
              and Computers in Simulation.  This workshop is part of a year-long program
              focusing on numerical computation - the first ever at the Fields Institute. The
              program recognizes the central importance of numerical analysis in advancing
              computational science and engineering, and seeks to expand interactions among
              mathematicians, scientists, and engineers. The funds will be used to support
              travel expenses of researchers from the U.S., including invited speakers and
              young researchers at the graduate or postdoctoral level.  Topics discussed at
              the workshop will be far ranging but will include optimal adaptive strategies,
              high-performance computation, error estimation, implementation issues,
              geometrical considerations, and applications. Applications will involve fluid
              flow, optimal design and manufacturing, electromagnetic phenomena, and
              biomechanics and biomaterials.
