Title       : ATOL: Collaborative Research: Deep Green Plant Phylogenetics: Novel Analytical
               Methods for Scaling Data from Genomics to Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0228729

Award Number: 0228729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $683000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent D. Mishler bmishler@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Boore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Brent Mishler of the University of California,
              Berkeley to investigate green plant evolution.  Humans rely on green plants for
              food, shelter, clothing, and for providing the oxygen that is essential to
              life.  From a biological perspective and as one of the oldest and most diverse
              branches of the tree of life, green plants provide an unparalleled system in
              which to explore interrelationships of living organisms and to approach some of
              the most significant and intriguing questions concerning the diversification of
              life on earth.  Many of these questions relate to fundamental evolutionary
              events, such as the transition of organisms from single-celled to multicellular
              body plans, the colonization of land, and the derivation of different
              life-cycle modes. Accordingly, understanding their evolutionary history is a
              critical component in the NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program.  

This
              grant is part of a collaborative project,, including principal investigators
              from the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, the University of California at
              Berkeley, Southern Illinois University, Utah State University, the University
              of Washington, and Yale University, the focus will be: 1) resolving the primary
              pattern of diversification among green plants; 2) investigating questions
              relating to the long evolutionary history of these organisms; 3) providing a
              model for analysis that will be applicable to other groups of organisms with
              extensive evolutionary histories.  The team will emphasize the development of
              novel analytical methods that make it possible to conduct analyses across
              multiple scales and to use all of the available data from heterogeneous
              sources.  A solid backbone of relationships based on genomes and structure for
              50-100 plants, representing the critical deep-branching lineages, will enable
              the integration of previous and ongoing studies of many more plants into a
              comprehensive picture of green plant genealogy. The primary objectives of the
              project are: 1) complete a matrix of whole genome sequences for chloroplasts
              and mitochondria, and develop Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) nuclear
              genome libraries; 2) produce a comprehensive set of comparable morphological
              and ultrastructural data for the same plants; and 3) incorporate inferences
              from across the phylogenetic hierarchy in green plants using methods designed
              to permit scaling across studies. Multiple integrated training, educational and
              outreach activities will result in continual dissemination of the activities
              and progress of this research group to the scientific community and beyond.
              

Brent D. Mishler will have primary responsibilities for coordinating the
              research with DEEP GENE and other related green plant phylogenetic projects,
              help develop tools for phylogenetic analysis and databases, and carry out
              analyses of organellar genomic data and bryophyte morphological data ; Jeffrey
              L. Boore will supervise the shotgun cloning; as well as automated sequencing,
              assembly, and annotation.  Alan R. Smith will assist in plant material
              collection and identification as well as analysis of morphological data for
              ferns and allies. 


