Title       : ATOL: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Deep Green Plant Phylogenetics: Novel Analytical
               Methods for Scaling Data from Genomics to Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0228660

Award Number: 0228660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $642000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dina F. Mandoli mandoli@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Olmstead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Dina F. Mandoli and Richard Olmstead of the
              University of Washington to investigate green plant evolution.  Humans rely on
              green plants for food, shelter, clothing, and for providing the oxygen that is
              essential to life.  From a biological perspective and as one of the oldest and
              most diverse branches of the tree of life, green plants provide an unparalleled
              system in which to explore interrelationships of living organisms and to
              approach some of the most significant and intriguing questions concerning the
              diversification of life on earth.  Many of these questions relate to
              fundamental evolutionary events, such as the transition of organisms from
              single-celled to multicellular body plans, the colonization of land, and the
              derivation of different life-cycle modes. 

In this collaborative project,
              including principal investigators from the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean
              Sciences, the University of California at Berkeley, Southern Illinois
              University, Utah State University, the University of Washington, and Yale
              University, the focus will be: 1) resolving the primary pattern of
              diversification among green plants; 2) investigating questions relating to the
              long evolutionary history of these organisms; 3) providing a model for analysis
              that will be applicable to other groups of organisms with extensive
              evolutionary histories.  The team will emphasize the development of novel
              analytical methods that make it possible to conduct analyses across multiple
              scales and to use all of the available data from heterogeneous sources.  A
              solid backbone of relationships based on genomes and structure for 50-100
              plants, representing the critical deep-branching lineages, will enable the
              integration of previous and ongoing studies of many more plants into a
              comprehensive picture of green plant genealogy. The primary objectives of the
              project are: 1) complete a matrix of whole genome sequences for chloroplasts
              and mitochondria, and develop Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) nuclear
              genome libraries; 2) produce a comprehensive set of comparable morphological
              and ultrastructural data for the same plants; and 3) incorporate inferences
              from across the phylogenetic hierarchy in green plants using methods designed
              to permit scaling across studies. Multiple integrated training, educational and
              outreach activities will result in continual dissemination of the activities
              and progress of this research group to the scientific community and
              beyond.

Dina Mandoli will coordinate construction of the BAC and organellar
              BAC (oBAC) libraries.  Richard Olmstead will coordinate studies of nuclear gene
              evolution and phylogenic reconstruction from organellar genome sequences, using
              the data obtained from the libraries.  To do this work, our team will grow the
              taxa needed for this study, generate and assess the quality of the BAC and oBAC
              libraries, determine the best nuclear genes for the phylogenetic reconstruction
              and generate sequence data for these nuclear genes, and evaluate the characters
              obtained from organellar genomes.


