Title       : Optimal Structural System Design for Catastrophic Unforeseen Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0228246

Award Number: 0228246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin W. Schafer schafer@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger G. Ghanem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7207,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The events of 9/11 demonstrate the need for consideration of a decision-making
              framework for structural building safety in response to unforeseen events. This
              research project will provide such a framework for decision-making and
              constrained optimization of building structural safety under unforeseen
              catastrophic events. Unforeseen events (i.e., terrorism damage, corroded
              members) occur with a surprisingly short return period and break the
              traditional link between environmental loads and the probability of structural
              failure (Pf). Current design, using only component-wise reliability, ignoring
              redundancy, and lacking a formal decision-making framework, is inadequate. By
              extending recent ideas in structural sensitivity, redundancy, and probabilistic
              earthquake engineering we propose a characterization for Pf in unforeseen
              events through two stochastic variables: an intensity measure (IM) and an
              engineering demand parameter (EDP). The IM describes the magnitude and
              correlation of the unforeseen damage. The EDP provides a link to Pf for a given
              IM. The use of a redundancy index (R) to provide a coarse, but computationally
              cheap indicator of Pf, will also be considered. Using Pf and/or the stochastic
              variables IM, EDP and R we will explore decision-making for low-probability,
              high-risk, catastrophic events. Such events force us to reconsider the
              applicability of the von Neumann Morgenstren utility theory. Recent research in
              catastrophic risk insurance will be utilized to develop an appropriate
              objective function for optimization of building safety. 

Whether one views
              the behavior of the World Trade Center during the attacks of 9/11 as a design
              success, because so many people were able to get to safety, or a design
              failure, after all the buildings collapsed - one issue that may have been lost
              in the resulting discussion is that the building's behavior is not a direct
              result of our "building codes" nor our current design methodologies. The
              proposed work combines new findings in structural sensitivity, redundancy,
              probabilistic earthquake engineering, optimization under uncertainty and
              catastrophic risk insurance. This research will lead to better decision-making
              in the design of buildings and insure a higher level of building structural
              safety, within realistic economic constraints, when considering the possibility
              of catastrophic damage events.


