Title       : HPNC: High Performance Network Connection for Middle Tennessee State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0228106

Award Number: 0228106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Detmer rdetmer@mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph M. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ngee-Sing Chong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zachariah Sinkala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Preston J. MacDougall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 4088      High Perf Netwk Connect-SciEng
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU) is establishing a high performance
              network connection to support its increasingly strong research mission.  Among
              the researchers who will use this connection are 

	Ralph M. Butler (Computer
              Science).  Dr. Butler conducts research in the development of
              algorithms/software for parallel processing and computational biology.  The
              high performance network connection will enhance his collaboration with
              colleagues at Argonne National Laboratory and at the University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign. 

	Ngee-Sing Chong (Chemistry).  Dr. Chong conducts
              research in the development of new materials for the removal of environmental
              pollutants.  The high performance network connection will also allow him to
              carry out computational simulation of the transport of atmospheric pollutants
              using the resources available from various government agencies.  Dr. Chong will
              also make use of remote access to instrumentation for student research projects
              and laboratory instruction.

	Preston J. MacDougall (Chemistry).  Dr.
              MacDougall is the Principal Investigator for the Materials Theory and Molecular
              Design Project at MTSU. The most computationally intensive area of his research
              program is the development of molecular visualization tools, and involves
              collaboration with computer scientists at the NASA Ames Research Center in
              Mountain View, California.  The high performance network connection at MTSU
              will enable Dr. MacDougall and his students to utilize the key interactive
              features of his visualization software remotely, and in "real time".
              

	Zachariah Sinkala (Mathematics).  Dr. Sinkala focuses on research in
              applied differential equations.  He will use the high performance network
              connection to obtain rapid access to powerful computer systems capable of
              numerically solving systems of hundreds of simultaneous, nonlinear, partial
              differential equations. 
 
MTSU has a network backbone using Gigabit
              Ethernet.  The campus standard is 100 Mbps switched Ethernet to the desktop,
              providing a full 100 Mbps dedicated connection to the campus data network.  The
              network includes over 7000 active ports.  The high performance network
              connection will be achieved by purchasing a router to provide connectivity to
              Vanderbilt University via a full DS3.  MTSU will also purchase the necessary
              equipment to interface the DS3 circuit with Vanderbilt's network equipment as
              specified by Vanderbilt's Information Technology department.  MTSU traffic
              destined for Abilene will then combine with Vanderbilt Abilene traffic on an
              OC-12 connection to the Southern Crossroads (SoX) regional high-speed
              network.

