Title       : SGER: Biomechanical Modeling to Forensic Estimation of Time Since Death
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0228036

Award Number: 0228036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Oscar Dillon                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted A. Conway tconway@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tosha Dupras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Bertetta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Biomechanical Modeling to Forensic Estimation of Time Since
              Death

Abstract

	This proposal is designed to address the question: "Can
              the time of death for a human be estimated from measured changes in mechanical
              material properties of specific tissues post-mortem?" A multidisciplinary team,
              consisting of a Forensic Anthropologist, an Anatomist and a Mechanical
              Engineer, has been formed to attempt to answer this question.  Since this
              research is at such a preliminary stage the NSF "Small Grants for Exploratory
              Research" is the appropriate mechanism for initial funding of the project.
	To
              gain insight into the mechanical degradation of human tissue after death, the
              tissue must be chosen from a location in the body which decomposes at a
              relatively slow rate.  Because of tissue encapsulation, we have chosen
              intervertebral discs (annulus fibrosus) in the spine as the most likely test
              specimens for this study, however, other tissues (e.g. teeth) will be
              considered as the testing protocol is developed.  Initially, three (limited by
              cost) human vertebral columns will be harvested from fresh (unpreserved)
              cadavers for which time of death is known.  The intervertebral discs will be
              surgically extracted from the thoracic and lumbar regions of the spinal columns
              at specified time intervals.  These harvested discs will be described
              macroscopically and microscopically, then mechanical material properties will
              be determined from quasi-static, dynamic and time-dependent compression testing
              imposed by an Instron 8511 Mechanical Testing Machine.  Additionally, pilot
              studies using ultrasound techniques will be investigated.
	The load and
              deformation data acquired from the mechanical tests will be modeled using the
              power law, exponential law, homography or other applicable constitutive laws
              appropriate for biological material to determine material parameters at
              specific times since death.  It is expected that a trend between the material
              parameters and time since death will emerge.



