Title       : Demographic Regimes and Kinship Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0228965

Award Number: 0228965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Hammel gene@demog.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kinship systems which define sets of allies and potential enemies play a central
              role in the life of anthropological populations, from foragers to nomads to
              peasants. The number and kinds of kin in a society are produced by the
              demographic rates of its population. Such populations are usually small, poorly
              buffered from environmental fluctuations, and subject to random variation in
              rates. This pilot research tests through simulation the effects of unstable
              booms and busts in demographic rates on the number of siblings, cousins, and
              other relatives in small populations. The model will distinguish cohort effects
              from period effects and will control the effects of randomness due to small
              sample sizes. Using the simulation program SOCSIM, the researcher will vary
              fertility, incest prohibitions, patterns of exogamy and random demographic
              shocks. The fundamental question to be examined is whether the simple picture
              of sharp kinship responses to demographic change, and thus the plausible
              political outcomes of such changes, would remain detectable under realistic
              conditions of randomness and small population change. This exploratory research
              has implications for our understanding of native models of kinship which group
              different genealogical types into the same named social role categories, thus
              overriding demographic inequalities by linguistic classification.
