Title       : ATOL: Phylogenomics:A Genome Level Approach to Assembling the Bacterial Branches
               of the Tree of Life
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EF  
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0228651

Award Number: 0228651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      EF   EMERGING FRONTIERS                      
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2480000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Eisen jeisen@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi L. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen E. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 7689      ASSEMBLING THE TREE OF LIFE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

DEB-0228651

Drs Naomi Ward, Jonathan Eisen, and Karen Nelson of
              The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) have been awarded a grant to
              determine the evolutionary relationships between and within the major phyla
              (groups) of Bacteria. This will be achieved by obtaining and interpreting
              complete genome sequences from members of seven or eight diverse bacterial
              groups that are not represented in current genome sequencing efforts. To
              sequence each genome, DNA will be broken into fragments and the DNA sequence of
              the fragments determined randomly. The resulting individual sequences will be
              assembled into one piece using computer software that recognizes overlaps
              between the different sequences. Any gaps left in the sequence will be filled
              in to produce a completed genome. Comparisons will then be made with existing
              genome databases, to identify the genes present. A later stage of the project
              will involve lab-based studies to confirm the function of the sequenced genes.
              Some of these genes will be identified as potential phylogenetic markers -
              genes that are especially useful for measuring the evolutionary relationships
              between organisms. The evolutionary relationships between the different
              bacterial groups will be determined using evolutionary trees inferred from both
              individual phylogenetic markers, and whole-genome analyses which consider the
              presence or absence of all the genes in the genome.  

While microscopic in
              size, Bacteria include the oldest and most diverse forms of life on Earth. 
              Accordingly, understanding their evolutionary history is a critical component
              in the NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program.  The results of this project
              are expected to have far-reaching impacts on the scientific community. A more
              complete representation of bacterial diversity will provide a clearer picture
              of evolutionary relationships within the Bacteria, and how specific
              characteristics (e.g., photosynthesis, the ability to live at high
              temperatures, or to live without oxygen) evolved. Research on understudied
              bacterial groups will be stimulated by making the genome sequence data publicly
              available, as well as by providing training in genome analysis to students and
              other members of the scientific community.

