Title       : SGER: Monitoring Anacapa Island Deer Mice: Population Bottleneck, Release, and
               Reestablishment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0228105

Award Number: 0228105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51668              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary V. Ashley ashley@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will take advantage of a unique opportunity to monitor the progress
              of a controlled population bottleneck and its aftermath during a capture,
              release, and recovery program for a threatened mammal, the Anacapa Island deer
              mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus anacapae). This deer mouse is an endemic
              subspecies that occurs only on the three small islets that comprise Anacapa,
              one of the California Channel Islands. The Channel Islands National Park is
              currently conducting a program to eradicate the introduced rat, Rattus rattus.
              Rat eradication is conducted by large-scale poisoning with a potent rodent
              poison; deer mice as well as rats will be extirpated. Previously Dr. Ashley had
              conducted a conservation and management study using a combination of approaches
              that included molecular genetics, morphological measurements and population
              viability analysis (PVA). As a result, recommendations were made to the Park
              Service to capture a minimum of 333 mice from each of the islets, hold them in
              captivity, and use then as stock for reintroduction. According to research,
              this scenario would produce a population with high probability of persistence
              that maintained genetic variation, and yet represented a feasible undertaking.
              This plan is currently being implemented. Here Dr. Ashley proposes to take
              advantage of this unique opportunity to monitor the recovery of these
              populations. She will sample and genotype every mouse reintroduced, census the
              population regularly, and resample biannually.   

The impact of this
              research extends well beyond the management of an island endemic. The project
              will test the outcome of a PVA, compare predictions of population genetic
              theory to the real world, and will evaluate a captive breeding and
              reintroduction program. Most species management projects involve one or more of
              these practices, but outcomes are rarely evaluated or field-tested. By
              monitoring the numbers, distributions, and genetic variation in deer mice as
              they are reintroduced and during their recovery, the results of this study will
              provide important new information that can be directly applied to management
              and conservation of other endangered vertebrate species. 

