Title       : CEDAR: Characterization of Plasma Structures in the High-Latitude Ionosphere
               with SuperDARN HF Radar Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0228269

Award Number: 0228269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130052             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Ruohoniemi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will study the macroscale irregularity features seen in high
              frequency radar observations.  The plasma of the high-latitude ionosphere is
              highly structured on spatial scales from hundreds of kilometers to meters.  The
              effects of these irregularities are readily apparent in technical systems, such
              as radar, navigation, and communication.  The radars of the SuperDARN (Super
              Dual Auroral Radar Network) system detect backscatter from decameter-scale
              irregularities, from which behavior of larger scale structures may be inferred.
               Thus, the observations will provide information about the occurrence
              frequency, spatial distribution and motion of the irregularities and their
              relation to larger scale ionospheric features such as patches, blobs, and polar
              cap arcs.  Because the SuperDARN radars are widely distributed over the
              northern and southern Polar Regions, the data is especially useful in tracking
              the origin and dynamic behavior of plasma structures.  The observations will
              also be compared with simultaneously derived convection maps to test models
              that describe the evolution of patches as they move through the high latitude
              ionosphere.  The investigators will provide community access to data products
              that will help other investigators study irregularity features for specific
              events.  The scientific studies enabled by the observations will contribute to
              the development of space weather models that specify and predict ionospheric
              conditions that might impact the operation of technical systems.
