Title       : What [More] Can LA-ICP-MS Do For Archaeology?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0228187

Award Number: 0228187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector Neff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) is a
              relatively new technique for chemical characterization of materials that has a
              great deal of potential for archaeological research. The analytical end of the
              instrument (the ICP-MS) is an extremely sensitive, precise analytical tool that
              is capable of measuring most elements of the periodic table at concentration
              levels of around one part per billion. With a computer-driven, laser-ablation
              front end, LA-ICP-MS can analyze solid materials in situ without chemical
              digestion. Moreover, since the laser can be targeted at spots as small as 5 -
              10 microns in diameter, and ablation typically removes only about 5 microns of
              material, LA-ICP-MS amounts to a highly sensitive microprobe suitable for
              analyzing surfaces and small inclusions in heterogeneous matrices. 
In
              archaeology, potential applications of LA-ICP-MS include identification of
              sources and technology of slips, glazes, and paints on ancient ceramics;
              analysis of the effect of temper in ceramic provenance studies; determination
              of sources of turquoise, copper ore, and copper; and determination of sources
              of Maya jades. Over the past two years, Dr. Hector Neff and his collaborators
              have explored these and other potential archaeological applications. Although
              this research demonstrated some of the potential of LA-ICP-MS in archaeology,
              it also suggested that many potential applications are remaining unrecognized
              because very few archaeologists have access to the analytical instrumentation.
              
The present project will broaden access by archaeologists to LA-ICP-MS
              instrumentation by supporting short-term visits (one to two weeks) to a
              LA-ICP-MS lab. A pilot short-term visitor program implemented during summer
              2001 demonstrated the payoffs of such an approach. New materials were analyzed
              and new archaeological questions were investigated. In addition, individuals
              familiar with the archaeological materials were brought together with
              individuals familiar with LA-ICP-MS, and this led to rapid development of
              sampling designs and analytical protocols and a minimum of wasted time and
              effort. In some cases, new questions arose and were pursued during the visits.
              Overall, considerable excitement and productivity were generated by the
              projects, and this constituted a powerful motivation for PI Neff to seek funds
              to extend the program. 
Funds provided by this NSF grant will permit PI Neff
              and a series of short-term visitors to explore new and potentially innovative
              archaeological applications of LA-ICP-MS. Projects will be solicited from the
              US archaeological research community without restriction as to academic level
              (undergraduate through professional). Originators of the most novel projects
              will visit the state-of-the-art LA-ICP-MS laboratory at California State
              University, Long Beach, where they will work with PI Neff for periods of one to
              two weeks. In many cases, it is anticipated that research carried out during
              the initial visit will generate questions that will be addressed through more
              extensive sampling and analysis. Some areas in which this program is likely to
              make contributions to archaeological knowledge are relatively easy to identify
              (e.g., determination of the provenance of paints and pigments on ancient
              ceramics), but, since LA-ICP-MS is so new to archaeology, some surprising new
              kinds of applications may be anticipated as well. 

