Title       : PGE/RES Women's Participation and Experiences in Chemical Business and Industry
               in the U.S.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0228007

Award Number: 0228007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Fassinger rf36@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra C. Greer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 0000,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              University of Maryland College Park will study the experience of S&E-trained
              women in the chemical industry.  There are three areas of study: Contextual
              Patterns, Individual Experiences, and Effective Interventions.

Scientific
              Issues:
* What contextual patterns and influences exist with respect to the
              role of S&E-trained women in the chemical industry?
* What have been the
              individual experiences of S&E-trained women in the chemical industry, and what
              vocationally-inhibitory and -facilitative factors can be identified from their
              reports?
* What formal and informal strategies currently are being used to
              increase S&E-trained
women's participation in the chemical industry, and how
              effective are they?

Contextual Patterns will be assessed through
              quantitative investigation of organizational patterns of women's participation
              in chemical business and industry in the U.S. over time. This will include
              identifying a national, representative sample of chemical businesses, gaining
              access to archival and current organizational data on male and female
              employment patterns, and administering an organizational survey to
              management.

Individual Experiences will be assessed through both
              quantitative (survey) and qualitative (interview) investigation. A survey will
              be administered to a large, national, representative sample of women in
              chemical business and industry to assess their self-reported experiences in
              occupational preparation, entry, and advancement. A representative sub-sample
              of these participants (diverse in race/ethnicity, age, work setting, S&E
              sub-field, and education) will be interviewed to explore more specifically the
              variables that have inhibited or facilitated their career trajectories in the
              chemical industry.

Effective Interventions will be assessed through both
              quantitative (survey) and qualitative (interview) investigation, as well as
              literature review. The quantitative portions of Studies 1 and 2 and the
              qualitative portion of Study 2 will include assessment of formal and informal
              strategies currently used by companies to increase women's participation;
              interviews also will be conducted with a sub-sample of management personnel
              from Study 1 regarding their perceptions of intervention strategies, to compare
              to the responses from individual women. These data will be combined with a
              literature review to identify best practices interventions.

Science and
              engineering (S&E) fields are considered crucial to U.S. economic growth and are
              expanding rapidly. Demographic trends indicate that women and minorities
              represent the greatest increases in workforce participation; however, the
              continued under-representation of women (including minority women) in S&E
              fields is well documented. Much of the attention to women's relative absence
              from S&E fields has focused on women in academe, and very little is known about
              women in other S&E settings. Industry is the largest employer of S&E workers,
              but women are less likely than men to be employed in the industrial sector.
              Data regarding why women fail to enter industrial settings in predictable
              numbers and what happens to them there are virtually non-existent. Moreover,
              very little is known about the prevalence or effectiveness of strategies
              currently being used to address the paucity of women in industry.

The
              Broader Impacts of the study include:
* Providing a model for the study of
              demographic diversity in one industry
* Identification of "best practices"
              interventions to enhance the careers of women in S&E business and industry.
*
              Training of graduate and undergraduate students in research methods of the
              social sciences.

