Title       : Constraining the Timing and Nature of Life's Emergence in Extrema: the Geology
               and Geochemistry of Akilia Island, West Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0228999

Award Number: 0228999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 30,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43646              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Mojzsis mojzsis@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Stephen J. Mojzsis, T. Mark Harrison, Craig E. Manning


The emergence of
              the first life on Earth can be viewed as having occurred in the context of an
              extreme environment at the global scale.  A detailed program of fieldwork and
              geochronological studies coupled with stable isotopic (C, N, S) investigations
              is used to explore the oldest known marine sedimentary rocks, from southern
              West Greenland, that contain a record of these earliest times.  These rocks are
              between 3.7 and 3.9 billion years old.  A two-pronged approach is taken to
              study the sedimentary record of Earth's earliest extreme environments.  First,
              P. Is.' are revealing the geological context and history of the rocks related
              to petrogenesis and subsequent protracted metamorphism from field studies,
              metamorphic petrologic observations, and U-Pb zircon geochronological
              investigations.  Second, their study searches for isotopic tracers in the form
              of C, N, and S fractionations induced by life and preserved in the oldest
              sediments.  P.Is.' view is that these two approaches together will lead the
              advance in understanding the extremes of early environments for life on Earth. 
              This research is utilizing new ultra-high resolution mass spectrometric
              techniques (MC-SIMS, C-GC-IRMS, LEC-SMS) developed by UCLA and project
              collaborators to make these measurements.  With this work, the number of
              biogeochemical tools will increase in power and diversity for detecting
              potential evidence for early life and the timing of its appearance, in older
              rocks from Earth when they are found, and eventually in samples from other
              worlds, like Mars, and Europa.


