Title       : Measuring Velocity-Microstructure from Odyssey III AUV
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0228507

Award Number: 0228507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64170              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hemantha W. Wijesekera hemantha@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Boyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Measuring Velocity-Microstructure from Odyssey III AUV

H.
              Wijesekera
T. Boyd

Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) have recently
              become available and popular as stable and reliable platforms for oceanographic
              instrumentation and for conducting surveys of the water column over a small
              region. We are in the process of acquiring an Odyssey III class AUV from
              Bluefin Robotics (expected delivery is summer 2002). One of our long-term goals
              is to develop this AUV as a platform to study fine-scale to small-scale
              processes in the ocean. Our main objective in this proposal is to measure
              velocity-microstructure from Odyssey III AUV, and we are the first user group
              attempting to make such measurements from this class of Bluefin vehicles. In
              order to obtain the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) dissipation rate we must
              meet two distinct goals: (1) determine that this AUV is an appropriate platform
              from which to make microstructure measurements, and (2) adapt an existing
              conductivity and temperature microstructure package to measure TKE dissipation
              rate by adding shear probes. To meet goal (1), we must: (a) verify that the
              platform is either noise-free in the frequency band of interest, or that the
              noise is narrow-band and can be removed from the signal, and (b) determine the
              flow distortion of the vehicle in order to know how far forward of the AUV nose
              the microstructure sensors must be placed in order to sample the free stream.
              At present, neither we nor the AUV manufacturer (Bluefin Robotics) have a
              quantitative measure of vehicle noise and of flow distortion around the
              vehicle. The vehicle noise will be evaluated by measuring acceleration of AUV,
              and flow around the AUV will be examined from numerical techniques. The
              existing microstructure package,  "MicroSoar" will be upgraded with shear
              probes along with appropriate hardware modifications to obtain microscale
              velocity fluctuations.

