Title       : Collaborative Research: Origin of High Magnetic Remanence in Fault
               Pseudotachylites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0228849

Award Number: 0228849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38588              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Geissman jgeiss@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Geissman
EAR-0228849

Frictional heating during coseismic deformation can
              lead to the 
melting of the fault rocks and formation of pseudotachylite if
              slip 
is important. The increasingly reported existence of earthquake
              
lightning shows that transient coseismic electric currents of large
              
intensity are associated with large magnitude earthquakes (M  > 6.0). 
Such
              currents are likely to follow pseudotachylite veins because 
their electric
              conductivity, being melts, is considerably larger than 
that of the unmolten
              rocks. All previous and preliminary results on 
fault-related pseudotachylites
              show that they have an anomalously 
high remanent magnetization. Their
              remanent magnetic properties are 
similar to those of lightning struck rocks,
              which suggests that large 
electric pulses were involved in the magnetization.
               This project 
aims at demonstrating that remanence anomalies in
              pseudotachylites 
are generally observed and that coseismic electric currents
              are 
responsible for it. The investigators propose to test the hypothesis 
on
              three young pseudotachylites from seismically active fault zones 
(California,
              Japan and Western Alps) by collecting oriented samples 
for paleomagnetic
              studies. Samples collected at various points with 
respect to the main fault
              plane will enable us to test the coseismic 
current hypothesis. The geometry
              and the characteristics of the 
magnetizing field will be compared with the
              Earth's magnetic field at 
the time of pseudotachylite formation. This will
              provide an 
independent second test for the coseismic current hypothesis. A
              
series of experiments will generate artificial pseudotachylites using 
the
              friction welding method. The artificial and natural 
pseudotachylites will be
              compared to assess the possible causes of 
anomalous magnetization in natural
              specimens. The direct study of 
coseismic currents is made difficult by their
              transient nature. This 
problem can be circumvented by using the remanent
              magnetic record of 
rocks affected by the electrical  phenomenon.  This
              research will 
open new directions of investigation on coseismic electric
              currents 
in fault rocks and should contribute to a better understanding of
              
coseismic electric phenomena
-- 

