Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Positional Behavior and Limb Use in Cebus,
               Alouatta, and Ateles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0228924

Award Number: 0228924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Morbeck morbeck@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Studies of positional behavior (locomotion and posture) are central to key
              issues in biological anthropology including primate origins and arboreal
              adaptations, hominoid climbing, and hominid bipedalism. The study of locomotion
              and posture provides critical information concerning ecological, anatomical and
              evolutionary relationships in living species, a comparative framework for
              interpretation of the fossil record, and as an educational tool for
              conservation and ecological planning. This research examines the ontogeny (the
              life history of an individual) of positional behavior and details of limb and
              prehensile-tail use in three New World primate species (Ateles geoffroyi,
              Alouatta palliata, and Cebus capucinus) inhabiting a tropical rainforest in
              Costa Rica.
 During the course of growth and development, individuals face
              different challenges in exploiting their environment.  Ontogenetic data allow
              assessment of behavioral and morphological changes as they occur and
              developmental constraints on positional behavior among closely-related species.
               While ontogeny is critical to our understanding of positional behavior, there
              are no field studies that assess its effects on New World primates. White-faced
              capuchins (Cebus), black handed spider monkeys (Ateles), and mantled howling
              monkeys (Alouatta) will be examined at La Suerte Biological Research Station in
              Costa Rica.  Behavioral observations in conjunction with digital video
              recording will be used to document positional strategies during infancy,
              juvenescence, and adulthood to address the following objectives. First, this
              research will provide a comprehensive, systematic, and quantified description
              of expressed behavior, functional morphology, and ecological context of three
              prehensile-tailed species. Second, data on juvenile and adult positional
              strategies will provide information on how growth and development may influence
              feeding and foraging strategy, social behavior, and ultimately survival during
              the juvenile period.   Third, because the prehensile tail has evolved
              independently in the subfamily Atelinae (Alouatta, Ateles, Brachyteles, and
              Lagothrix) and Cebus, this study will allow comparison of the prehensile tail
              as a shared-derived feature in two more closely-related species (Ateles and
              Alouatta), and as an analogous feature in the more distantly- related Cebus. 
              Closely-related howler and spider monkeys are biobehavioral variations on the
              ateline theme, that is, large-bodied, long-tailed New World primates with
              extensive gripping capabilities.  Capuchin monkeys, also with prehensile
              abilities of the tail, differ in body size and tail anatomy (and evolutionary
              history). 
 This project will contribute a comprehensive, systematic, and
              quantified description of expressed behavior and ecological context in three
              New World primates inhabiting the same rainforest.  By focusing on questions of
              ontogenetic differences in positional behavior, this study examines the degree
              to which adult-like patterns of locomotion and posture develop in primate
              ontogeny and how patterns may differ within and between age and sex categories.
               Finally, the results of this research will be used in the conservation
              planning and maintenance of the rainforest surrounding La Suerte Biological
              Research Station.  As part of these efforts, results will contribute to
              educational programs in the surrounding community and in the United
              States.



