Title       : HPNC: High Speed Networking for Automated Fluorescence Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0228916

Award Number: 0228916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Rogan progan@cmh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Children's Mercy Hosp/Clin
	      2401 Gillham Road
	      Kansas City, MO  64108    /   -

NSF Program : 4088      High Perf Netwk Connect-SciEng
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With high speed networking capability, investigators at Children's Mercy
              Hospital will be able to rapidly transmit high volumes of digital images
              produced by fluorescent microscopes to colleagues at collaborating Internet2
              institutions where images will be processed. The images must be captured and
              transmitted with very low latency, because network delays could lessen data
              quality (fluorescence is quenched from prolonged exposures (>5.) at the
              excitation wavelengths at high magnification) and because sustained high
              transmission rates are required (2-4 Mb/sec over 3 hours per experiment). 
              
Fluorescence microscopy is a key technology in cell biology and genetics
              research.  Molecular cytogenetic detection of chromosomal abnormalities by
              fluorescence in situ hybridization  (FISH) has been translated into clinical
              practice. More recently, FISH has been used to stratify patients for cancer
              therapies targeted to the genes rearranged in these disorders.    CMH
              investigators study the causes of human chromosomal disorders using a new type
              of single copy DNA probe (scFISH) that has been designed and produced directly
              from the human genome draft.  Funded research studies at CMH are using scFISH
              probes to detect abnormal chromosomes from patients with inherited or acquired
              disorders. It is feasible to produce and hybridize arrays of scFISH probes at
              very high genomic densities (1 per 20-30 kb), enabling definition of chromosome
              rearrangements at a resolution not feasible with conventional FISH probes. With
              conventional FISH, the rate of DNA probe preparation is a bottleneck in
              generating results from hybridization experiments. This is overcome with
              scFISH, in which umerous probes can be prepared and hybridized simultaneously. 
                Now, the rate at which the microscopist can scan slides for adequate
              metaphase chromosome spreads (or other cellular structures) is the limiting
              factor in the analysis of scFISH (or immunofluorescence) data.
CMH
              investigators are collaborating with computer scientists and engineers,
              respectively, at the University of Missouri-Columbia  (MU) and at the
              University of Missouri-Kansas City  (UMKC) to develop  an  automated  system 
              to  expedite  processing  and  prioritize  images  from  scanned  microscope
              slides  of  fluorescently-labeled,  hybridized  metaphase  chromosomes  or 
              antibody-labeled  cells.  Current commercial automation systems are limited
              only to fluorescent probe detection, and do not account for both chromosome (or
              cellular) morphology and the fluorescent signals, which is the goal of this
              project.  This system will reduce the backlog of hybridized or antibody-stained
              slides and should therefore result in significantly higher throughputs for
              scFISH studies aimed at defining the breakpoints of chromosomal
              rearrangements.
Slide scans will be processed  (at least) daily by MU and UMKC
              collaborators to select the optimal images of either fluorescently-labeled
              probes hybridized to chromosomes or antibodies bound to cellular structures in
              order to obtain timely results for subsequent genetic analyses of patient
              specimens. For the FISH application, slides will initially be scanned at low
              magnification to localize the fields containing metaphase chromosome spreads
              and distinguish them from intact interphase nuclei and empty or incomplete
              fields. (Other criteria will be developed for immunofluorescence studies to
              select optimal cells for further analyses.) The coordinates of potential
              metaphase spreads will be recorded for subsequent rescanning of specific
              subsets of fields at higher magnification, resulting in a total of ~7200 images
              per slide.  MU and CMH investigators have carried out image analyses indicating
              that metaphase chromosomes are computationally-distinguishable from interphase
              nuclei and other cellular structures. 
Once algorithms and parameters have
              been optimized for feature selection  (ie. chromosome density, overlap,
              condensation, banding, and clarity and the location of fluorescent signals),
              images and coordinates the "best" metaphase spreads will be returned to
              microscopists at CMH, where they will then be reviewed, and ranked according to
              metaphase quality. The coordinates and rankings of these images will be sent to
              collaborators at MU and UMKC for subsequent parametric or algorithmic
              refinement.  Sensitivity and specificity of algorithms will be monitored at
              each iteration until the processing algorithms cannot improve upon existing
              rankings.  Under ideal circumstances, the microscopist and the image processing
              procedures will produce identical rankings. However, the rankings will be
              considered adequate (ie. useful) if at least the top 50% of human-ranked
              metaphase chromosome spreads or labeled cells are also present in the
              computer-based rankings.  Once the software is ready for production
              applications, it will be compared with a commercial automated FISH analysis
              system that has not been optimized for use with metaphase chromosomes.  


