Title       : Sonoluminescence for Groundwater Remediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0228690

Award Number: 0228690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55667              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Ray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,9150,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0228690, Richard P. Ray, University of South Carolina -
              Columbia
"Sonoluminescence for Groundwater Remediation"

This action is to
              explore the use of sonoluminescence for groundwater
              remediation

Sonoluminescence, the process of turning sound into light, was
              discovered over 60 years ago.  As sound waves propagate through a liquid,
              dissolved gases are forced out of solution to form bubbles.  The wave of
              rarefaction is succeeded by a wave of compression, which compresses the gases
              inside the bubble.  When sufficient energy is applied at the proper frequency
              (usually about 20 kHz) sonoluminescence occurs.  For a fraction of a second,
              the temperature in the bubble can reach ~5,000 ?K and pressures of 500-1000
              atmospheres.  Such conditions turn the bubble's contents into an incandescent
              plasma of electrically charged ions, neutral atoms and electrons.  At the same
              time, the bulk solution remains near ambient pressure and temperature.  The
              small gas bubbles make it possible to break apart molecules and produce
              chemical reactions.  The cycle repeats itself with each new wave of rarefaction
              and compression.

The project will begin by reproducing the simplest geometry
              and system, i.e. single-bubble sonoluminescence, and proceed to more complex
              conditions. At each stage of experimentation, test parameters such as
              excitation frequencies, wave shapes, and transducer positioning will be
              performed.  Additionally, the amount of energy input to the system will be
              carefully monitored.

Experimental results should show remediation of the
              groundwater to drinking level standards with decreased remediation time and
              cost.  This study will focus on bench-scale performance, with pilot-scale
              potential.  Experimental work will be preceded and augmented by standard
              laboratory testing and computational simulations.  The simulations will aid in
              determining test intensities and durations. 

Presently there exist a wide
              variety of techniques to remediate contaminated groundwater.  These
              technologies are often limited by borehole placement, and collect media (air,
              water) indiscriminately.  Therefore, a great deal of treatment energy goes
              toward handling media that is already clean.  The method of sonoluminescence is
              unique in that it produces heat and cavitation bubbles at a distance from its
              source.  If this process can be manipulated, it should be possible to focus the
              energy within a prescribed field, releasing, transporting, and possibly
              breaking down contaminants in soil and groundwater insitu.  This process may be
              coupled with other remediation methodologies (for example, vacuum extraction,
              pump and treat, surfactant injection) to achieve target levels in a more timely
              and efficient manner.  Economies of treatment are further realized when dealing
              with DNAPLs (dense non-aqueous phase liquids) and recalcitrant compounds as
              well as vadose or capillary zone contamination.
 







