Title       : ATOL: Assembling the Tree of Life: Phylogeny of Spiders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0228699

Award Number: 0228699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2738000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward C. Wheeler wheeler@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Petra Sierwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gustavo Hormiga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lorenzo Prendini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan A. Coddington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1629,7689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Assembling the Tree of Life: Phylogeny of Spiders

Ward C.
              Wheeler, Jonathon A. Coddington, Gustavo Hormiga, Lorenzo Prendini, and Petra
              Sierewald

American Museum of natural History

A grant has been awarded to
              Dr. Ward Wheeler of the American Museum of Natural History and his colleagues
              Dr. Lorenzo Prendini (AMNH), Dr. Jonathan Coddington (National Museum of
              Natural History, Smithsonian Institution), Dr. Gustavo Hormiga (George
              Washington University) and Dr. Petra Sierwald (Field Museum of Natural History)
              to examine the evolutionary history and biodiversity of spiders.  Spiders are
              among the oldest and most diverse groups of terrestrial organisms on our
              planet, with fossils dating back to the Devonian (c. 380 million years ago) and
              a current diversity of over 37,500 described species placed in 3,471 genera and
              109 families. Spiders stand out because of their ecological importance as the
              dominant predators of insects. It is no exaggeration to say that without
              spiders, insect pest populations would soar and humans would be greatly
              affected.  Furthermore, spiders are already model organisms in biochemical
              (silk proteins and venom), behavioral (especially sexual and web-building
              behaviors) and ecological (foraging, predator-prey systems, integrated pest
              management) research.  Accordingly, understanding their evolutionary history is
              a critical component in the NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program.  
The
              aim of this Tree of Life proposal to produce a robust phylogeny of all the
              deepest branches within the spiders, by combining a massive amount of newly
              generated comparative genomic data with a substantial set of new and
              re-assessed data on morphology and behavior.  The PIs will use high-throughput
              DNA sequencing to examine at least 50 "loci" for representatives of at least
              500 genera of spiders and their closest relatives (the whipscorpions and
              allies). The computational challenges posed by the resulting large data
              matrices will be analyzed using new computer software, designed in large part
              by members of the group and using massively parallel processing to achieve
              supercomputing capability.  These organisms included in the study will
              purposefully include all the previously most-favored study organisms of
              ethologists, ecologists, physiologists, and developmental and molecular
              biologists, thus integrating and contextualizing their research.

