Title       : Network for Computational Nanotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0228390

Award Number: 0228390
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Lundstrom lundstro@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl Hess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed H. Sameh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Bottum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph F. Pekny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is to establish a Network for Computational Nanotechnology (NCN) at
              Purdue University with three-fold mission: (1) to catalyze the formation of
              teams of theorists, computational scientists, and experimentalists in research
              that addresses key challenges in realizing integrated nanosystems; (2) to
              support the research and the broader National Nanotechnology Initiative with an
              infrastructure that provides ready access to high-perfomence computing and
              visualization, facilities collaboration, delivers simulation services, and
              enables solutions to large, multi-scale problems by assembling standard,
              open-source components tht are available to the entire community; and (3) to
              develop educational packages that can be incorporated into the curricula to
              train students, scientists, and engineers.  The NCN will initially address
              three research themes: (1) nanoelectronics, (2) naoelctromechanics, and (3)
              nsnobioelectronics. The University of Illinois, Urbana/Champaign, Stanford
              University, Northwestern University, and University of Florida will be initial
              participants. The core research topics and participants will evolve while
              preserving relevance and leadership in the rapidly developing field of
              nanoscience.  A number of special projects will be undertaken designed to
              address the need for a second-generation network computing platform.  This
              award is for an initial period of five years, subject to renewal for another
              five years.  
