Title       : Stochastic Network Interdiction Models for Homeland Security
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0228419

Award Number: 0228419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99960              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Morton morton@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elmira Popova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Charlton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7207,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research attempts to solve a stochastic network interdiction model for
              deterring and preventing smuggling of nuclear material.  The interdiction model
              consists of two adversaries, a nuclear smuggler and an interdictor who installs
              sensors to detect the smuggler.  The smuggler selects a path through a
              transportation network that maximizes the probability of avoiding detection. 
              The interdictor installs sensors to minimize that maximum probability.  This
              problem is formulated as a bi-level two-stage stochastic mixed-integer program.
               It is stochastic because the smuggler's origin and destination are unknown at
              the time the detectors are installed.  The model is reformulated as a
              stochastic mixed-integer program that one can attempt to solve with commercial
              software.  For larger instances of the problem, a decomposition procedure that
              exploits the model's special structure is proposed.  The model's data
              requirements include the probability a smuggler can traverse an indigenous arc,
              an arc with an undetected sensor, and the probability distribution governing
              the smuggler's origin-destination pair.  

The efforts of terrorist
              organizations, such as al Qaeda, and rogue nations, such as Libya and Iraq, to
              obtain nuclear material and technology to produce a nuclear weapon have been
              well documented.  Securing U.S. borders from the possible smuggling of
              nuclear/radiological weapons or precursor materials is an important step in
              minimizing the associated threat.  Other U.S. organizations are focusing on
              issues needed to secure the border.  For example, scientists at 
Los Alamos
              National Laboratory are developing radiation sensor equipment to detect minute
              quantities of nuclear material and data on terrorist groups.  The Immigration
              and Naturalization Services, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the
              Customs Department are collecting data on potential smuggling routes. 
              Significantly less effort is being devoted to developing methodology to use
              this data to determine where these detectors should be located.  This grant
              supports research to help provide the technical basis for locating such
              detectors.

