Title       : SGER: Protein Based Nano-Motors and Nano-Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0228103

Award Number: 0228103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantinos Mavroidis mavro@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin L. Yarmush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the development of protein-based nano-motors and
              nano-robots.  The goal is to develop novel and revolutionary biomolecular
              machine components that can be assembled and form multi-degree of freedom
              nanodevices that will be able to apply forces and manipulate objects in the
              nanoworld, transfer information from the nano to the macro world and also be
              able to travel in the nanoenvironment. These 
machines are expected to be
              highly efficient, economical in mass production, work under little supervision
              and be controllable.  The vision is that such ultra-miniature robotic systems
              and nano-mechanical devices will be the biomolecular electromechanical hardware
              of future planetary, military or medical missions.  Some proteins, due to their
              structural characteristics and physicochemical properties constitute potential
              candidates for this role. The specific aims of this project are: a) To identify
              proteins that can be used as motors in nano / micro machines and mechanisms. 
              We will focus our studies on the mechanical properties of viral proteins to
              fold or unfold depending on the pH level of environment. Thus, a new, powerful,
              linear biomolecular actuator type is obtained  that we call: Viral Protein
              Linear (VPL) motor.  Various viral proteins will be studied and from them
              different VPL motors will be produced; b) To develop dynamic models and
              realistic simulations / animations to accurately predict the performance of the
              proposed VPL motors;  c) To perform a series of biomolecular experiments to
              demonstrate the validity of the proposed concept of VPL motors; d) To study,
              both computationally and experimentally, the interface of the proposed protein
              motors with other biomolecular components such as DNA joints and
              carbon-nanotube rigid links so that complex, multi-degree of freedom machines
              and robots are formed.

The broader impact and outreach activities of this
              project are: a) the initiation of  undergraduate students in research; b) the
              establishment of collaborative projects on nanotechnology with the science and
              technology high schools of New Jersey with the objective to attract new
              students in this field; c) the organization of a special session at the annual
              ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (IMECE) on
              nano-robotics;  and d) the development and maintenance of a webpage on
              bio-nano-robotic systems.


