Title       : CEDAR: Optical Measurements of Daytime Thermospheric Dynamics and Nighttime
               Mesospheric and Thermospheric Dynamics at the Magnetic Equator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2002  
File        : a0228634

Award Number: 0228634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312377             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Meriwether john.meriwether@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will operate a Second-generation Optimized Fabry-Perot Doppler
              Imager (SOFDI) at the Huancayo Geophysical Observatory in Peru to measure
              mesospheric and thermospheric winds.  The main objective is to determine the
              way in which zonal wind direction is linked to the occurrence of equatorial
              spread-F and scintillations at the magnetic equator.  A problem in
              understanding the complex electrodynamics of the equatorial region has been to
              explain the day-to-day variability of the effects of the disturbed ionosphere,
              represented by the phenomena of bubbles, scintillations, bottomside spread F,
              and equatorial spread F.  While other factors play a role in these phenomena,
              the change in the semi-diurnal thermospheric tidal activity that modulates the
              speed of the zonal wind across the evening twilight terminator may be a key
              factor.  Such variations of the zonal wind speed may affect the timing for the
              development of the F-region dynamo and modify the likelihood of the development
              of plasma instabilities.  The SOFDI instrument is designed for both nighttime
              and dayglow measurements of airglow intensities and atmospheric winds and
              temperatures at remote locations.  The observations will be made in
              coordination with an all-sky imager and the Jicamarca incoherent scatter radar.
               The investigators will also investigate the possible effects of atmospheric
              gravity waves on irregularity growth.  Irregularities in the equatorial
              ionosphere produce scintillations that affect the operation of navigation and
              communications systems.  This study will help develop models that can forecast
              the occurrence of scintillations to protect these systems from deleterious
              space weather effects.
