Title       : The Origins of Domesticated Sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0228049

Award Number: 0228049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100459             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Lentz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary D. Pohl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin L. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Bye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren H. Rieseberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chicago Botanic Garden
	      1000 Lake Cook Road
	      Glencoe, IL  600220400    847/835-5440

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With funding provided by the National Science Foundation, Dr. David Lentz and
              his associates will conduct fieldwork and laboratory experiments to determine
              whether the modern domesticated sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) is derived
              from: 1) a wild progenitor from populations in eastern North America, as
              previously hypothesized; 2) a wild population from Mexico; or 3) or the result
              of two separate domestication events.  The issue of domesticated sunflower
              origins has been reopened because of recently discovered archaeobotanical
              remains of fully domesticated H. annuus from deep deposits at the San Andres
              site in the Gulf Coast region of Tabasco, Mexico.  Radiocarbon age
              determinations +- 50 B.P.  These findings represent the earliest indisputable
              record of domesticated sunflower.  The San Andres sunflower seeds probably were
              imported into Tabasco as full-fledged domesticates because Tabasco lies to the
              south of the modern distribution of wild sunflowers.  The precise location of
              sunflower domestication is unknown at present, but Mexican regions north of
              Veracruz with suitable habitat and wild populations of H. annuus now seem
              likely as possible areas of origin.

The methodological approaches will
              include a major fieldwork component followed by laboratory analyses.  The
              fieldwork will focus on collecting modern wild sunflower specimens from
              northern Mexico, the southwestern U.S., and the midwestern U.S.  These
              collections will provide raw material for the taxonomic and molecular analyses
              that will enable the team to identify wild progenitor populations of
              domesticated sunflower.

Previous authors have argued for an eastern North
              American origin for domesticated sunflower based on archaeobotanical data from
              several sites in the Mississippi River Basin and the recognition of sunflower
              as one of the keystone species in what eventually developed into the Eastern
              Agricultural Complex (EAC) of North American cultigens.  Interestingly,
              sunflower was the only major cultigen that formerly was unchallenged as an
              eastern North American domesticate; now that origin, at least as a unique
              domestication event, appears in doubt.  In addition to its anthropological
              implications, locating ancestral wild populations has significant practical
              applications for expanding the genetic base of a valuable resource; sunflower
              is one of the world's major oilseed crops with an annual global production of
              over 26 million metric tons.  Once located, these ancestral sunflower
              populations, as valuable genetic reservoirs, will represent meaningful targets
              for conservation.

