Title       : Optimal and Near-Optimal Resource Allocation for Information Security and
               Critical Infrastructure Protection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0228204

Award Number: 0228204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki M. Bier bier@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7207,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the investigation of optimal and near-optimal
              strategies for defense of critical infrastructure from an intelligent and
              adaptable adversary.  Game-theoretic optimization models will be developed
              taking into account the structure of the system to be defended (e.g., series
              and/or parallel subsystems), and also varying assumptions about the goals,
              knowledge, and constraints of both the defender and the adversary.  Systems
              that are too complex to yield closed-form optimal results will be analyzing
              using a heuristic attack strategy that is demonstrably near-optimal for a wide
              range of cases, as a basis for developing optimal or near-optimal defenses
              against those attack strategies.

If successful, the results of this research
              will lead to improved guidance for allocation of resources to critical
              infrastructure protection.  The primary goal of this work is to identify
              defensive investment strategies that are optimized to defend against attackers
              with varying assumed goals, knowledge, and constraints.  For example, attacker
              goals may include maximizing the probability that an attack succeeds,
              maximizing the damage caused by an attack if successful, or maximizing the
              expected value of the damage caused by an attack.  Similarly, attackers may
              have differing levels of knowledge about the system's defensive investments,
              and differing constraints (e.g., limits on the number of failed attacks before
              the attacker is detected and disabled.  Determining optimal or near-optimal
              strategies to defend against attackers with varying characteristics will help
              both to improve the security of our critical infrastructure, and also to reduce
              the cost of critical infrastructure protection.  This work will also contribute
              to the computational tools and methodologies available for resource allocation
              problems in complex systems.
