Title       : Scaling Up Standards-Based Accountability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2002 
File        : a0228295

Award Number: 0228295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5557088            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Stecher Brian_Stecher@rand.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura S. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904072138    310/393-0411

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Arguably the largest scale-up of an educational program occurring in the United
              States at the 
present time is the implementation of standards-based
              accountability (SBA) in all 50 states as a 
result of the No Child Left Behind
              Act of 2001 (NCLB). SBA involves several elements 
including content and
              performance standards, aligned assessments, and a set of consequences 
tied to
              assessment results. The utility of standards-based accountability was
              demonstrated in a 
few pioneering states in the 1990s, and a number of studies
              suggest that SBA systems may 
influence both student learning and
              instructional practices. The government cited the success of 
these
              accountability systems as justification for requiring SBA in all states. This
              investigation is 
designed to identify factors that enhance the implementation
              of SBA systems, foster changes in 
school and classroom practice, and promote
              improved student achievement.  It addresses four 
broad questions: 
 
 What
              strategies are used in implementing SBA at the state, district, and school
              levels?  
Which state, district, and school implementation strategies are
              associated with 
changes in classroom practice?  
 How valid are the
              standards-based test scores as indicators of changes in student 
achievement?
              
 Which features of SBA implementation are associated with student attainment
              of 
academic standards?   
 
The study involves three states that vary in
              their approaches to SBA.  Data will be collected from 
state and district
              officials, principals, and teachers using a combination of questionnaires,
              
interviews, and artifact examination. The data collection approach is
              longitudinal, and is 
designed to provide information on SBA implementation at
              all levels, as well as on factors that 
influence implementation, such as the
              clarity of the standards and the methods for promulgating 
them, teachers. and
              principals. understanding of the SBA policies, and the professional climate
              
of the school.  Student achievement data will also be collected to address
              the third and fourth 
research questions.  The evaluation of the validity of
              standards-based test scores involves 
examination of the content and format of
              test items as well as a comparison of score trends on 
the standards-based
              test and on other tests such as the National Assessment of Educational
              
Progress (NAEP).  Relationships among implementation, practices, and student
              achievement will 
be explored using longitudinal multilevel modeling
              techniques.   
 
Answers to the four research questions will help
              policymakers, educators, and researchers 
understand the ways SBA policies are
              implemented at all levels of the system; explain 
relationships among
              implementation, instructional practices and student achievement; and 
identify
              successful practices that can be promulgated to make SBA function more
              effectively. 
Over the next three to five years, SBA will affect every public
              school student in the country, so 
insights gained from this research will
              have wide applicability.
