Title       : Deciphering the Andean Knotted-String Records: A Project Aimed at Creating and
               Querying a Khipu Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0228038

Award Number: 0228038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Urton gurton@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the two-year project to be undertaken by Dr. Gary Urton at
              Harvard University with the support of a research grant from the National
              Science Foundation is to create and query a database composed of information
              from study of surviving samples of Inka khipu.  The khipu (Quechua: "knot"),
              were the principal devices used for record-keeping in the Inka empire.  There
              are some 600 surviving samples of these devices in museum and private
              collections around the world.  These artifacts, which are composed of dyed and
              knotted cotton and camelid fibers, were used by Inka administrators to record
              both statistical data and narrative information. Although khipu have been
              studied by researchers for several decades, these ancient knotted texts remain
              largely undeciphered. Working with a database  manager, Urton will coordinate
              efforts to design and build procedures for entering data recorded by earlier
              researchers, as well as new data on khipu construction recorded from recently
              completed and on-going museum studies by P.I.  Data entry will proceed
              throughout the '02-'03 academic year.  In Spring, '03, work will begin on two
              additional components of the project.  First, procedures will be designed to
              query the khipu database, searching for patterns in numbers, colors,
              construction techniques, etc., that might help researchers to understand how
              information is organized in the khipu and, therefore, how one might theorize
              the nature and procedures of encoding and decoding (or reading) these ancient
              records.  Secondly, work will be undertaken on the design and construction of
              supplementary electronic databases drawn from two types of textual sources that
              may help in querying the khipu database; these sources will be, first, a text
              written in colonial times in the Quechua language (probably the Huarochiri
              Manuscript), and secondly, material from documents transcribed by Dr. Urton
              from archival research in Seville, Spain, containing Spanish transcriptions of
              khipu readings that were given by native recordkeepers in the Andes in early
              colonial times.  Data storage and querying procedures will be developed that
              will allow researchers to cross-reference and query the khipu database from
              information contained in the databases of Quechua textual and ethnohistorical
              materials.  The khipu database will be posted on the WWW, along with
              instructions for how researchers can request queries of the database.  The
              objective of the project is to attempt -- if not the decipherment of the khipu
              -- at least a significant advance in our understanding of this remarkable
              indigenous South American recording device.
