Title       : PPD-DEI: Supporting Youth with Disabilities in Science, Technology, Engineering,
               and Mathematics: The SIU SY-STEM Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0228133

Award Number: 0228133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76836              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Bates pbates@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen S. Renzaglia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1545,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This project will contribute to our nation's capacity for increasing the
              number of
people with disabilities employed in the science, technology,
              engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) work force by demonstrating the
              effectiveness of an innovative
combination of person centered career planning
              activities, ongoing mentoring, and hands
on experiences in the sciences. This
              combination of activities is designed to 1.) increase
recognition of the
              interests and needs of students with disabilities in the STEM career
areas,
              2.) create a more supportive academic and professional climate for persons
              with
disabilities, 3.) promote accessibility and appropriateness of
              instructional materials and
educational technologies at multiple levels (high
              school, community college, and
university), and 4.) increase the availability
              of academic enrichment experiences such as
mentoring and hands-on experiences
              in the STEM areas.

To meet these broad goals, the SIU SY-STEM project
              will:
*Identify students' preferences and interests for specific STEM-related
              career
areas.
*Increase receptivity of educators (secondary and
              post-secondary math and science
educators) and of guidance counselors for
              including of students with disabilities
in STEM-related curriculum
              experiences.
*Impact adaptations, accommodations, and instructional strategies
              used by
educators in STEM classes and labs at multiple levels.
*Foster
              academic and professional development in STEM related career areas
              by
increased access to career exploration experiences and mentoring.

A
              fundamental premise of this project is that the best way to impact employment
              of
persons with disabilities in the sciences is by simultaneously increasing
              the numbers of
people in the pipeline leading to these careers and enhancing
              the capacity of secondary
and post-secondary training institutions to
              successfully include students with disabilities.
Twenty-five teams of
              students, parents, educators, and guidance counselors from 25 high
schools in
              southern Illinois will participate in intensive one-day workshops on
              person
centered career planning.  From these 25 student teams, six students
              will be selected to
participate in an intensive, on-campus Summer Institute at
              Southern Illinois University.
This Institute will expose students to a variety
              of careers in the sciences and engage them
in a series of rotations in various
              lab sciences.  University students with disabilities will be
recruited to work
              in close affiliation with a graduate student mentor and faculty mentors
to
              provide ongoing support for the workshop and Institute participants.

The SIU
              SY-STEM project will impact involvement of persons with disabilities in
STEM
              areas of study at multiple levels, including the personal and
              professional
development of high school and college students with
              disabilities, and changes in the
educational resources, willingness, and
              capacity to support these students in high school,
community college, and
              university programs.  Although this project is designed as a
regional
              demonstration involving high schools, consortia of community colleges,
              and
Southern Illinois University, it is the intention of the applicant to
              sustain this initiative by
building broader, more comprehensive
              regional/national networks and alliances.  To that
end, the project includes a
              comprehensive evaluation component and widespread
dissemination plan.
