Title       : International: Experimental Evaluation of Coordinated Flexible Satellite Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0228865

Award Number: 0228865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7995               (Estimated)
Investigator: William Singhose   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0228865
Singhose

This award supports a one-year collaborative international
              dissertation enhancement project.  The principal investigator for the project
              is William Singhose at Georgia Tech in Atlanta.  The Japanese collaborator is
              Saburo Matunaga at the Tokyo Institute of Technology.  They will be undertaking
              research on an experimental evaluation of coordinated flexible satellite
              control.  The precise control of spacecraft with flexible appendages is
              extremely difficult.  The complexity of this task is magnified many times when
              several flexible spacecraft must be controlled precisely and collaboratively as
              in formation flying.  Coordinated satellite control requires a group of
              spacecraft to fly in a desired trajectory while maintaining relative position
              and velocity with respect to each other.  The Two-Dimensional Spacecraft
              Dynamics Simulator at the Tokyo Institute of Technology was constructed to
              verify the Robot Satellite Cluster Systems.  The two objectives of the project
              are to:  1) evaluate vibration reducing on-off thruster profiles for three
              coordinated satellites and  2) evaluate vibration reducing on-off thruster
              profiles for three coordinated satellites that are connected by tethers.   
              

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The collaboration will
              offer great mutual benefits and could advance the research field in three ways:
               1) experimental verification of the proposed satellite thruster control method
              will enable a significant advancement in satellite control system design;   2)
              the extension to multiple, coordinated spacecraft will greatly expand the
              utility of the on-off thruster control methods developed previously for single,
              independent spacecraft and  3) satellites equipped with on-off thrusters will
              be able to maneuver faster, more accurately, and with less residual vibration. 
              The project advances international human resources through the participation of
              a graduate student.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project
              will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  Results of the research will be disseminated at
              scientific meetings and in scientific journals.  


