Title       : SGER: Formation Time and Past Changes in the Atmospheric Circulation System over
               Northwest Mongolia--A Pilot Study of Lake Hovsgol Sedimentary Proxy Records
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0228571

Award Number: 0228571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11856              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Prokopenko   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas F. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
              (SGER) program, will analyze select sediment cores collected from Mongolia's
              largest water body, Lake Hovsgol, to determine their suitability for detailed
              paleoclimatic investigations.

Ultimately, the researchers want to test the
              hypothesis that atmospheric circulation during the Holocene period was
              undergoing periodic fluctuations capable of causing pronounced changes in the
              regional precipitation regime in northwest Mongolia leading to droughts and
              desertification in the area where 75% of present-day population of Mongolia now
              resides.  Lake Hovsgol, whose water budget is strongly dependent on the
              regional precipitation pattern, is ideally located to examine large-scale
              changes in atmospheric circulation as it lies beneath the Siberian High and the
              moisture-bearing westerlies.

At this point in time, however, it is not clear
              if the recovered cores are of sufficient quality to answer any of the posed
              science questions.  So, the research will address the following three basic
              questions:
What is the age span of the new recovered Lake Hovsgol cores?
What
              proxies of lacustrine sedimentation and productivity might be most useful to
              indicate regional climate changes?
When did the present-day climatic system in
              the Lake Hovsgol area of continental interior Asia become established and how
              variable was it through time?

This basic information will have broad impact
              in providing an understanding of climate variability in northwest Mongolia from
              the Last Glacial Maximum through the Holocene.
