Title       : Workshop: Managing Plant Genomic Resources, June 12-14, 2002, Asilomar, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0228022

Award Number: 0228022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30039              (Estimated)
Investigator: Calvin O. Qualset coqualset@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Div Agr & Nat Res
	      1111 Franklin Street
	      Oakland, CA  946075200    510/987-0042

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The genomic and post-genomic eras of biological research have produced large
              quantities of information and novel genetic products that have challenged
              traditional means for conservation and access. Altogether, these resources may
              be termed "genomic resources" and for the most part research funding agencies
              require them to be publicly available to researchers.

A workshop will be
              held with the goals of addressing the longevity, uniqueness, and utility of
              plant genomic resources and their curatorial status; determining strategies for
              their future curation, storage, and distribution; and recommending strategies
              for funding, infrastructure, and personnel needs. The workshop will address the
              common components of a genomic resource management system and determine a
              conceptual framework applicable to all plant genome research. This framework
              will provide guidance for researchers and funding agencies in developing both
              short- and long-term management plans for public genomic resources. Further,
              this framework will provide a basis for estimating financial, human, and
              physical needs for sustaining genomic resources.

The meeting will open with
              presentations to demonstrate the diversity of types of genomic resources, the
              current means of curation and management, the types of uses and demands for the
              resources, and the nature of financial support and anticipated duration.
              Results of two surveys conducted in advance of the Workshop will be presented.
              One will assess genomic resources produced by the NSF Plant Genome Research
              Program projects and the other will address research user expectations and
              needs for genomic resource access. Periods of open discussion will be held to
              define the components of a genomic resource management plan and determine the
              issues that impact them. The final product from this workshop will be a report
              that will provide guidance for researchers and funding agencies in developing
              both short- and long-term management plans for public genomic resources.
              Participants will represent existing genomic resource management programs,
              genomic projects with needs for biological resource management, and expertise
              with the components of biological resource management.

