Title       : Space-Time Rainfall: Scaling, Extremes and Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0228835

Award Number: 0228835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Allen G. Hunt                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniele Veneziano venezian@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0228835
Veneziano

The objective of the project is to study the scaling of
              rainfall in space and time and develop models for hydrologic application
              including extremes and short-term forecasting. This is an extension of work
              done recently by the PI and co-workers on temporal rainfall. The main issues to
              be addressed are:

 Scaling invariance:  Determine whether and in what form
              the limited multifractal scaling properties of temporal rainfall (at small
              scales and within synoptic events) extend to space-time. 
 Modeling:  A new
              type of renewal models with multifractal pulse-based rainfall events has proved
              successful in modeling temporal rainfall series. Extend these models to
              space-time in a way that reproduces on/off statistics, scaling invariance,
              spatial and temporal dependencies, extremes, and other key properties of
              rainfall.
 Extremes:  Derive theoretical scaling laws for the
              Area-Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves based on properties of space-time
              rainfall. Use these theoretical laws to extrapolate beyond the observation
              range.
 Forecasting:  Develop short-term forecasting methods based on the
              scaling properties of time-space rainfall.

These issues are of great
              theoretical and practical importance to hydrology. They will be pursued through
              a combination of statistical modeling, theoretical scaling analysis, numerical
              simulation and validation, and analysis of space-time rainfall records (from
              the GATE and TOGA-COARE experiments). 

In the past, rainfall models have
              emphasized either the conceptual pulse structure of meso-scale atmospheric
              circulation or the multifractal cascade structure of turbulence. The models we
              shall develop combine both aspects and use a parsimonious parameterization.
              Extremes are of obvious importance for hydrologic design and risk analysis.
              Theoretical determination of their scaling behavior will allow more confident
              extrapolation beyond the observation range as well as linkage to climatic
              parameters. Of equal importance is real time forecasting, for which we intend
              to develop flexible and practical methods that take advantage of the scaling
              properties of space-time rainfall. The developments under this project are
              directly relevant also to space-time rainfall downscaling and disaster
              prevention through short-term rainfall prediction and long-term flood risk
              assessment.

