Title       : Templated Molecular Recognition Materials: Theory and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0228400

Award Number: 0228400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Van Tassel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Potoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,7224,7237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Paul R. Van Tassel
Wayne State University 

"Templated Molecular Recognition
              Materials: Theory and Simulation"

Molecular recognition (MR) is a term used
              to describe the strong and highly specific binding
between complementary
              patterns of weakly interacting sites. In living systems, MR is at the origin of
              many biological functions, including signal transduction and assembly guidance.
              Fully synthetic materials capable of MR are potentially useful as bio-mimics,
              sensors, tissue engineering substrates, and separation/purification agents and
              offer clear advantages in terms of cost and robustness compared to conventional
              materials into which true biological structures (proteins, peptides, nucleic
              acids) are incorporated. A universal strategy for preparing synthetic MR
              materials is through the nanoscale assembly of functionalized, polymerizable
              monomers in the presence of molecular or supramolecular templates. Following
              polymerization and template removal, the material will (ideally) possess a
              shape and pattern, on a nanometer length scale, that complements those of the
              template.

The idea behind templated molecular recognition (TMR) is
              straightforward and some applications have appeared (most notably, the
              molecularly imprinted polymers). However, progress is limited by the current
              poor quantitative understanding of elemental issues like the influence of
              template morphology on the material's structure and recognition ability. In
              particular, no theoretical description is currently available to predict
              recognition from template and monomer structures and synthesis variables (e.g.
              precursor composition, temperature, etc.). It is the overall goal of this work
              to develop such a description. A molecular-based model inspired by the TMR
              formation process is proposed whose starting point is a functional monomer /
              template / solvent mixture in equilibrium with respect to a molecular force
              field. Polymerization of the monomers is accounted for by an instantaneous
              quench, or freezing, of the molecular positions. The template and solvent are
              then removed, and the remaining (quenched) monomers serve as the initial model
              material into which is immersed a new solution containing molecules identical
              or structurally related to the original template. Post-polymerization
              structural alterations are also possible through expansion/contraction or
              de-densification. Of particular significance is our proposed equilibrium based
              theoretical approach, exploiting the replica method originally developed to
              study spin
glasses, to determine the binding thermodynamics of the model
              system. Complementary molecular computer simulations are also proposed.

The
              first objective is to establish this theoretical description for simple model
              systems capable of
TMR. An integral equation theory will be developed to
              calculate the thermodynamics of chain molecule and cluster adsorption in this
              model material. The significance will be the first theoretical description of
              TMR. The second objective is to apply the theoretical description to carefully
              chosen model monomer, template, and adsorbate structures in order to answer to
              important fundamental questions on TMR. The significance will be the first
              fundamental,  molecular-level understanding of TMR. The third objective is to
              use the theoretical description to predict TMR in a system reported in the
              literature. The significance will be the first predictive model of
              TMR.

Industrial and Societal Impact:
The proposed theoretical description
              of TMR will be a valuable tool in the development of
nanostructured materials
              capable of high affinity binding. Examples of materials whose rational design
              will be enabled include molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs), directed surface
              assembled monolayers, template functionalized inorganics, and protein templated
              biomimics - these may find important application as sensors, selective
              adsorbents, and tissue engineering substrates and offer significant advantages
              in cost, robustness, and biocompatibility over conventional materials into
              which true biological structures (proteins, peptides, nucleic acids) are
              incorporated. Using this description, current practical problems such as low
              density, poor accessibility, and heterogeneous binding strength of the
              recognition sites may be overcome. Additionally, the ability of these
              organically formed materials to function in an aqueous environment will be
              enhanced. One can envision a future where nanostructural modification by
              templating is routinely used to tailor materials for specific binding
              applications.

Also, minorities and women will be encouraged to participate
              at this large, urban university.  Finally, a seminar series is planned in which
              the students will be required to make presentations relating to their part of
              the research.  

