Title       : Nonlinear and Adaptive Control with Unmodeled Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0228846

Award Number: 0228846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petar V. Kokotovic petar@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The  wide  diversity  of  applications,  from aero  and  automotive  engines  to
               micro  and nano systems, requires  a diversity  of nonlinear feedback designs,
              which remain  an important research direction. However, the increased 
              availability  of nonlinear design methods must be accompanied with a fuller
              understanding of their robustness properties with respect to unmodeled
              dynamics, ubiquitous in all engineering applications. Strong nonlinearities 
              interacting  with  unmodeled  dynamics  may  cause  instability  phenomena that
              cannot be handled by linear robust control methods. New nonlinear robustness
              
analysis and compensation methods are needed to increase the applicability of
              nonlinear designs. 

The two main themes in this proposal are, first,
              analysis of the behavior of nonlinear feedback systems caused by  significant
              dynamics not included in their nominal design models, and, second, static and
              dynamic compensation methods to improve stability properties and performance in
              the presence of unmodeled dynamics.  After a brief overview of the
              accomplishments under the current grant in Part One, the effects of unmodeled
              dynamics and possible remedies are introduced through simple examples in Part
              Two. The research plan, described in Part Three, proposes an in-depth analysis
              and characterization of systems with minimum and nonminimum phase unmodeled
              dynamics.  It then suggests promising directions for performance improvement by
              compensation and structure specific robust redesigns. 
 
