Title       : Causes of Y-Chromosome Degeneration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0228832

Award Number: 0228832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryant F. McAllister bryant-mcallister@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
0075295
McAllister

A morphologically and functionally distinct pair of sex
              chromosomes provides a basis for gender determination in many organisms.  One
              chromosome (X) is shared between the two genders, and contains a normal set of
              functional genes; the other (Y) is restricted to one gender, and has few genes.
               These differences arise through a repeatable evolutionary process, because
              pairs of sex chromosomes have arisen multiple times from pairs of identical
              chromosomes (autosomes), a transition that has been demonstrated for the X-Y
              pair in humans.  

This project involves molecular and genetic analyses of
              Drosophila americana americana, a species with a chromosomal rearrangement that
              has recently transformed a pair of its autosomes into neo-sex chromosomes.  The
              long-term objective of the study is to reveal the forces influencing loss of
              gene function on the male-limited neo-Y chromosome of D. a. americana.  Studies
              will characterize the pattern of sequence variation in the region adjacent to
              the centromere of these neo-sex chromosomes, because this region is subjected
              to a gradient of restricted recombination.  These data will lead to a better
              understanding of the relationship between recombination and the forces of
              mutation, selection and genetic drift.

The study of Y chromosomes provides a
              model system for demonstrating the consequences of restricted recombination,
              which has implications for understanding factors influencing asexual
              reproduction and evolution within closely-linked regions of the genome.


