Title       : Advancing U.S. Interests in International Activities in the Psychological
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0228216

Award Number: 0228216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Lawson elawson@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Spaulding  (Principal Investigator former)
              Wendy D. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project supports activities of the U.S. National Committee for the
              International Union of Psychological Science (USNC/IUPsyS). The USNC exists to
              represent the United States in the scientific union, which is a member of the
              International Council for Science (ICSU). The objective of this program is to
              support effective U.S. participation and strong leadership in the international
              union in response to expanding needs in international science and technology.
              It will accomplish this by taking advantage of the volunteer tradition of the
              National Research Council (NRC) -- a tradition that attracts top-level
              scientists and researchers to serve on USNCs. International Unions affiliated
              with ICSU facilitate the exchange of scientific information, forge
              international agreements on standards and measurements, act as scientific
              advisers to intergovernmental agencies, and promote the right of all scientists
              to participate in their activities without political or any other form of
              discrimination. This project engages the U.S. research community in
              international activities by providing opportunities for colleagues from around
              the world to meet on common ground, builds partnerships, and discusses
              collaborations.

