Title       : US-Africa Planning VIsit: Assessment of Opportunities and Capabilities for
               Manufacturing Research in Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0228112

Award Number: 0228112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston O. Soboyejo soboyejo@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel M. Nosenchuck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1385,1786,5976,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This international travel grant will explore opportunities for collaborative
              research on manufacturing between Africa and the U.S.  Three U.S. engineers
              will visit countries in the North, South, East and West of Africa.  During
              these visits, they will meet with local African researchers, industrial and
              technical leaders.  They will also visit selected local universities and
              industries to assess the local capabilities for collaborative research and the
              future development of manufacturing enterprise systems.  In an effort to
              distinguish between the manufacturing opportunities at different scales, the
              visiting engineers will assess the capabilities for manufacturing research
              related to small, medium and large-scale industries.  The existing
              infrastructure for research will also be assessed along with the areas of
              strength for future collaborative research.  A special effort will be made to
              identify areas of collaboration that could result in societal impact in the
              U.S. and in Africa.  As such, these could include: manufacturing enterprise
              systems for the development of export-based manufacturing to the U.S.; the
              integration of research and education in ways that could impact the local
              training of a larger pool of African manufacturing expertise, and the
              development of indigenous manufacturing capabilities at different scales. 
              Following the visits, the group will prepare a preliminary report of its
              findings and recommendations for future collaborations in
              manufacturing/manufacturing research.  This will be presented to the NSF and
              the participants at the Africa MRS meeting in Dakar, Senegal.  The
              inputs/feedback received from these two groups will then be incorporated into
              the final report and a technical paper that will be disseminated widely, and
              made available on the worldwide web.
