Title       : Collaborative Research: Field and Experimental Iron Isotope Investigation of
               Sedimentary Pyrite Dissolution in Appalachian Coal Mine Drainage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0228903

Award Number: 0228903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Dzombak dzombak@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0228903
Dzombak

Acid mine drainage (AMD) from abandoned underground mines is
              and has long been the most serious water quality and watershed degradation
              problem in the mining regions of the U.S.  As a result of underground coal and
              metal mining operations, pyrite (FeS2) becomes exposed to water, resulting in
              its dissolution and release of iron and sulfuric acid to solution, as well as
              metals and other constituents from acid-induced dissolution of additional
              minerals.  Moreover, a significant fraction of the global fluvial sulfate flux
              arises from pyrite dissolution, and the contribution is increasing due to
              mining activities.  While pyrite dissolution is of great importance in sulfur
              cycling and in AMD formation, our understanding of this process and our ability
              to model it are very limited.  	
	This project will exploit recent advances in
              iron isotope measurement techniques to study pyrite dissolution in a novel
              manner in the laboratory and in the field.  An important objective will be to
              test and demonstrate the power of using iron isotopes to quantify and
              source-track the dissolution of pyrite in abandoned coal mine outflows.  It is
              hypothesized that the 56Fe/54Fe isotopic ratio will be distinct for sedimentary
              pyrites formed under different conditions, and that the process of pyrite
              dissolution itself could lead to measurable isotopic fractionation.  To test
              this, the 56Fe/54Fe isotopic ratio in sedimentary pyrite from different
              depositional environments of the Appalachian basin will be determined.  The
              rates of dissolution of some of these samples, and resulting aqueous phase
              isotopic fractionation, will be investigated in the laboratory using a batch
              reactor developed specifically for quantifying pyrite dissolution under tightly
              controlled redox and aqueous phase conditions.  The laboratory and field data
              will allow us to evaluate our ability to use 56Fe/54Fe as a tracer for the
              primary source of Fe in AMD outflows.  Results obtained will provide the basis
              for moving forward with additional studies of more complex systems, especially
              systems with bacteria present that can mediate the pyrite dissolution
              process.


