Title       : ATOL: Collaborative Research: Archosaur Phylogeny-A Total Evidence Approach at
               Fine Taxonomic Levels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0228604

Award Number: 0228604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59953              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley C. Livezey livezeyb@carnegiemuseums.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst
	      4400 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152134080    412/622-3241

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,7689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaboartive Research: Archosaur phylogeny-a total evidence approach at fine
              taxonomic level

Living birds form an extensive, undoubtedly monophyletic
              assemblage of vertebrates.  Yet even after over 150 years of intense study the
              interrelationships of the orders, families, and genera of extant birds are
              still poorly understood.  Recently it has been
conclusively demonstrated that
              birds are nested within theropod dinosaurs. Fossils of some of these groups
              have been found that display a number of features that have previously been
              thought of as avian (e.g. feathers, brooding behavior, furculae).  We propose
              to examine the relationships of theropod dinosaurs (including birds) using a
              total evidence approach at very fine levels. In the morphological analysis we
              will develop a matrix of scoreable characters across the entire diversity of
              non-avian theropods and
at fine taxonomic levels within birds (I.e. near the
              generic level).  Molecular analyses will use high-throughput sequencing
              techniques to produce molecular sequences from birds and outgroup taxa. 
              Nuclear genes will be used predominantly to complement prior mitochondrial
              sequencing; the RAG-1 exon will be sequenced for most genera of extant birds,
              and additional genes such as RAG-2, MC3R, and cMOS will be sequenced for
              exemplars to establish deeper level relationships.  Analysis of these data will
              result in a fine-grained phylogenetic hypothesis of living and fossil birds and
              their close theropod relatives.  Such a phylogeny will have obvious importance
              for the study of a broad range of evolutionary questions within theropods.  A
              major focus of this grant is the development of a 'supermatrix'.  We envision
              this matrix to be a virtual archive for all the character information that we
              generate during this study.  Several different kinds of data will be stored
              here.  Digital images of specimens will allow character conditions to be
              examined within the context of the matrix. Molecular information will be
              available as well.  Capabilities for the development and export of character
              matrices into formats conventionally used for phylogenetic analysis will also
              be available. As this information
is published it will be made available over
              the www.



