Title       : SGER: Investigation of High Temperature Resonant Gas Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0228787

Award Number: 0228787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry L. Tuller tuller@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 7209,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The feasibility of extending the operation of highly sensitive resonant-based
              gas sensors to elevated temperatures will be investigated. Towards this end,
              the electrical, resonant and mass transport properties of langasite, a
              piezoelectric material stable to elevated temperatures, will be characterized
              as functions of temperature, oxygen partial pressure and cation composition. 
              The defect model, to be developed and based on these results, will be used to
              modify langasite in order to maintain high Q values and compositional stability
              to elevated temperatures thereby insuring high sensitivity. Means for isolating
              thermal and stress cross effects will be investigated and implemented. Gas
              sensitive films (PrxCe1-xO2-?, and ZnO) will be deposited on langasite by pulse
              laser deposition with varying thickness and microstructure.  Sensitivity and
              response time will be correlated to film stoichiometry, thickness and grain
              morphology. Parallel monitoring of film stoichiometry and resistivity with
              temperature and pO2 will provide further insights into gas-solid
              interactions.

Bulk and surface acoustic wave resonant devices exhibit
              exceptional sensitivity to a wide range of chemical and biological species when
              coated with appropriate species-sensitive films but are typically limited to
              room temperature operation. In this program, the electrical and mass transport
              properties of langasite, a piezoelectric material stable to elevated
              temperatures, are modeled and investigated to elevated temperatures and in
              controlled atmospheres. Understanding gained from these studies, will enable
              the operation of this multifunctional resonant sensor platform to elevated
              temperatures and thereby address the need for improved sensors in the
              transportation, industrial process and energy industries.  

This proposal
              was submitted in response to the Dear Colleague Letter: Next Generation
              Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems [nsf 02-112].

