Title       : ATOL: Phylum Nematoda: Integrating Multidisciplinary Expertise and
               Infrastructure for Resolving Relationships in a Major Branch of the Tree of
               Life
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EF  
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0228692

Award Number: 0228692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      EF   EMERGING FRONTIERS                      
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2440000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Thomas kelley.thomas@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Fitch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul De Ley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Baldwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Nadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7689      ASSEMBLING THE TREE OF LIFE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. William K Thomas at the University of New
              Hampshire and his colleagues Dr. James Baldwin and Dr. Paul De Ley (University
              of California, Riverside), Dr. David Fitch (New York University) and Dr. Steven
              Nadler (University of California, Davis) to examine the evolutionary history
              and biodiversity of nematodes.  The phylum Nematoda (roundworms) is argued to
              be one of the most abundant and genetically diverse animal phyla on earth.   In
              addition, they play a key position in animal evolution and understanding of
              controversial invertebrate evolutionary relationships. Phylogenetic studies of
              this enormous phylum have been impeded by the difficulty of working with such
              diverse taxa, most of which are microscopic and known by relatively few
              experts. Nematode phylogenetics has also been impeded by the fragmentation of
              taxonomic specialists among different disciplines and by bias toward
              economically or medically important parasites of plants, vertebrates and
              invertebrates.  Accordingly, understanding their evolutionary history is a
              critical component in the NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program.  
This
              project will develop a higher-level tree for the nematodes to provide a
              framework for interpreting their diversity.  The work will use both molecular
              (18S ribosomal genes) and morphological data for over 1000 species.  In a
              parallel effort, they will use the results of this work as a basis for
              selecting 50 nematode species for construction of cDNA libraries to provide
              greater insight into genetic diversity in the phylum and to possibly resolve
              the longstanding questions about of the deepest branches of the nematode tree
              or even its phylogenetic position in the animal kingdom.

