Title       : Information Technology in the Integrated Civil Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0228099

Award Number: 0228099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98144              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil S. Grigg neilg@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Siller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin E. Criswell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0228099
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Grigg, Neil
INSTITUTION NAME:
              Colorado State University
TITLE: Information technology in the integrated
              civil engineering curriculum

Abstract

The proposal is to plan for
              integration of next generation information technology into the 
civil
              engineering curriculum at the department level. The rationale is that civil
              engineers 
have lead roles in infrastructure and environmental systems, and
              the power of 
information technology can be used in design, construction, and
              operations to relieve 
problems of traffic congestion, infrastructure
              integrity, construction productivity, 
environmental monitoring, systems
              security and other sectors of civil society. To address 
this rapidly changing
              field requires new thinking about the curriculum. Old curriculum
              
organization, consisting of loosely connected subjects, will not provide the
              integration 
needed for expanding applications of information technology
              across civil society sectors. 
Twenty-first century problems require
              integration of new technologies and new 
approaches to the organization of
              engineering work, shaped by information technology.  
 
Early application of
              information technology in engineering education focused on 
computer
              programming, but only a few civil engineers engage in much programming. 
Most
              use software to apply wide bands of technology to problems with highly
              dispersed 
spatial, technological, and social dimensions. Teaching civil
              engineers how to apply the 
methods that underlie the software is a main goal
              of the integrated curriculum at 
Colorado State. 
 

