Title       : Dissertation Research - Reconstructing Trincheras: A Study of the Role of Cerros
               De Trincheras in the South-West United States and Northern Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0228833

Award Number: 0228833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall H. McGuire rmcguire@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Randall McGuire, MsBridget Zavala will conduct
              archaeological fieldwork in Arizona and Sonora, Mexico.  Ms. Zavala's research
              will help to systematize and gather information on the enigmatic site-type
              'cerros de trincheras' or hills with stone terraces and walls.   Recent
              investigations at a handful of the terraced hill sites now show that cerros
              were a long-lived architectural tradition beginning 3000 years before present
              and continuing well into the 15th century.  Cerros de trincheras are found in
              the modern day states of Chihuahua, Sonora, Arizona and New Mexico,
              crosscutting five archaeological traditions. To date, different researchers
              have posited multiple functional explanations for these sites- either
              defensive, ceremonial, architectural or residential.  In the past two decades,
              investigators involved in the first large scale excavations of these sites at
              Cerro Juanaquena, Chihuahua; Las Trincheras, Sonora; the Fortress in New
              Mexico; Linda Vista Hill, Tumamoc Hill and Cerro Prieto in Arizona have finally
              collected the kind of data that will make it possible to reassess our
              understanding of terraced hill life. Wit is now known that these particular
              cerros were multidimensional in their function and they were the site of many
              of the activities of daily life. Ms..  Zavala will conduct badly needed
              cross-regional analyses of the role of cerros de trincheras in their regional
              and chronological settings.  Fieldwork in Sonora and Arizona will involve site
              recording of at least 31 cerros de trincheras on both sides of the U.S./ Mexico
              border.  Sites will be mapped, and details will be recorded.. A GIS database
              will then be created to articulate field observations with information gathered
              by other projects. Ms.  Zavala's investigation will either verify or discredit
              one of three working hypotheses for cerros de trincheras: 1) all cerros de
              trincheras had one specialized use: defense, agriculture, ceremonial or
              habitation that remained constant through time; 2) cerros de trincheras had
              several specialized uses: defense, agriculture, ceremonial or habitation that
              remained constant through time; or 3) the site type was used in different ways
              at different times by different archaeological traditions.  

This research
              will not only help to dispell the mystery surrounding cerros de trincheras but
              it will also help address the role of upland sites all over the world.  Hilltop
              enclosures in the southeastern U.S. and hill forts in Ireland and England,
              among others, all evoke the same kind of questions from anthropologists yet
              they are often ignored in comparison to their flood plain counterparts.  We
              need to look uphill and incorporate upland pre-Hispanic land use if we intend
              to create accurate reconstructions of the past. This project will also
              contribute to training a promising young scientist.

