Title       : The Arctic Community-wide Hydrological Analysis and Monitoring Program
               (Arctic-CHAMP) Project Office
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0228860

Award Number: 0228860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404238             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Vorosmarty charles.vorosmarty@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry D. Hinzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Arctic constitutes an important environment, central to the dynamics and
              evolution of the Earth system. The region, is currently experiencing rapid
              environmental change, but the sources and consequences of such change are still
              poorly understood. In response to calls by the science community to assess the
              current state-of-the-art in Arctic hydrology and to formulate a new research
              effort to study water and water cycle change in the Arctic system, NSF-ARCSS
              convened an Arctic System Hydrology Workshop in September 2000 at the National
              Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS) in Santa Barbara, CA. A
              chief recommendation of that workshop was for NSF to invest in development of a
              pan-Arctic Community-wide Hydrological Analysis and Monitoring Program
              (Arctic-CHAMP) for synthesis studies of the water cycle and its role in the
              Arctic system. 
 
Through a series of meetings, reports and a newly-funded
              Announcement of Opportunity (ASOF/CHAMP; NSF-02-071) supporting the
              multi-agency SEARCH initiative, progress is rapidly being made toward an
              operational Arctic-CHAMP. The primary goal of this proposal is to establish an
              Arctic-CHAMP Science Management Office (SMO) to assist ARCSS in coordinating
              emerging Arctic-CHAMP science and outreach efforts. 
 
The anticipated
              Arctic-CHAMP synthesis and integration issues are complex and multi-faceted and
              a dedicated Science Management Office is needed to provide an efficient
              mechanism for executing the initiative. The SMO will provide logistical and
              administrative support to ongoing activities of the Arctic-CHAMP Scientific
              Steering Committee, organize Arctic-CHAMP scientific meetings, workshops, and
              symposia to catalyze interdisciplinary water cycle studies, support the timely
              delivery of CHAMP-related science data products, perform liaison activities
              with other thematic elements of ARCSS, other US and international agency
              partners through dedicated communication efforts by SMO personnel, and
              disseminate findings of Arctic-CHAMP to scientists and the broader user
              community. 
 
Broader Impacts. The SMO is structured to foster not only
              research, but also graduate education, post- graduate training and outreach to
              policy-makers and the public. A proposed series of science meetings and
              workshops, particularly those directed at young student scientists, is designed
              to foster the educational mission of CHAMP. A post-doc, serving as Executive
              Director, will help to satisfy what we see as an important need -- to train
              young science managers, who must increasingly deal with complex,
              interdisciplinary and often international research programs. Data
              dissemination, web pages, and newsletters help to broaden interest in
              CHAMP-related environmental change. Proposed cooperation with partners in
              Canada, Russia, and the Nordic countries fosters US diplomatic interests, good
              will, and open communication through science. 

