Title       : Investigating Emotion-Based Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0228889

Award Number: 0228889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Mellers mellers@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Anyone who has ever made an important decision knows that anticipated emotions
              play a  role. There are effects of the feelings and moods we experience at the
              time of a choice and effects of anticipated feelings about future consequences
              of choice. We have developed a descriptive theory of the anticipated pleasure
              of outcomes called decision affect theory. The theory rests on the assumption
              that pleasure and pain are evaluated relative to the status quo and other
              salient reference points, such as counterfactual outcomes, personal goals, and
              social comparisons. All of these comparisons have asymmetric effects; the
              incremental displeasure of obtaining the worse of two outcomes is greater in
              magnitude than the incremental pleasure of getting the better of two outcomes.
              Finally, beliefs about the likelihood of outcomes moderate the effects of
              comparisons. Surprising outcomes lead to stronger emotional responses than
              expected outcomes.

In past research, we have applied our theory to risky
              choice. We assume that people anticipate the pleasure or displeasure of each
              outcome of an option (as predicted by decision affect theory), weight those
              feelings by the chances they will occur, and sum over outcomes. This process
              yields an average anticipated pleasure for an option. People then compare the
              average pleasure of all options and select the one that maximizes expected
              pleasure.

Our theory of choice is called subjective expected pleasure
              theory. This proposal builds on past work and has three primary goals. First,
              we will extend our theory to riskless choice and test it by conducting seven
              studies. Four of them examine endowment effects and the status quo bias. Three
              additional studies investigate other well-known phenomena in riskless choice,
              such as asymmetric dominance, preference reversals, and advantages vs.
              disadvantages.  Our second goal is to examine the effects of moods on
              anticipated emotions, beliefs, and choice. Although we expect to find
              mood-congruent effects, it is quite possible that moods can have opposing
              effects on judgments and choice.   Our third goal is to examine the accuracy of
              hedonic forecasts immediately after the decision has been resolved and some
              time later. Accuracy is essential for emotion-based choice; decisions based on
              faulty predictions will surely be sub-optimal. Research suggests that people
              focus on attributes that are salient at the moment, but not necessarily
              important later one. That is, they are insensitive to adaptation. We will
              explore affective forecasts in three real world studies and three laboratory
              studies. If deviations in forecasts occur, we will explore methods for
              improving accuracy.


