Title       : Symposium: The Role of Tissue Mechanics in Biological Responses to Mechanical
               Loading, Notre Dame, Indiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0228966

Award Number: 0228966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen L. Niebur gniebur@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Glazier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0228966
Niebur
This symposium is designed to explore the function of
              biological tissues as modulators of mechanical stimuli applied to cells and as
              transducers of mechanical forces. A wide variety of lectures will be presented,
              ranging from tissue formation and remodeling, to methodologies for probing the
              mechanical properties of tissues and cells. Speakers with expertise in a wide
              range of biological systems will develop a broad understanding of
              mechanobiological processes. By promoting discussion and presenting current
              research, the proceedings will advance our current understanding of
              mechanobiology and foster new research by exposing gaps in current
              knowledge.

The meeting will bring together acknowledged experts in the field
              of tissue mechanics to provide training, insight, and advice to those
              interested in becoming involved in this field of research. It will also provide
              a forum for discussion and debate of the current state of knowledge of
              mechanics and mechanobiology for different tissues. Tutorial lectures on bone,
              cardiovascular, and cartilage remodeling will provide attendees with a view of
              the current state of the art in each of these fields, and emphasize important
              areas of future research. The meeting is to promote interaction between
              engineers, physicists, mathematicians, biologists, and chemists with interests
              in biomechanics and mechanobiology. Also, it provides a forum for junior
              faculty and graduate students to interact with a wide range of experts in the
              field of tissue mechanics and mechanobiology.

Proceedings of the conference
              will be compiled and disseminated to all participants, and will be made
              available electronically over the world-wide-web. 

