Title       : SGER: Simulation Modeling of Systems With Complex Entity Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0228803

Award Number: 0228803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Smith jsmith@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9150,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) provides funding for the
              classification of discrete-event simulation models involving complex entity
              interaction and the development of several sample models using commercial
              simulation packages.  Complex interactions are those in which the flow of the
              entities and the behavior of the resources are highly dependent on the system
              state.  Simulation models of these systems are characterized by having numerous
              "user-defined" wait states for entities.  In these models, resources can not be
              simply passive capacity maintenance mechanisms, but rather they must implement
              specific allocation logic.  There are a surprising number of seemingly
              straightforward models that belong to this class.  This class of systems will
              be characterized and documented and modeling methodologies for problems is this
              class will be developed.  In addition, a test suite of problems will be
              developed and models for these problems will be developed using several
              commercially available simulation software packages.  These models will be
              compared with each other and with hand-coded event-oriented models of the same
              systems.

If successful, the results of this research will provide
              methodologies for developing discrete-event simulation models of a class of
              systems involving complex entity interactions along with a suite of example
              models implemented in several commercially available simulation packages.  The
              long-term goal of this research is to develop an open-source simulation toolkit
              to specifically support the development of models for complex systems.  The
              result will be a freely available simulation software package along with
              significant educational materials.  Note that the goal of the toolkit is not to
              compete with the commercial simulation packages, but, rather, to supplement
              them and to provide tools to support the teaching and understanding of general
              simulation principles.  Actually, improving the understanding of general
              simulation principles will benefit the commercial packages by increasing the
              probability of success for simulation projects.
