Title       : Flow Past Obstacles in Shallow Water: Wake Structure and Free-Surface
               Deformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0228110

Award Number: 0228110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald O. Rockwell dorO@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0228110
DONALD O. ROCKWELL
LEHIGH UNIVERSITY 


FLOW PAST
              OBSTACLES IN SHALLOW WATER:
WAKE STRUCTURE AND FREE-SURFACE DEFORMATION
The
              overall aims of this investigation are to acquire a fundamental understanding
              of wake instabilities, their coupling with free-surface distortion, and the
              influence of these features on the bed loading for the case of flow past
              horizontal obstacles in shallow water.  Petroleum, natural gas, and water
              pipelines across flooded rivers and along coastlines, submerged bridge decks
              during severe flood conditions, sand dunes in fluvial rivers, low head
              hydraulic gates in tailwater, energy dissipaters at high-speed hydraulic
              discharges, and flow along hydraulic grade control structures are among the
              configurations that generate vortical structures.  These vortices typically are
              linked to distortion of the free-surface of the shallow water layer, in
              presence of an adjacent bed (bottom wall).  Among the consequences of the
              coupled vortex-free surface instabilities are steady and unsteady loading of
              the obstacle, loading of the bed with scour/sediment transport, locally
              resonant oscillations of the river or channel, mixing of pollutants due to
              local disruptions induced by the obstacle, and alteration of the river/channel
              resistance.
This program will advance knowledge of shallow water vortex
              systems by yielding quantitative representations of the onset and evolution of
              vortical structures and free-surface distortion, both of which occur in
              presence of an adjacent bed.  These contributions will include loading
              characteristics of the obstacle and the bed, and techniques for their control. 
              It is anticipated that this insight can provide guidance for both theoretical
              models and numerical techniques and, in addition, enhance the framework of
              design guidelines in engineering practice.


