Title       : Nonlinear elliptic boundary value problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0228854

Award Number: 0228854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50462              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eun Heui Kim ekim4@csulb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103823
Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Elliptic
              Boundary Value Problems


Abstract

DMS-0103823
Keyfitz

The major
              focus of this project is to develop systematic theories to understand the
              solution structures of nonlinear elliptic boundary value problems arising from
              change-of-type systems in multidimensional conservation laws, and from
              experiments in morphogenesis and ecological systems.  It is a distinctive
              feature of multidimensional conservation laws in self-similar coordinates that
              they change type, being hyperbolic far from the origin but of mixed type near
              the origin.  Analysis of behavior near the origin gives rise to interesting
              open problems in elliptic partial differential equations, including nonlinear
              free boundary value problems, degenerate oblique boundary problems, and
              quasilinear degenerate elliptic systems.  Such problems arise in many different
              combinations in the study of two-dimensional Riemann problems, including those
              for the compressible Euler equations of gas dynamics.  This project also
              investigates a class of singular non-quasimonotone elliptic systems that arise
              in models of biological morphogenesis experiments and certain predator-prey
              interactions.   

Multidimensional conservation laws are mathematical models
              for fundamental processes in physics and engineering, such as high-speed flows
              and supersonic jets.  While tools for numerical simulations of multidimensional
              conservation laws have been developed extensively, there is very little
              analytical theory available.  It is our goal to establish parts of the needed
              theory and to investigate the structure of solutions for such problems.  The
              results of the project will have application to a wide a variety of physical
              systems.
 

