Title       : Conference on Frontiers of NMR in Molecular Biology - VIII to be held in Taos,
               New Mexico at the Taos Covention Center, February 4-10, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0228138

Award Number: 0228138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Prestegard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keystone Sympo Molec & Cel
	      Drawer 1630
	      Silverthorne, CO  90498    970/262-1230

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1144,1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project supports attendance of students at the Keystone Symposium on the
              Frontiers of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) in Molecular Biology, which will
              be held at Taos, New Mexico from February 4-10, 2003. The timely topic of this
              conference reflects the fact that NMR has continued to evolve to meet new
              challenges of molecular biology and genomics. Already the challenge of
              providing structures of proteins on a genomic scale has produced new NMR
              approaches to efficient structure determination. The prospect of having more
              targets to implement in biotechnology applications has spawned new means of
              screening for small-molecule and macromolecule interactions. The realization
              that biological function often involves the interplay of groups of
              macromolecules in a dynamic setting has led to new methods for monitoring
              interactions and motion in large macromolecular complexes. With new approaches
              and new realizations come additional challenges. Large volumes of data and new
              types of data demand innovative approaches to analysis, assemblies of
              interacting macromolecules means working with ever-larger structures, and new
              sources of data on protein dynamics require new connections to mechanistic
              models. New technological advances needed to work with larger systems often
              come from combining solids NMR with solution NMR approaches. Computational
              biology is well poised to organize diverse types of data, generate molecular
              models, and turn them into predictive tools. The ultimate challenge for the
              meeting will be to stimulate discussion among scientists coming from these
              diverse fields. The meeting will highlight new approaches to the challenges
              defined above and provide a forum for discussion among molecular biologists,
              NMR spectroscopists, and computational biologists. 

The program will be
              organized around problem areas and integrate talks by scientists having
              different perspectives on their solution. Scheduled breaks between formal
              presentation sessions are ideal for simulating discussion among participants,
              and promoting contact between students and established leaders in these diverse
              fields. The interdisciplinary character of the meeting, as described above,
              will broaden its potential impact. The meeting will also have a distinct
              educational component by its support for the attendance of graduate students
              and postdoctoral associates. Discussion of more practical aspects of the field
              will be promoted by the organization of afternoon workshops having a less
              formal structure. These will enhance opportunities for interaction of students
              with established scientist working in the area.

