Title       : Workshop on Dynamics and Bifurcations of Patterns in Dissipative Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0228181

Award Number: 0228181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Iuliana Oprea juliana@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerhard H. Dangelmayr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Progress in nonlinear science achieved during the last decades has brought
              mathematicians and physicists a better understanding of the variety of
              structures observed in systems far from equilibrium.  The emergence of
              macroscopic order and the spontaneous breaking of spatiotemporal symmetries are
              features common to many natural phenomena.  Virtually every structure seen in
              our world can be considered the result of a long sequence of successive
              symmetry-breaking instabilities of a complex nonlinear system under
              nonequilibrium conditions.  The interdisciplinary field of pattern formation
              seeks a common understanding of such spontaneous formation of spatial and
              spatiotemporal patterns in systems from areas as diverse as fluid mechanics,
              solid state physics, nonlinear optics, chemistry, and biology.  While much
              progress towards understanding pattern formation has been made in recent years,
              fundamental challenges remain. 

This award supports participants in the
              Workshop on Dynamics and Bifurcations of Patterns in Dissipative Systems, held
              at Colorado State University in the spring of 2003.  The goal of the workshop
              is to bring together theorists and experimentalists from different fields, from
              applied mathematics to theoretical and experimental physics, unified by their
              interest in nonlinear phenomena and in search of a deeper understanding of
              pattern formation and dynamics in complex systems.  The workshop will stimulate
              communication and collaboration between experts, advanced graduate students,
              and young researchers in identifying key ideas, new advances, and open
              questions in the mathematical analysis of spatiotemporal patterns in
              dissipative systems.  Topics of interest include stability, bifurcation, and
              dynamics of patterns, reduction of governing equations, and the role of
              symmetry.  The presentations and roundtable discussions will stimulate further
              theoretical and applied investigations in pattern formation and analysis. The
              extremely rapid pace of developments in the science of patterns, identified as
              one of the six grand challenges for physics in a new era, lends urgency to the
              goals of the workshop. 
