Title       : Collaborative Research: Anabranching Channels in Jointed Bedrock: An Integrated
               Flume and Field Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0228853

Award Number: 0228853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen E. Wohl ellenw@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0228853
Wohl
Our primary research objective is to quantitatively describe the
              interplay of the processes and rates of change in bedrock channels formed on
              jointed, resistant rock with particular reference to anabranching rivers. An
              anabranching river reach has multiple channels that branch and rejoin and are
              separated by surfaces that are dry or rarely flooded. We will use flume
              experiments and field studies of the Orange River in South Africa to explore
              the relationship of channel geometry developed on jointed, resistant rock to
              sediment discharge, lithology, tectonic regime, and joint spacing. The flume
              experiments and fieldwork will allow us to determine the conditions under which
              anabranching bedrock channels form and persist. Multiple substitutions of
              variables, accomplished by space substitution in the field and run design in
              the flume, will allow us to directly infer the relative influences of each
              variable.

By conducting a systematic examination with experimental and field
              studies, we will increase our ability to establish cause and effect. This will
              benefit studies of bedrock rivers in general by directly contributing to the
              ability to parameterize bedrock channel processes, and ultimately the ability
              to model landscape evolution. Furthermore, we will use this project as an
              opportunity to train young scientists and to foster scientific and cultural
              exchange between South Africa and the United States. Graduate students will be
              integral parts of the research program and we will work collaboratively with
              colleagues in South Africa and from Wales. The graduate students will gain
              important scientific and cultural knowledge, we will gain valuable
              international experience, and our South African and Welsh colleagues will gain
              international exposure through our work.

