Title       : HPNC: Colorado School of Mines High Performance Network Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0228912

Award Number: 0228912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip R. Romig promigjr@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clare M. McCabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Squier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franklin Schowengerdt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 4088      High Perf Netwk Connect-SciEng
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Colorado School of Mines (CSM) is a special-purpose university that does
              internationally recognized science and engineering research while maintaining a
              nationally acclaimed commitment to engineering education.  In support of the
              needs of its researchers, CSM is planning a high performance network connection
              (HPNC).  CSM proposes to make a connection to Internet2's Abilene Network
              through the Front Range GigaPop to achieve this objective. Five research
              projects, each which would significantly benefit from a HPNC are described in
              this proposal:   
The Squier Group, led by Dr. Jeff Squier, focuses on three
              dimensional nonlinear microscopy and optical histology. 
The Center for
              Commercial Applications of Combustion in Space (CCACS), led by Dr. Frank
              Schowengerdt, conducts research in scientific areas related to combustion with
              a special focus on those areas where the results can be applied to the
              development of commercial products and processes and where the research can
              benefit from the unique properties of space. 
Dr. Panos Kiousis performs
              research involving the modeling of high strength concrete structures when
              subjected to static, cyclic, and dynamic excitations such as strong earthquake
              motions. 
The McCabe Group, headed by Dr. Clare McCabe performs research on
              molecular modeling and computational chemistry. 
The OpenChem Workbench
              Project (Dr. Glenn Murray and Dr. J. Thomas McKinnon) plans to expand into real
              time collaboration on chemical modeling. 

