Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Determinants of Scapegoat-selection in Zimbabwe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0228412

Award Number: 0228412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald F. Murray murray@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0228412
Murray / Rodlach
With more than 25% of the adult population estimated
              to be infected, Zimbabwe has one of the highest rates of HIV-infection in the
              world. In assigning blame for AIDS, people frequently argue about causes of the
              epidemic over which they have virtually no pragmatic control (poverty,
              conspiracies emanating from others, negligence on the part of their political
              leaders, etc.). In contrast, those working in the field of HIV/AIDS awareness
              and prevention highlight biomedical causes (sexual behavior, mother-to-child
              transmission, and blood-transfusions). This contrast is striking and
              problematic. The objective of this dissertation research in cultural
              anthropology is to document the direction and inner logic of such folk causal
              explanations in Zimbabwe and to test hypotheses on the factors leading
              different subgroups within society to invoke different explanations. Five
              hypotheses will be tested: (i) the more dissatisfied an individual is with the
              current politics, the more he/she will blame political forces for HIV/AIDS;
              (ii) the lower the socio-economic status of the individual, the more he/she
              blames the wealthy for HIV/AIDS; (iii) the more an individual perceives common
              strategies for HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention as blaming the victim, the
              greater will be the tendency to blame the medical profession for HIV/AIDS; (iv)
              the more an individual is experiencing a split between his/her values and
              beliefs and their actual practice, the more he/she blames the guardians of the
              value and belief system (God and the ancestors) for HIV/AIDS; and (v) the more
              intimate the network to which one belongs, the more he/she expresses belief in
              sorcery and points at other members of his/her social network as the cause of
              HIV/AIDS.  Data will be collected (assisted by local residents and sociology
              faculty and students from the University of Zimbabwe) during a 12 month period
              of field research in an urban township in Zimbabwe. The project will interview
              samples of township residents, engage them in focus group discussions, do
              in-depth ethnographic probes of selected households, analyze messages in the
              mass-media on HIV/AIDS prevention, and survey a representative sample of the
              township in order to gather date to test the hypotheses. 
This research will
              evaluate theoretical concepts to interpret folk-explanatory models for
              undesirable events for the southern African context, shedding light on their
              cross-cultural variability. The broader impacts of advancing knowledge about
              the popularly assumed causes for the AIDS epidemic and the explanation of these
              dynamics of causal attribution and of processes of scapegoat-selection are
              their importance for medical and development officers designing effective AIDS
              prevention and awareness messages. This research will enable them to tailor
              their messages and programs to fit their audience and consequently improve
              their effectiveness. The project also contributes to the training of a young
              social scientist.

