Title       : Multiscale Preconditioning of BEM Equations for Electrostatic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9521001

Award Number: 9521001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Levin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ECS-9521001  Levin    The objective of this project is to create sparse
              approximations of the fully populated boundary element matrices that one
              obtains using integral formulations like charge simulation or surface charge
              simulation.  These well known numerical schemes are used to find the electric
              field on and near high voltage devices like guard rings, insulator strings, and
              transformers.    The sparse approximations are formed by a similarity transform
              of the coefficient matrix.  The cost of the one employed here is of optimal
              order N .  Nonetheless, the benefits of computing with a sparse matrix
              typically do not justify the costs of creating it unless the problem has
              multiple right hand sides (that is, one wants to simulate multiple excitation
              modes).    This project will attempt to quantify the advantage of wavelet-based
              similarity transforms and suggest practical ways in which they can be employed.
               The proposal suggests that for large problems with thousands of unknowns there
              may be an immediate advantage in working in the wavelet basis because of the
              dramatic reduction in disk access; the costs of the transform might be
              recovered more quickly than previously thought.    Additionally, there are
              attractive ways of economically creating sparse approximations of the inverse
              matrix.  These are the best kinds preconditioners for iterative solvers like
              generalized conjugate gradients and GMRES.  Preconditioners can dramatically
              reduce the number of iterations required to achieve a particular tolerance. 
              So, not only do sparse approximations reduce the cost of each iteration
              (linearly by the sparsification), they can be used to reduce the number of
              iterations as well.  Investigating different preconditioning alternatives
              constitutes the second objective of the proposal.    Of course the most
              interesting possibility offered by wavelet bases is that of creating a sparse
              coefficient matrix without suffering the expense of the similarity
              transformation.  The third part of the project will be devot ed to integrating
              these bases into a previously existing boundary element package and producing
              the sparse systems directly.                  3
