Title       : An Integrated Compiler-Runtime Approach to Software Distributed Shared Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1996     
File        : a9521735

Award Number: 9521735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willy Zwaenepoel willy@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research effort focuses on an integrated compiler-runtime  approach to
              support software distributed shared memory (DSM).  The goal is to achieve
              performance close to hand-tuned message  passing programs while still
              presenting the user with a shared  memory programming model. The work is
              primarily directed towards  "networks of workstations", but it is also
              applicable to  dedicated distributed memory machines like the IBM SP-2. 
              Notwithstanding advances in the design and implementation of  software DSM
              systems over the last few years, message passing has  remained the most
              commonly used method for programming  distributed memory machines, because
              message passing systems, in  general, perform better than DSM systems.    This
              proposal addresses this issue by building an integrated  compiler-runtime DSM
              system, including the optimization of  explicitly parallel shared memory
              programs through compiler  analysis.  Specifically, the ability of the compiler
              to predict  access patterns, rather than merely react to them as the runtime 
              system does, will allow prefetching and aggregation of messages,  and will
              avoid unnecessary data movement and consistency actions.    The work will be
              based on the TreadMarks DSM system developed at  Rice.  The proposed work will
              contribute to the better  utilization of networks of workstations and, more
              generally,  distributed memory machines for parallel computing. Earlier work 
              on TreadMarks has already contributed to that goal, in that it  has produced
              one of the most advanced runtime systems for DSM,  that has been used by other
              researchers for work in computational  genetics, mixed integer programming, and
              seismic modeling.  ***
