Title       : Studies of Humidity-Induced Stiction in MEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9521288

Award Number: 9521288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao Cheng Zeng xzeng1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Payne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig J. Eckhardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis J. Diestler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. DiMagno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9521288  Zeng  The overall aim t his University-Industry GOALI project is to
              eliminate or reduce "stiction", the adhesion of microscopic surfaces present in
              micromachined microelectronic systems (MEMS), which can result in the
              malfunctioning of such system.  Humidity-induced stiction is of particular
              concern.  We propose to alleviate the problem by coating the MEMS surfaces with
              an organic film having the property that two such coated surfaces repel one
              another on close approach.  The surfaces therefore cannot adhere but remain
              hydrophobic.  The project, which involves a collaboration among physical
              scientist a the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UN-L) and engineers at Analog
              Devices, Inc. of Waltham, MA, will be divided into four phases:  1) Organic
              chain molecules that have an embedded polar group with an effective dipole
              moment projecting parallel to the molecular long axis will be synthesized. 
              These molecules will be covalently bonded to the polysilicon substrates that
              make up the bare MEMS elements, sot hat a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) with a
              net dipole moment normal to the surface will cover the substrate.  Two such
              coated surfaces will repel each other.  (2) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and
              chemical force microscopy (CFM) will be used to determine the quality of the
              SAM's and toe measure the forces of adhesion and friction between SAM-coated
              substrates.  (3) Monte Carlo computer simulations of model SAMs will elucidate
              the molecular mechanism of stiction that operate in real dipolar SAMs. 
              Feedback from phases (2) and (3) will guide the design of "smart" SAM coatings
              being synthesized in phase (1).  The possible detrimental effects of humidity
              will also be assessed.  (4) The testing of candidate SAMs in an actual MEMS,
              the ADXL50 accelerometer, will be accomplished by means of standard drop,
              shock-survival and electrical-capture tests at Analog Devices.
