Title       : U.S.-National Committee for CODATA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9521481

Award Number: 9521481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Blanpied                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Uhlir puhlir@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5984      OFFICE OF TRANS-REGIONAL AFFAI
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9217,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                l                 C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                       l     
               l                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       '   (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                ***
              INT-9521481 Uhlir  The globalization of since is occurring in parallel with a
              rapid extension in the speed and sophistication of information and data
              handling technologies, and in their uses for scientific purposes.  Developments
              in these areas permit the planning and execution of large scale scientific
              programs.  Such programs, in turn, frequently require sophisticated data
              handling and processing techniques.  In view of the multilateral character of
              many large scale scientific programs, the handling, processing, and
              transmission of scientific data has become a major international enterprise in
              its own right, one that is vital to those scientific programs.  The Committee
              on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) is a non-governmental, multilateral
              body affiliated with the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). 
              The principal objective of CODATA is to facilitate worldwide communication on
              problems relevant to scientific data.  Like other members of the ICSU family,
              CODATA is comprised of non-governmental National Member Organizations.  The
              National Academy of Sciences (NAS) fulfill s that function in the United
              States.  This award will provide partial support to the NAS to continue to
              manage U.S. participation in CODATA, including partial payment of dues to
              CODATA and partial support of the activities of the U.S. National Committee. 
              Additional support is also being sought from several other federal agencies: 
              DOE, NASA, NIH, and NIST.  ***                         ;                       
                                                    Oh     +'  0                             
                       $       H       l                             S u m m a r y I n f o r
              m a t i o n                           (                                        
                        &                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        D       h                                            
                    R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       ***  
                                            Elena R. Padron                     Elena R.
              Padron             @     W l                           @                       
                         @     W l                                                           
                                                     @    F #                                
                 Microsoft Word 6.0                                                      1   
                                                                                             
                 ;                                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            e
              =       e                                                                      
                      j       j   j       j       j       j       j                          
                                                          R   1                              
                                                                                             
                  4           T       5   R                       j                          
                                                            R               j       j        
                                                                            j               j
                                                    ~               j       j       j       j
                                        3                                                    
                                                          *** INT-9521481 Uhlir  The
              globalization of since is occurring in parallel with a rapid extension in the
              speed and sophistication of information and data handling technologies, and in
              their uses for scientific purposes.  Developments in these areas permit the
              planning and execution of large scale scientific programs.  Such programs, in
              turn, frequently require sophisticated data handling and processing techniques.
               In view of the multilateral character of many large scale scientific programs,
              the handling, processing, and transmission of scientific data has become a
              major international enterprise in its own right, one that is vital to those
              scientific programs.  The Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA)
              is a non-governmental, multilateral body affiliated with the International
              Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).  The principal objective of CODATA is to
              facilitate worldwide communication on problems relevant to scientific data. 
              Like other members of the ICSU family, CODATA is comprised of non-governmental
              National Member Organizations.  The National Ac
