Title       : Environmental Regulation and Labor Demand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9521890

Award Number: 9521890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146688             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eli Berman eli@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Bui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1094,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the effects of environmental  regulation on the
              demand for labor.  The changes that these  regulations induce in the technology
              of production will affect  labor demand in the manufacturing sectors of the
              developed world  and in the rapidly growing manufacturing sectors of the 
              developing world.    Worldwide growth in manufacturing output and trade has
              prompted  concern for the effect of economic growth on environmental  quality. 
              Regulatory stringency is expected to increase in both  the developed and the
              developing world.  Arguments against  regulation are often framed in terms of a
              tradeoff between jobs  and environmental quality.  The investigators argue that
              existing  estimates of the effect of investment in pollution abatement on 
              labor demand are conflicting and subject to a number of biases.  Estimates of
              job loss provided by economists are likely to be  biased downwards, as much of
              the observed investment is conducted  in anticipation of regulatory change by
              firms who face low  compliance costs.  Estimates of job loss provided by firms
              are  likely to be biased upwards, as they ignore the effect that the  same
              regulatory changes will have on their competitors prices for  output.    This
              project will provide estimates of the effect of regulation  on labor demand
              free of these biases.  The selection bias will be  treated by using regulatory
              as instrumental variables, thus  restricting attention to firms forced to
              invest in pollution  abatement by regulatory changes.  The upward bias in
              firms'  estimates is addressed by separately estimating the output 
              elasticities of labor demand and the marginal rate of technical  substitution
              between pollution abatement capital and labor.      Data on state and local
              regulatory changes will be combined with  plant level data on pollution
              abatement investment and on  employment from the Census of Manufactures to
              provide estimates.  To ensure that the instruments have explanatory power,
              additional  data will be collected on s harp changes associated with two 
              regulatory programs: The South Coast Air Quality Management  District in
              Southern California and the Delaware River Basin  project.  Estimated effects
              will inform policy makers about how  large the tradeoff really is between
              environmental quality and  manufacturing jobs.  ***
