Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Converting the Industrial Assets of Cold War
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1995   
File        : a9521699

Award Number: 9521699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann R. Markusen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Converting the Industrial Assets of Cold War
              Science    Under the direction of  Dr. Ann Markusen, Mr. Jonathan Feldman is
              examining the barriers and opportunities for conversion in firms which
              primarily serve the military.  The most successful defense projects are led by
              managers able to forge links among engineering experience, insiders and
              exposure to outside commercial experiences such as civilian production culture.
               Defense cutbacks and supporting regimes spark diversification in these firms. 
              Defense procurement creates capacities for civilian market entry through
              economies of scope, such capacities for diversification can be extended by
              reorganizing resources through separatimn, the development of common systems
              and the creation of institutions which facilitate technology transfer among
              divisions.  Such institutions include systems for forging cooperation within
              the firm.  Successful projects which exploit these strategies benefit from
              learning by doing, relatedness between new products and old defense or newly
              acquired commercial capacities and the existence of a collaborative system
              which forces engineers to design for civilian needs.   The collaborative system
              often is linked to external users who help build markets for defense firms.  To
              test the hypotheses and develop a theory of the changing institutional
              requirements of developing defense nurtured financial, research and
              manufacturing capacities for civilian use, Mr. Feldman is studying a number of
              defense firms and case studies of defense contractors and their key civilian
              projects.
