Title       : Density Functional Theory of Electronic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9521353

Award Number: 9521353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Perdew perdew@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9521353  Perdew  This grant is being made to support theoretical research on 
              the electronic structure of atoms, molecules and solids.  The goal of the
              research is to improve methods and concepts  of the density functional and
              pseudopotential theories  through the following projects: (1) The
              exchange-correlation  hole around an electron, describing the tendency of 
              electrons to stay apart, is somewhat transferable from one  system to another. 
              For an electron gas of uniform density,  the hole will be analyzed by spin and
              by interelectronic  spatial separation. (2) An Oon-top holeO explanation will
              be  given for the success of the local spin density and  generalized gradient
              approximations in OnormalO systems.  Exact or nearly exact holes in atoms and
              molecules will be  used to test the strengths and weaknesses of these 
              approximations. (3) Systematic local spin density and  genralized gradient
              approximation calculations will be  undertaken for the elemental solids.  Local
              spin density and  generalized gradient approximation energies will be analyzed 
              by reduced density gradients.  (4) To complete the liquid  drop model for a
              charged metallic cluster, the quantum  contribution to the size effect for the
              ionization energy  will be evaluated.  (5) A local electron-ion 
              pseudopotential, combining simplicity with realism, has been  constructed from
              solid state electron densities,  Tests and  applications will include
              calculation of phonon frequencies  and OuniversalO phase diagrams for simple
              metals under  pressure. (6) In a quest for Ochemical accuracy,O hybrid  methods
              will be developed by combining density functionals  for short-range
              correlations with wavefunction methods for  long-range. (7) The density
              gradient expansion of the  kinetic energy will be tested and convergently
              resummed,  leading to a simple Oorder-NO method of electronic structure 
              calculation.  %%%  Numerical and analytical techniques will be used to develop,
               test and apply new methods to calculate the properties of  the electr onic
              structure of atoms, molecules and  particularly, solids.   The results of this
              work could have  a wide-ranging impact on researchers using these methods to 
              calculate  a wide variety of material properties related to  the electronic
              structure.  ***
