Title       : Low Energy Ion Scattering and Scanning Tunneling Microscope Studies of the
               Nucleation and Growth of Islands on Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9521392

Award Number: 9521392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Stanley Williams rsw@argon.chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9521392  Williams    The phenomena of nucleation and growth of metals and
              metalloid islands  (Ni,  Ag, In, Sn, Sb, and Te), on semiconductor surfaces
              (Si) will  be  investigated.  Techniques of Time-of Flight Low Energy Ion 
              Scattering  will  be  used  to measure the coverage of the surface islands 
              during  material  deposition to obtain kinetic information. Scanning Tunneling 
              Microscopy (STM) will provide spatial information such as shape,  size  and 
              densities  of the islands, which can be related to  thermodynamic  properties
              of the system. The experimental data will be compared  with  computer 
              simulations  to  determine growth  mechanisms  and  physical  parameters, 
              especially surface diffusion constants and line  tensions  for  different
              adsorbates.  Materials with a broad range of properties  and behaviors have
              been selected. STM will also provide information on  the  size dependence of
              the electronic property of the islands and the  unique properties of supported
              clusters.  %%%  The  ultimate objective in this research is to understand the 
              kinetic  and  thermodynamic  processes of nucleation and  growth  so  that  the
               formation of an optimized structure of dots, lines, and/or planes  can  be 
              guided  through  control of deposition parameters  such  as  flux,  fluence and
              substrate temperature. The selected Materials have a broad  range  of 
              properties and behaviors. Techniques of Time-of Flight  Low  Energy Ion
              Scattering will provide information on the coverage of  the  surface   islands 
              during  material  deposition  to   obtain   kinetic  information. Scanning
              Tunneling Microscopy (STM) will be used to study  spatial  information such as
              shape, size and densities of the islands,  which  can  be related to
              thermodynamic properties of the system.  The  experimental data will be
              compared with computer simulations  data  to  determine   growth  mechanisms 
              and  physical  parameters,  especially  surface diffusion constants and line
              tensions for different adsorbates  STM  will  also  p rovide  information on
              the size  dependence  of  the  electronic  property  of  the islands and  the 
              unique  properties  of  supported clusters.  ***
