Title       : Global Environmental Assessment Team
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a9521910

Award Number: 9521910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1999808            (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Clark william_clark@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              As part of an NSF Consortium for Research on the Human Dimensions of Global
              Change, this award provides support for a collaborative study of global
              environmental assessment.  This team effort is based at Harvard University's
              Kennedy School of Government but involves scholars from Carnegie-Mellon,
              Cornell, and Duke Universities, and from the International Institute for
              Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA).  The goal of this project is to improve
              society's ability to integrate science-based assessments in the progressive
              development, implementation, and evaluation of responses to large-scale,
              long-term problems of global environmental change.  The team conducts empirical
              and conceptual research, drawing on a variety of disciplinary perspectives, to
              advance understanding of how assessment is done, how it interacts with
              policy-making, politics, and negotiations, and how assessment practice could
              more usefully contribute to effective social management of global environmental
              change.  The team seeks to develop more realistic models of relationships among
              assessment, policy making and management of global change, avoiding
              conventional views of assessment-policy relationships as linear and static, and
              uses these models to critique and improve current practice.  Each year, the
              team recruits an international group of pre- and post-doctoral fellows, with
              backgrounds in both social and natural sciences.  Fellows spend a year engaged
              in research on environmental assessment and policy, principally in residence at
              Harvard's Center for Science and International Affairs but with significant
              periods at the other member institutions.  The team adopts one major focus each
              year -- either assessment experience on a particular global environmental
              issue, or a particular conceptual approach to the study and criticism of
              assessment.  A one-week summer institute each year brings together all faculty
              and fellows for an intensive period of collaborative work drawing together the
              year's work, and producing a monograph for publication.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
