Title       : Excitation-Emission Microspectrofluorometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1997      
File        : a9521478

Award Number: 9521478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elli Kohen ekohen@umiami.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to add excitation fluorescence spectroscopy  capability to
              present microspectrofluorometer with  capabilities for topographic and emission
              fluorescence  spectral scans. Thefluorescence excitation attachment will  be
              based on a spinning         multizone disk, prepared with  a series of
              alternate light and dark areas such that, as a  function of radius, there will
              be different numbers of  alternations at different distances from the center.
              As the  spectrum of the dispersion element is focused on the disk,  it will be
              modulated (coded) according to wavelength (i.e.  excitation wavelength interval
              divided into n 100  nm  bands). The resulting coded excitation light falls on
              the  object  to be studied. Thus it will be possible to build an 
              excitation-emission matrix (EEMS) of the fluorescence, a  powerful method to
              study  complex  multi-emission  spectra.  Both  the  theory and practice of
              building such EEMS has  been tested, the latter in cultured fibroblasts treated
              with  the fluorescent carcinogenic hydrocarbon  benzo(a)pyrene  -  (BP).  It 
              is  proposed  that  the usefulness  and  applications  of  the  proposed 
              apparatus  be  investigated in fibroblasts treated with BP metabolized  through
              the cytochrome P450 detoxification system,  daunorubicin extruded through the
              P-glycoprotein-mediated  MDR (multidrug-resistance) pathway, or a fluorescent 
              molecule such as mMSA. The observed         excitation-  emission  changes  may
               relate  to  intracellular  metabolization, interactions, binding or quenching
              of the  drug, as well as its elimination by conjugation or  extrusion.        
              The microspectrofluorometer complemented  to that purpose will also provide
              real time processing of  data enabling alterations of the experimental design
              in the  course of observations. Thus a system of experimentation  will be
              produced which is rapidly           responsive to  the changes provoked in the
              cell.                     NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)     3
