Title       : CAREER: Crustal Cracking along Multi-Segment Portions of the Juan de Fuca Ridge
               and its Relation to Ridge Segmentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9521039

Award Number: 9521039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Shor                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawn J. Wright dawn@dusk.geo.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9521039  Wright    This project is supported under the NSF Faculty Early
              Career  Development (CAREER) Program. It provides support over four years  for
              a new Oregon State University faculty member, Dr. Dawn Wright,  to develop new,
              interdisciplinary courses in the marine and  geological sciences, to promote
              scientific careers to;  undergraduate and high school students, and to carry
              out a two-  pronged research program in different aspects of marine geophysics.
               The first part of the proposed research focusses on a study of the 
              geophysical development of the Tonga forearc, a region formed in  response to
              ocean crust subduction and characterized by uplift of  volcanoes and deep ocean
              crustal material west of the Tonga trench  in the western Pacific Ocean.  This
              study will be carried out in  collaboration with Dr. Sherman Bloomer, Chair of
              the Oregon State  University Department of Geoscience. The second focus of Dr. 
              Wright's research will be the investigation of crustal faulting and  fissuring
              along the Juan de Fuca Ridge, a highly active ocean  spreading center located
              offshore western North America from  northern California to Canada.  This part
              of the project will  include the integration of several existing data sets of
              side-scan  sonar and photographic data along the spreading axis to define the 
              distribution and characteristic of cracks developed in response to  the
              stresses involved in ocean crust formation.  Understanding the  distribution,
              length and shape of these cracks will improve our  understanding of the
              mechanisms involved in sea floor spreading;  study of the Juan de Fuca Ridge
              expands on Dr. Wright's study of  the processes of crack formation on the East
              Pacific Rise, a  faster-rate spreading center further south in the eastern
              Pacific.  The Juan de Fuca Ridge region is a highly active area seismically, 
              with numerous earthquake reported annually.  Dr. Wright will be  working on
              this project in collaboration with researcher at the  Hatfield Marine Center in
              Newport, Oregon,  and will integrate her  study of crack distribution with the
              ongoing study of earthquakes  on the Juan de Fuca carried out at Hatfield
              Center.  The research  program on Juan de Fuca Ridge tectonics will be
              integrated into new  courses developed for graduate and undergraduate
              education, and  will allow a hands-on introduction to research techniques to 
              students at Oregon State University.
