Title       : Nonadiabatic Molecular Dynamics in Condensed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1998   
File        : a9521793

Award Number: 9521793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324900             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Coker coker@chem.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Coker is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research in nonadiabatic   molecular dynamics
              in condensed systems.  Coker is combining    nonadiabatic switching formalism
              with surface hopping theory to study   energy redistribution between quantum
              and classical subsystems.  This has   resulted in a new approach for treating
              nonadiabatic dynamics in   condensed phase systems.  Additional new methods
              will be developed for   simulating systems with few nonadiabatic quantum
              degrees of freedom in   the presence of a classical bath degrees of freedom. 
              Applications which   explore nuclear nonadiabaticity include: 1) studies of the
              effects of   solvent density on the nonadiabatic rotational dynamics of
              hydrogen   molecule in solution and the influence they have on rotational Raman
                linewidths; 2) the influence of nonadiabatic dynamics and tunneling on  
              transport of hydrogen molecule in ice; and 3) studies of solution phase  
              intermolecular proton transfer reactions and the effects of solvent  
              polarization and planarity on tunneling and nonadiabaticity of proton  
              dynamics.  Electronic nonadiabaticity in solution phase reactions will be  
              studied by the introduction of a semi-empirical valence bond approach   called
              diatomics in molecules.  This approach will be used to study early   time
              nonadiabatic dynamics after photoexcitation of diatomic iodine,   diatomic
              iodine anion, and methyl iodide in various molecular solvents.  Since most
              industrial synthetic processes occur in solution, it is   important to gain an
              increased understanding of the influence which   solvent has on fundamental
              chemical processes in solvated systems   including molecular transport, proton
              transfer, and electronic   excitation.  This theoretical research will lead to
              an improved   understanding of the factors which influence chemical reactions
              in   solution.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
