Title       : Adaptive Identification and Control of Dynamical Systems Using Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9521405

Award Number: 9521405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kumpati S. Narendra kumpati.narendra@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The fundamental processes involved in controlling a dynamical system include the
               mathematical modeling of the system, identification based on experimental
              data, processing of the  outputs, and using them in turn to synthesize control
              inputs to achieve desired behavior.  The aim of  automatic control is to
              achieve the latter rapidly, accurately, and  in a stable fashion.  The problem 
              of controlling a known linear plant with multiple inputs and multiple outputs
              is a difficult one.  When the parameters of such systems are unknown, the
              problem is considerably more difficult, and  adaptive control is needed.  The
              difficulty is substantially grater when the plant is known but  nonlinear. 
              When the plant is nonlinear with unknown characteristics, we have a nonlinear
              adaptive  control problem which is truly formidable.  In numerous application
              in new areas such as space  technology, manufacturing, and robotics, as well as
              established areas such as process control and  aircraft control, such problems
              are arising with increasing frequency.  The proposal deals with  theoretical
              and practical aspects  of the control of such systems using neural networks. 
              The first  part of this work will deal with the representation problem of non
              linear systems and the existence of  controller for them.  In the second part,
              questions related to the choice of neural networks as  identifiers and
              controllers will be addressed.  The third part will deal with the important
              question  of stability.  In the fourth part, a detailed study of control using
              multiple models will be carried  on.  Empirical studies carried out in the past
              three years suggest that such a control methodology  based on multiple models
              is needed to cope efficiently with rapid changes in the environment.  The  four
              part of the proposal represents four of the important aspects of nonlinear
              adaptive control using  neural networks.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
