Title       : U.S.-Indo Cooperative Research Logic Programming: Analysis, Transformations, and
               Principles, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9521076

Award Number: 9521076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6600               (Estimated)
Investigator: R. K. Shyamasundar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tata Inst of Fund Res
	      
	      Bombay, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9521076  SHYAMASUNDAR  Description:    This proposal will provide linkage
              support  for a   collaboration between Deepak Kapur, Department  of Computer 
              Science, State University of New York, Albany  and R.K.  Shyamasundar,
              Theoretical Computer Science  Group, Tata Institute  of Fundamental Research
              (TIFR), Bombay, India.   The focus of this  project is the study and analysis
              of logic  programs with emphasis  on termination of sequential and concurrent 
              programs.  The  initial theoretical investigations will  concentrate on proving
               termination of a logic program for a query,  developing semantic-  preserving
              transformations to improve  efficiency of logic  programs, and identifying
              conditions under  which the occur-check  can be omitted in a logic programming
              language  interpreter.   Software tools will be developed to implement 
              theoretical results  and are expected to promote the design of  elegant and
              efficient  logic programs.   Scope:  The P.I.s are well-known senior 
              scientists with  complimentary research interests.  Kapur and  his group are 
              accomplished in the area of automated deduction  and term  rewriting systems
              and have developed an  extremely powerful  theorem prover, Rewrite Rule
              Laboratory.   Shyamasundar is well-  known for his research in theoretical
              computer  science,  particularly in the area of logic programming  and
              semantics of  real-time and concurrent programming.  Computer  science is an 
              area of exceptional strength in India and many  mutual benefits can be expected
              to result from  this collaboration.    ***
