Title       : Dissertation Research: Tiger, Tiger, Burning Out? The Science, Policy and
               Politics of Tiger Preservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9521562

Award Number: 9521562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Braybrooke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1305,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research will examine sources of conflict and dynamics of
              change in international species protection policy, by examining Project Tiger,
              an effort to save the Bengal tiger by the government of India, the World Wide
              Fund for Nature (WWF), the World Conservation Union (IUCN), and a cadre of
              wildlife biologists and ecologists from India, the Smithsonian Institution, and
              the Species Survival Commission (SSC).  The award will allow the dissertation
              student to spend eight months in India collecting administrative, archival and
              interview information from three Project Tiger sanctuaries.  The early 1970s
              saw the exclusion of villagers from new tiger sanctuaries, a policy consistent
              with the views of many ecologists and with established forestry policy in
              India.  This strategy caused conflict among the groups that make preservation
              policy as well as between villagers, park wardens, and tigers.  Over time, the
              policy was reevaluated and new strategies and policies have emerged.  This
              research uses a logic of rule analysis in conjunction with an issue-processing
              approach to understand the dynamics of policy change.  It sees policy failure
              as the result of conflict over principles, with the desire to resolve conflict
              providing a catalyst to change the principles so as to allow changes in
              policies and institutions.  The project identifies and examines situations
              where rules conflict and then change so as to allow resolutions to develop.  It
              provides a picture of a stage by stage process where changes in the description
              of a problem and the solutions to that problem can be identified and tracked,
              helping to identify not only the shifts in policy but also the locations where
              changes in institutions might be expected to occur.  Understanding these
              dynamics can challenge or support theoretical perspectives, illuminate the
              relationships between the state and society in the context of policy change,
              increase understanding of the role of scientific advisors in policy
              reformulation, and advance knowledge of institutional change.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
