Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Advanced Manufacturing and
               Packaging of Microwave, Optical and Digital Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9521645

Award Number: 9521645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roop L. Mahajan roop.mahajan@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9102,9148,9178,9231,9251,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              EEC-9521645  Mahajan    CAMPmode (Center for Advanced Manufacturing and
              Packaging of  Microwave, Optical and Digital Electronics), is establishing an
              NSF  Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) to conduct 
              interdisciplinary research in computer-aided designs, packaging and 
              manufacturing technologies needed for high quality, low cost  production of
              microwave/millimeter-wave, optical and digital  electronic systems.    The
              MIMICAD Center was established in 1988 at the University of  Colorado as an NSF
              Industry/University Cooperative Research  (I/UCRC) to provide a knowledge base
              for microwave/millimeter-wave  integrated system design methodologies and CAD
              tools.  Working  cooperatively with a number of defense oriented companies and 
              government organizations, the Center has been successful in  fulfilling its
              stated purpose.  Over the last few years, however,  the Center has been
              undergoing a change, just as its sponsoring  companies have been.  There is a
              perceptible shift in the defense  industry from military to commercial
              applications.  As a result, a  predominantly defense oriented R&D base in
              microwave electronics  must evolve into one with more balance between
              commercial and  defense applications.  A significant growth is expected in the 
              commercial applications which would require a synergistic  interaction of
              microwave/millimeter-wave technologies with high  speed digital and optical
              electronics.  However, effectiveness in  gaining a market share in these
              markets depends on the ability to  produce not only cost effective designs but
              very importantly high  quality, low cost packaging and manufacture of these
              electronic  systems.  To meet these evolving needs, MIMICAD members have merged
               with another industry consortium to form a new Center, CAMPmode.   This will
              facilitate closer cooperation between design, packaging  and manufacturing
              research.  This will broaden the expertise base  and provide enhanced value to
              customers in digital electronics,  optics and RF communica tion markets.    The
              Center will provide enhancements in curriculum through  development of
              cross-disciplinary courses, and provide students  valuable research training in
              this important technical area.    As part of the NSF-I/UCRC proposal, the
              Center requests support  from NSF towards a female undergraduate student in
              Electrical and  Computer Engineering.  The student will conduct research in the
               computational electromagnetics research group.
