Title       : Collaborative Research: On Estimating Behavior Determining Income When Response
               Is Subject to Error
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9521714

Award Number: 9521714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63423              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Bollinger prccrib@langate.gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The rate of participation in programs that provide an economic `safety net` has
              been widely used as a bellwether of program adequacy.  Improved design for
              income maintenance programs requires consistently-estimated models of behavior
              leading to participation in the program.  Estimates of participation
              probabilities from households surveys are biased by response error; hence,
              estimates of behavioral models of participation are also biased.  This fact
              motivates the research.  Administrative-level records have been matched to
              survey data from the Survey of Income and Participation Program (SIPP).  Extent
              of response error and models of response error conditioned on economic and
              demographic variables can be estimated from the match.  Models of program
              participation can then be correctly estimated, accounting for response errors. 
              The initial focus of this research is on two programs:  Food Stamps (FS) and
              Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC).  Improved models of
              participation in these programs will afford better understanding of populations
              not currently reached by the program.  Implications of program policy changes
              then can be more accurately predicted with the result that more efficient
              program designs can be developed.  The methodologies developed from this
              research can be generalized to other subjects and afford a way for many
              applications to adjust for error in household surveys.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
