Title       : 1996 NSF Design and Manufacturing Grantees Conference, January 3-5, 1996,
               Albuquerque, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9521669

Award Number: 9521669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ming C. Leu                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron Lumia lumia@me.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohsen Shahinpoor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Alzheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9521669  Lumia   This award is to conduct the annual NSF Design and
              Manufacturing Grantees Conference.  The conference will involve researchers
              from the Division of Design, Manufacture, and Industrial Innovation, the
              Division of Engineering Education and Centers and the Mechanics and Materials
              Program in the Division of Civil and Mechanical Structures, located within the
              Directorate for Engineering, the Division of Information, Robotics and
              Intelligent Systems, located within the Directorate for Computer and
              Information Science and Engineering and manufacturing related projects in the
              Division of Materials Research, located within the Directorate for Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences.  The conference ensures that the individual researchers
              are informed about the ongoing activities of their colleagues.  An elimination
              of duplication of their efforts may be achieved and a degree of cooperation may
              result from this activity.  An overall improvement of efficiency of the
              research activity could be expected.  In addition, the conference program
              organization allows for ample time to discuss manufacturing research in detail
              with the collective research community at the meeting, with feedback to and
              input from the National Science Foundation.  Finally personal contacts between
              the grantees and program directors in the Divisions should contribute to
              clarifying many current issues in their work.   The aims of the conference are
              to enhance communication between researchers, encourage joint research, promote
              synergism, and develop networks for technical interchange.  Attendees to the
              conference gain an early access to the information disseminated.  ***
