Title       : Processing and Devices for Integrated Optoelectronics in GaN and Related
               Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9521671

Award Number: 9521671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilesanmi Adesida adesida@capone.ccsm.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9102,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9521671  Adesida  Over the last decade, significant improvements in the
              development of the epitaxial growth of wide bandgap nitrides have yielded
              positive results.  Perhaps the most significant development in this yield has
              been the demonstration and commercialization of high luminosity blue LEDs. 
              These achievements have engendered a broad spectrum of research activities in
              various laboratories world wide.  The major  emphasis of these activities
              continues to be on epitaxial growth.  It is evident from literature that the
              excellent progress made in the growth of nitrides has not been accomplished by
              a commensurate progress in the processing methods that are required to turn
              these materials into devices.  Some of  the processing problems are
              sufficiently different from those of conventional III-V compound semiconductor
              materials, that the development of variable processing techniques for the
              fabrication of devices in the nitrides has become imperative .  Further, it is
              of cardinal importance to begin training the graduate students who will
              constitute the human resources needed in the future to manufacture the
              impressive array of  products that are envisaged from these materials.  Our
              proposal research is therefore motivated by the continued improvement in the
              growth of GaN and related compounds and the need to develop processing methods
              required to turn these materials into high performance devices and circuits. 
              The broad goals of  the proposed research are to provide new insights into the
              etching of III-V nitrides, to develop new methodologies for  the formation of
              ohmic and Schottky contacts on nitrides  , and to develop high performance
              optoelectronic integrated photoreceivers operating at UV wavelengths.  The
              specific objectives are to 1) develop and understand mechanism for highly
              anisotropic and "no-damage" etching processing suitable  for the fabrication of
              laser faucets and mirrors in the nitrides; 2) develop ohmic contacts with low
              contact resistance and to understand the mechanism of  contact formation ; 3)
              investigate Schottky barrier properties of refractory metals and silicides on
              the nitrides; and 4) fabricate and characterize metal-semiconductor-metal (MSM)
              photodetectors and GaN metal-semiconductor field-effect transistors (MESFETs)
              and to develop the technological basis for their integration.  The work will be
              done in collaboration with Dr. M. Asif Khan of APA Optics, Minneapolis, w ho
              will provide the epitaxial nitrides uses in the work.   ***
