Title       : Tight Polyhedral Relaxations for Discrete and Continuous Nonconvex Problems with
               Applications to Production, Distribution, and Design Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9521398

Award Number: 9521398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanif D. Sherali hanifs@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9521398  Sherali   This research is focused on the formulation and development
              of new solution techniques for discrete and continuous nonconvex programming
              problems. The research will revolve around a new
              Reformulation-Linearization-Technique (RLT) that has been developed for
              generating tight linear programming relaxations that can be used not only to
              construct exact solution algorithms, but also to design heuristic procedures
              for large classes of discrete combinatorial and continuos nonconvex programming
              problems. For linear mixed-integer 0-1 problems, a new hierarchy of relaxations
              is presented that provides a  framework for constructing a spectrum of
              continuous relaxations spanning from the linear programming relaxation to the
              convex hull representation. The hierarchy provides opportunity to exploit
              special structures such as generalized/variable upper bounds, covering,
              partitioning, packing constraints, and sparsity. The basic constructs of the
              scheme can also be extended to devise globally convergent procedures for
              continuous, nonconvex, polynomial programming problems. To effectively cope
              with the higher dimensional, large-scale representations that are typically
              generated by the RLT procedure, various constraint and variable/column
              generation strategies and Lagrangian dual approaches are suggested for
              investigation.  The developed algorithm will be tested on a host of problems
              drawn from distribution, design, telecommunication, production, and
              location-allocation problems.    The importance of having tight linear
              programming relaxations to enhance the effectiveness of algorithms for solving
              integer programming problems has long been recognized.  The potential impact of
              the outcome of this research is to provide a tool (the RLT) that can help unify
              concepts, generate new polyhedral results, and design effective algorithms
              along with provable good heuristics for hard, discrete and continuous,
              nonconvex problems that arise often in practice. This may lead to the
              development of general, pract   ical, RLT implementation strategies and promote
              its understanding sufficiently so as to facilitate its assimilation into public
              domain software. Common usage of such software will significantly improve the
              efficiency of usage of the technique. This will produce savings in cost in a
              host of applications.
