Title       : PEET: World Monograph of the Therevidae (Insecta: Diptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9521925

Award Number: 9521925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $715000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Irwin m-irwin2@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Yeates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Wiegmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1056,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9521925  Irwin  The Therevidae (Insecta: Diptera: Asiloidea) is a speciose group
              of flies inhabiting particularly fragile, xeric environments.  The family
              radiated in warm desert regions of the world, and its species are particularly
              abundant in Australia, western North America, southwestern South America, the
              Mediterranean area, and southwestern Africa.  Larvae are voracious predators of
              soil-dwelling arthropods.  Thus, these flies are critical to the functioning of
              natural and managed systems, are potential control agents of fossorial pests,
              and are probable indicators of environmental heterogeneity and productivity. 
              Yet, worldwide, the family Therevidae is among the poorest known and least
              understood of the flies because the larvae are difficult to locate and the
              adults are secretive, frequenting habitats rarely sampled.  The family contains
              an estimated 3,000 species worldwide, of which fewer than one-third have been
              described.  The poor state of knowledge of this family is a major constraint to
              its potential use for protecting agriculture and for gauging habitat health.  
              %%%  This grant proposes to further the task of comprehensively elucidating the
              world Therevidae.  The team that has been assembled is talented, complementary
              in function, and well integrated in approach.  The grant will create and
              manipulate comprehensive databases of specimen character, collection, and
              geographic information, produce monographic treatments of genera, initiate a
              higher level classification of the family, organize and disseminate knowledge
              contained in databases and monographs to targeted clientele, and educate five
              next-generation Diptera systematists through a combination of formal and
              informal training, including participation in field expeditions.  Molecular
              character sets will test and extend hypotheses derived from morphological
              character analyses.  Diskettes and CD-ROMs that contain descriptions and expert
              keys will be disseminated to museum curators.  A larger audience will be
              targeted for more ge neralized information through a home page on WWW, where
              anyone with access to the Internet can browse and learn about the Therevidae.  
              ***
