Title       : Theoretical Studies of Classical and Quantum Coherent Vortex States in Arrays of
               Mesoscopic Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9521845

Award Number: 9521845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge V. Jose jjv@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9521845  Jose  A variety of systems will be investigated theoretically  which
              impact modern condensed matter physics.  Problems to  be studied relate to
              glassy behavior in superconductors,  macroscopic quantum coherent phenomena,
              superconductor-  insulator transitions, and coherent oscillatory vortex 
              patterns.  These problems can be studied experimentally in a  unique OcleanO
              way in artificially fabricated Josephson  junction arrays.  Different types of
              collective vortex  ordering in these arrays will be investigated both in the 
              classical and, mostly, in the quantum regime.  The dynamic  response of
              Josephson junction arrays will be modeled by a  Langevin equation for the
              phases of the superconducting  order parameter and by MaxwellOs equations for
              the self-  induced fields.  Research will also be extended on the  response of
              mesoscopic systems with specially designed  geometries that have chaotic
              solutions in the classsical  limit.  These theoretical problems are motivated
              by  experiments and by the desire to expand our understanding of  previous
              theoretical predictions for the existence of novel  coherent vortex states. 
              The theoretical techniques to be  used include large scale classical and
              quantum Monte Carlo  simulations, renormalization group techniques, classical 
              dynamical systems theory, many-body techniques, path  integral methods,
              pseudo-spectral methods, and other  theoretical approaches deemed necessary. 
              Algorithms will be  developed for serial, vector and parallel platforms.  The 
              results of this study are likely to impact the field of  quantum effect
              electronics.  %%%  A theoretical and computational study will be made of 
              strongly interactiong microelectronic arrays.  These arrays  are excellent
              models for a variety of physical systems  including high temperature
              superconductors.  They also  exhibit chaotic behavior in certain regimes. 
              Besides  possessing model behavior, these arrays also serve as actual  devices
              which incorporate quantum effects at the  microelectronic scal e.  ***
