Title       : Conference: Frontiers of Electronic Commerce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1995 
File        : a9521672

Award Number: 9521672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Les Gasser                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Whinston abw@uts.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              IRI-9521672  Whinston, Andrew  University of Texas-Austin  $14,850 - 12 mos   
              Conference:  Frontiers of Electronic Commerce    The conference is aimed at
              pushing and provoking Electronic  Commerce research and practice to "go where
              no firm has ever  ventured before. "  Electronic commerce will render obsolete
              much  of the accumulated research in business.  Instead of  merely 
              transforming the way commerce is done today from a non-electronic  world to an
              electronic platform, the new way of commerce will  create and demand radical
              changes in the process, product and  promotion to better exploit the digital
              platform.    However, this emerging electronic market place is an unknown and 
              needs to be understood.  The goal is to use emerging technology  to create a
              business environment or infrastructure that will  ensure efficient electronic
              markets.  What does it take in terms  of new organization structures like the
              network structures  facilitated by smart and wireless messaging; new electronic
               institutions such as brokerages staffed by electronic brokers or  agent; new
              business processes better suited for mass  customization, global sourcing and
              logistic; new financial  payment mechanisms and mercantile protocols?    To
              achieve exploration and exploitation of new frontiers, we need  to integrate
              business concerns with the changing technology.  The  conference aims to
              provide this integration by bringing together  leading business researchers who
              specialize in the various facets  of electronic markets, namely economics,
              finance, marketing  production and operations management, and technology
              experts in  the industry who are creating the Electronic Commerce 
              infrastructure.  In addition, experts who specialize in the World  Wide Web
              browsers, electronic cash, encryption, software agents,  MIME-based messaging
              and EDI and Structured documents will be  invited.    The outcome of conference
              will be a better understanding of the  shape, structure, and operation of
              business in the coming  millennium.
