Title       : Planning Activities: Development of the Ohio River Environmental Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9521848

Award Number: 9521848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Bukaveckas   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Thorp  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Freshwater ecologists in the U.S.A. have long emphasized the  study of lentic
              and small lotic ecosystems; and as a  consequence, research has rarely been
              conducted on large  rivers.  Indeed, about 96% of all lotic studies have 
              involved headwater creeks to a few medium-sized rivers,  despite the fact that
              big rivers are perhaps the most  crucial, surface-water ecosystem for humans
              throughout the  world in terms of water supply and transport.  Although 
              aquatic ecologists generally acknowledge that much more  research is needed on
              large rivers, this has been difficult  to accomplish because of: (a) major
              logistical problems and  expenses associated with large river research: (b) 
              inadequate foundation data on which to base sophisticated  research proposals
              to funding agencies (especially NSF; and  (c) the severe shortage of field
              stations on large rivers as  operational centers for research and sites for
              long-term  environmental monitoring to support descriptive,  theoretical, and
              experimental studies.    The University of Louisville recently purchased
              riverfront  property located approximately one hour from the main campus 
              (upstream from Louisville in Westport, KY) on which to  establish the Ohio
              River Environmental Station (ORES) and  has received a gift from a national
              corporation to aid in  the renovation or construction of research facilities. 
              The  institution wishes to make ORES a preeminent site for large  river
              research on regional, national, and international  levels, especially as the
              research relates to management of  navigable regulated rivers.  ORES is located
              at an ideal  site where the Ohio changes from a river with a naturally- 
              constricted channel to a fllodplain river.    To further these goals, this
              project will support planning  and design of ORES.  The project will sponsor a
              workshop at  the University of Louisville to (1) refine the mission of  ORES;
              (2) discuss the organization, physical design, and  equipping of ORES; and (3)
              develop plans for the  establishment and impl ementation of an international 
              consortium of large river laboratories and field stations.  Three faculty
              members from the Biology Department at the  University of  Louisville will join
              5 aquatic ecologists  from other North American universities and 2 aquatic 
              scientists from overseas research laboratories at this  workshop.  Based on
              additional information gathered by the  P.I. and advice from participants in
              the workshop, the  master site plan, mission, and strategic objectives of ORES 
              will be finalized.  The University of Louisville will then  contract with an
              architectural firm for the final design of  the Ohio River Environmental
              Station site and buildings.
