Title       : A Structural Analysis of Sediment Subduction Off Nicaragua: Why the 10Be
               Anomaly?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9521717

Award Number: 9521717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81102              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Plank   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9521717  Plank  This collaboration among researchers at University of Kansas,
              Washington University and Rutgers University addresses the geological question
              of how subduction at a continental margin builds or erodes the continent.  More
              specifically, it addresses the question of how much ocean sediment is carried
              down beneath the continental margin compared to how much is plastered against
              the margin at the "subduction zone" offshore of Central America (Nicaragua and
              Costa Rica).  The three investigators will carry out a field program sampling
              volcanoes along the west coast of Central America, and they will analyze these
              rocks for 10Be, an isotope of beryllium which is known from earlier work to
              vary from high levels in Nicaragua volcanoes to low levels in volcanoes from
              nearby Costa Rica.  The high levels of 10Be are hypothesized to be a proxy
              indicator of the amount of young sediment which is scraped off of the oceanic
              crust and added to the continental margin as crust is subducted beneath the
              Middle America Trench.  The study here will examine volcanic rocks of various
              ages from Nicaragua and Costa Rica, and it will include investigation of the
              time variability of the Nicaragua-Costa Rica 10Be transition.  The project ties
              closely to planned scientific drilling by the NSF-supported, international
              Ocean Drilling Program ship JOIDES Resolution offshore Costa Rica in late 1996.
               That cruise will collect samples of sediments from beneath the continental
              slope to examine the direct evidence for subduction and accretion of sediments.
               A future drilling leg offshore Nicaragua to perform a similar study there is
              highly ranked by the JOIDES panels which set the JOIDES Resolution drilling
              program.  The Nicaragua-Costa Rica region is of particular interest in this
              regard because the contrast in 10Be signal here is nearly as large as that
              observed worldwide.  Because the high and low 10Be levels are so close
              geographically, it tightly constrains the number of variables aside from
              sediment accretion which  may be involved.  The project, therefore, can be
              expected to improve our understanding of the subduction process and the
              processes of continental growth from ocean crust subduction.  ***
