Title       : The Chemistry of the Multielectron Excited State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1997   
File        : a9521347

Award Number: 9521347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel G. Nocera   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research on multielectron oxidation-reduction processes   by
              Daniel G. Nocera of the Chemistry Department, Michigan State   University.  
              The long-term goal  is to develop detailed understanding of   the mechanism of
              multielectron processes in order to enable rational   design of reactions such
              as atom transfer and reductive elimination.     Reactions of metal-localized
              excited states of quadruply bonded   metal-metal complexes will be
              investigated.  Tungsten and molybdenum   complexes and mixed-valence binuclear
              rhodium fluorophosphine complexes   will be synthesized for use in the studies.
               The photoexcited   intermediates generated  will be characterized by
              picosecond and   nanosecond time-resolved excited state spectroscopy.    Solar
              photoconversion has great potential as an efficient means of   promoting
              complex chemical transformations which require movement of more   than one
              electron.  Such reactions occur in natural systems during   nitrogen fixation,
              but chemists have yet to understand the reaction   details well enough to be
              able to design reactions in which sunlight   rather than heat is used
              beneficially.  Much of what is known involves   one-electron processes.  This
              project will provide additional information   on reactions involving bond
              breaking and bond making, which are   fundamental to chemical transformations
              and generally involve multiple   electrons.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
