Title       : Carnegie Mellon Center for Integrated Study of the Human Dimensions of Global
               Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9521914

Award Number: 9521914
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6345259            (Estimated)
Investigator: Baruch Fischhoff bf0r@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Granger Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hadi Dowlatabadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Granger Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1093,1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              As part of an NSF Consortium for Research on the Human Dimensions of Global
              Change, this award supports the Center for Integrated Study of the Human
              Dimensions of Global Change.  The Center activities, coordinated through
              Carnegie-Mellon University, will be conducted by more than thirty researchers
              from fourteen institutions located in seven countries around the world.  The
              mandate of this Center is the systematic integration of global change research.
               Such a systematic integration can reveal new insights from the existing body
              of knowledge, help identify the neglected issues, and promote the necessary
              research.  While integrated analysis will form the core of the Center's
              efforts, this analysis will be supported with basic and applied research on
              selected issues of substance, theory, and methods.  This work will involve: 
              Descriptive and behavioral studies which aim to understand how humans perceive
              and behave in their environment, and normative and analytical studies which aim
              to characterize forces of change in the environment and evaluate alternative
              policy options.  In addition to research, the Center will be active in
              facilitating better communication between the public, students,
              decision-makers, and researchers.  In summary, the Center will:  1) Provide a
              single research framework within which to analyze and compare a variety of
              different aspects of global change; 2) Be a dynamic source of new research
              ideas and a stimulus for basic research activity on the human dimensions of
              global change; 3) Advance the state of the art of integrated research and
              modeling; 4) Facilitate greater collaboration between social and natural
              scientists on a cross-institutional and cross-national basis in the context of
              a shared analytical environment; 5) Provide an important vehicle for discourse
              on global change issues between researchers, the public, and key decision
              makers around the world; and 6) Provide innovative educational services to
              citizen groups, schools, universities, and decision-makers.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
