Title       : A Proposal to Support A Center for the Study ofInstitutions, Population, and
               Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a9521918

Award Number: 9521918
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7790480            (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio F. Moran moran@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elinor Ostrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1093,1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                As part of an NSF Consortium for Research on the Human Dimensions of Global
              Change, this award establishes a Center for the Study of Institutions,
              Population, and Environmental Change (CIPEC) at Indiana University.  CIPEC's
              primary focus is on a systematic, long-term study of deforestation and
              afforestation processes as mediated by institutions.  Three broad questions
              serve as central organizing themes for research:  (1) How is human behavior at
              household and community levels linked to regional and global change phenomena? 
              (2) How can macro-scale physical processes observed and modeled at a global
              level be linked to meso and micro human organizational and decision-making
              processes?  (3) How do institutional arrangements influence the direction and
              size of the impact of human driving forces, such as population and
              transportation networks, on forest ecosystems and global change?  These broad,
              overarching questions are addressed by specific projects that combine the
              efforts of social scientists, ecologists, and physical scientists working
              together on sustained, over-time research conducted in carefully selected sites
              using the best methods from the physical, biological, and the social sciences. 
              The Center draws on expertise from four existing Indiana University centers: 
              The Anthropological Center for Training and Research on Global Environmental
              Change (ACT), the Workshop in Political Theory and Analysis, the Midwestern
              Regional Center of the National Institute for Global Environmental Change
              (NIGEC), and the Population Institute for Research and Training (PIRT).  CIPEC
              also addresses the national need of training doctoral-level environmental
              social scientists in rigorous disciplinary methods and the development of
              interdisciplinary skills.  The Center has an international commitment to the
              training of mid-career scholars and professionals from a number of countries in
              recognition of the global nature of environmental change.  CIPEC will produce
              new discoveries and new knowledge that will both expand our understanding of
              the human dimensions of global change and influence the direction of research
              in the larger HDGC community.  In addition, CIPEC will foster both
              interdisciplinary research and multidisciplinary training in the human
              dimensions of global change.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
