Title       : Modeling of Disperse Multiphase Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1998   
File        : a9521374

Award Number: 9521374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Morris S. Ojalvo                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea Prosperetti prosperetti@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9521374    An Engineering description of multi-phase flows by
              necessity must be made on the basis of macroscopic equations in which the phase
              inhomogeneties are accounted for in an average sense, rather than in detail. 
              The difficulty in formulating the models resides in the fact that any averaging
              procedure applied to the fundamental equations of continuum mechanics leads to
              models containing more unknowns than equations.  The fundamental problem is
              then  that of closing the equation set, namely of determining "constitutive
              relations" that express some unknown quantities in terms of others.  This is
              the central theme of the proposed research for the case of disperse flows, such
              as particles in a fluid phase.    The problem will be attacked by relying on a
              new method for deriving averaged equations and on the state-of-the-art
              numerical direct-simulation techniques.  Both tools have been previously
              developed under NSF support.  The new averaging procedure expresses the unknown
              in terms of integrals over the particles surfaces that can readily be
              calculated from numerical simulations of the motion.  The computations will be
              carried out by means of a space-time finite-element method implemented on
              massively parallel supercomputers.  The insight into the structure of the
              equations that, if successful, will derive from this research promises to
              answer long-standing questions as to the mathematical structure of the
              equations and their relationship to observe phenomena.  The enhancement of the
              numerical techniques necessary to carry out this research constitutes in itself
              a significant advancement in the current direct numerical simulation
              capabilities.    This research will be carried out in conduction with Professor
              Tayfun Tezduyar of the University of Minnesota (Twin Cities) who has a separate
              grant from NSF.   ***
