Title       : Anomalous Dispersion Enhanced Nonlinear Optical Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1995  
File        : a9521664

Award Number: 9521664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213757             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Singer kds4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9521664  Singer  The PI proposes to demonstrate and study anomalous dispersion 
              optimized Cerenkov phase-matched second harmonic generation and to  investigate
              its effect on cascaded third-order nonlinearities.   Theories of Cerenkov
              phase-matched second harmonic generation in  waveguides indicate that intrinsic
              phase-matching when coupled with  Cerenkov phase-matching leads to large
              enhancements in second  harmonic generation efficiency, and more recently, have
              suggested  that large phase-shifts in cascaded nonlinearities can occur.  
              Simulations indicate large enhancements in efficiency even with  incomplete
              intrinsic phase-matching.  The use of Cerenkov phase-  matching in combination
              with an appropriate intrinsic phase-  matching scheme eliminates critical
              fabrication or material  properties.  Anomalous dispersion has been shown to be
              an effective  intrinsic phase-matching technique in organic solutions, and 
              recently in polymeric waveguides.  The use of anomalous dispersion  along with
              the Cerenkov process also overcomes the effect of  absorption in anomalous
              dispersion phase-matching by guiding the  second harmonic light in the
              cladding.  We will demonstrate this  type of phase matching and study its
              dependence on fabrication and  material parameters in electric-field-poled
              polymeric waveguides.   The structures rely on a poled nonlinear optical layer
              composed of  a polymer doped with a recently developed anomalous dispersion 
              nonlinear optical dye.  Both slab and channel waveguide structures  will be
              investigated.  The nonlinear phase shift of the fundamental  light will also be
              studied.    Anomalous dispersion may represent an important enhancement 
              mechanism for nonlinear optical interactions which depend on phase-  matching
              properties.  This would lead to more efficient photonic  devices for
              application in optical data storage and processing.  ***
