Title       : US-Indo Cooperative Research: Phase Selection in Ceramic Oxides under
               Non-Equilibrium Conditions, Award in US and Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9521945

Award Number: 9521945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17177              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos G. Levi levic@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9521945  Levi   Description:  This proposal is for a US-Indo  research
              collaboration between materials  scientists Carlos Levi of the University of 
              California, Santa Barbara and Vikram Jayaram of  the Indian Institute of
              Science, Bangalore.   The project is entitled "Phase Selection in  Ceramic
              Oxides Under Non-Equilibrium  Conditions."  The investigators will study the 
              evolution of oxide microstructures in ceramic  oxides synthesized under
              conditions wherein  thermodynamic equilibrium is highly  constrained.  The  
              program will focus on relatively simple binary  and higher component systems
              using techniques  with proven potential to bring about  substantial
              metastability.  Compositions  produced in this manner will be heat treated to 
              study the hierarchy of states by which the non-  equilibrium structure evolves
              towards a more  stable one.  The primary objective is to  enhance the
              understanding of phase selection  processes, their relationship to fundamental 
              forms of metastability, as well as their impact  on microstructure evolution
              through subsequent  transformations.   Scope:  The PIs have extensive
              experience in  this area and have  collaborated productively  in the past.  The
              bulk of the experimental work  will be carried out at the Indian Institute of 
              Science.  The US collaborator will provide  guidance in the design of
              experiments and  analysis of results, as well as access to  atomization and
              characterization facilities at  the UC, Santa Barbara.  The research is 
              expected to generate a mutually beneficial  interaction with the ongoing
              research on the  synthesis of structural ceramics and functional  inorganic
              oxides at the NSF Materials Research  Laboratory at UC.  This project will
              provide a  unique international opportunity for a US Post-  doc to participate
              in the experimental research  at the IISc in Bangalore.     ***                
                                               This research will investigate small signal 
              stability of electric power systems as affected  by the addition of  High
              Voltage DC (HVDC) lines  and control devices such as Static Var  Compensators
              (SVC), Power System Stabilizer  (PSS) and other Flexible AC Transmission System
               (FACTS) devices.  The objective will be to  develop an overall linearized
              model to include  the above mentioned devices and to examine  their relative
              influence on dynamic stability.   This research is important in determining the
               causes of low frequency oscillations and  voltage collapse.  Both of these are
              operating  problems faced by utilities in both countries.   Prof. M.A. Pai,
              University of Illinois Urbana  will collaborate with Profs. D.P. Sen Gupta & 
              L.R. Padiyar, Indian Institute of Science,  Bangalore.  The research team is
              exceptional.   Prof. Pai is an internationally recognized  leader in the use of
              direct methods for power  system stability, Sen Gupta and Padiyar have  done
              state-of-the-art system studies involving  FACTS and adaptive PSS.    Scope: 
              This research will address a problem in  the area of power systems that is of
              importance  in the U.S. and India.  While there is much  accumulated experience
              in the U.S., the Indian  academic institutions are very good at keeping  up
              with state-of-the-art, and the power  industry there quite mature in terms of
              their  absorption of technology.  The results expected  from this collaboration
              include research  papers, course development at the University of  Illinois,
              and an advanced level monograph  emanating from the research.     ***
