Title       : The Fundamentals of Admicellar Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9521985

Award Number: 9521985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Grady bpgrady@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edgar A. O'Rear  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Harwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9162,9187,AMPP,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Grady - 9521985      A process called admicellar polymerization has
              been developed which can be used to form a very thin layer of polymer on a
              surface via a surfactant template.  In this process a polymer is formed in the
              hydrophobic region of a surfactant bilayer absorbed on the surface.  Through a
              cooperative research effort between PPG Industries and the Institute of Applied
              Surfactant Research at the University of Oklahoma, it has been shown that
              admicellar polymerized styrene-diene copolymers formed on a commercial
              precipitated silica significantly improve the properties of the silica as a
              filler for a rubber which serves as a model for automobile tires. 
              Silica-filled tire treads may have advantages over normal carbon black filled
              tire treads, such as lower heat buildup and improved resistance to
              chipping/chunking.  Silica-filled treads can also have a lower rolling
              resistance leading to better fuel economy and reduced emissions of greenhouse
              gases, while also having improved traction on wet pavement.  These tires have
              not been popular because use of a costly organosilane coupling agent and
              increased mixing times are required.  Admicellar polymerization might offer a
              mechanism for producing a silica-filled tread with these same performance
              advantages, yet a coupling agent is not required.    The objectives of this
              research are to: (1) develop a kinetic expression for admicellar
              polymerization, (2) understand the effect of polymer composition on the
              improvement in filler properties, and (3) determine the relationship between
              silica pore structures and admicellar polymerization.  To address the first
              objective, model surfaces will be used to isolate the kinetic problem from the
              pore diffusion problem.  Since admicellar polymerization superficially
              resembles emulsion polymerization, Smith-Ewart kinetics will provide the
              theoretical starting point.  The second objective is motivated by the fact that
              a silica modified with a styrene-diene copolymer has better filler properties
              than a  silica modified with either homopolymer.  The third part of the project
              will explore pore structure effects using controlled pore-size precipitated
              silicas in combination with scattering and liquid adsorption measurements to
              quantify changes in pore size.
