Title       : Studies in Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9521389

Award Number: 9521389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $654140             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Neelin neelin@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9521389  Neelin, J. David  University of California, Los Angeles 
              Title: Studies in Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction    This research aims to
              contribute to understanding climate phenomena  that arise by interaction
              between ocean and atmosphere, and the  mechanisms that produce them.  Methods
              developed under the previous  NSF grant will be applied but with a change in
              emphasis in several  areas:         1) A new approach will be used for the
              tropical atmospheric  modeling component, based on a method designed to parlay 
              theoretical developments from the previous grant into a new type of  nonlinear
              model.  Analytical results for vertical structure that  apply under certain
              convective conditions are used as a basis for  numerical models that are valid
              more generally, but retain high  accuracy for low cost near convection regions.
               This is combined  with an efficient treatment of long-wave radiation.  More 
              importantly, the models are easy to analyze for insight into the  atmospheric
              side of three-dimensional ocean-atmosphere feedbacks.          2)
              Investigations into the role of ocean-atmosphere  interaction in maintaining
              the tropical climatology were begun  under the previous grant leading to the
              "climatological version of  the Bjerknes hypothesis".  This suggest that
              three-dimensional  feedback between trade winds, ocean circulation and
              gradients of  sea surface temperature (SST) are important to the climatological
               configuration of warm and cold SST regions.  The PI will expand  this work and
              attempt to bridge the gap between this hypothesis  involving relative SST
              values and work by other investigators on  the processes regulating absolute
              SST values.         3) Work on modes of tropical interannual variability was a 
              mainstay of the previous grant.  The theoretical component of this  continues
              but with less emphasis relative to the above topics.   Instead method applied
              previously to the tropics are to be adapted  for midlatitude coupled
              variability, with the aim of providing a  the oretical counterpart for
              numerical modeling efforts underway by  other investigators.    This work is
              important because it seeks new knowledge relevant to  our ability to model and
              predict climate.
