Title       : An Observational Investigation of Mass Loss in Evolved Stars Using Millimeter
               Interferometry and Mid-IR Wavelength Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9521605

Award Number: 9521605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Meixner meixner@astro.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1207,1215,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9521605  Meixner    Mass loss has a profound effect on the final evolution of
              intermediate  mass stars.  Unfortunately, the physical mechanism driving the
              extreme  mass loss rates on the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) is not
              understood.   Dr. Margaret Meixner of the University of Illinois,
              Urbana-Champaign,  will conduct an observational investigation of the nature of
              the mass  loss in evolved stars using imaging techniques in two wavebands: 
              millimeter wavelength (3 mm), and mid-IR wavelength (8-25 microns).   The
              carbon monoxide emission millimeter wavelength (transition J=1-0)  imaging
              project utilizes the Berkeley-Illinois-Maryland millimeter  wavelength array
              (BIMA) and the NRAO 12m telescope for observations,  and a detailed radiative
              transfer software code for the analysis of the  data.  The expected results
              will include more accurate determination of  mass loss rates and
              characterization of the large scale halos (radii  about 70 arc seconds) which
              are found in all evolved stars; and compact  (less than 4 arc seconds) fast
              molecular gas regions, which are found  in transition objects such as
              proto-planetary nebulae (PPNe) and hold a  clue to the AGB to planetary nebula
              (Pne) transition process.  The  mid-IR wavelength imaging project involves the
              analysis of high  resolution (less than 1 arc second) mid-IR wavelength images
              of 55  circumstellar dust shells (CDSs) surrounding AGB stars, PPNe and young 
              Pne, will be carried out using an axially symmetric radiative transfer  dust
              code.  Moreover, the mid-IR wavelength project includes further  observations
              of PPNe and extreme AGB stars at similar and longer  wavelengths and at high
              angular resolutions (about 0.1 arc seconds)  using two mid-IR wavelength array
              cameras (MIRAC and the Keck LWIRC).   The results from this mid-IR wavelength
              imaging project will provide  insight into the origin of axially symmetric
              morphological structures  commonly found in Pne and insight into the
              evolutionary stage at which  this axial symmetry arises.    Dr. Me ixner has
              three activities planned that will lay ground work for  the future research. 
              Firstly, an observing run is planned with the  MIRAC team in June 1995 to
              observe approximately one dozen PPNe.  Secondly, a new axially symmetric
              computer software dust code will be  used to model several mid-IR images of
              PPNe and Pne from the current  sample; thereby demonstrating the application of
              this code.  Finally,  carbon monoxide wavelength emission data cubes of three
              objects will be  constructed using a new interferometry technique called
              mosaicing;  thereby demonstrating the feasibility of this technique.
