Title       : Dissertation Research: A Settlement Pattern Survey of Prehistoric and Historic
               Sites in the Izalco Region of Western El Salvador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9521749

Award Number: 9521749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Wyllys Andrews wandrews@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Andrews    Under the direction of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews, Ms. Kathryn Sampeck 
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct 
              archaeological research in the Rio Ceniza Valley region in  Western El
              Salvador. The zone is virtually unknown  archaeologically, although its
              colonial economic importance  resulted in a great deal of documentation. Ms.
              Sampeck will  examine the late preconquest and early conquest history of the 
              region. Before the arrival of the Spanish, the area was the  center of one of
              the most powerful regional states in  southeastern Mesoamerica. The power and
              prosperity of this  "Izalco Pipil polity" was likely due to its prominence in
              the  cacao trade, with cacao functioning as a kind of money in pre-  Hispanic
              economy. The Pippil were probably producing not only for  local use but for a
              broader market. With the incorporation of the  region into the Spanish empire,
              Izalco was propelled into the  global economy. The agricultural system was
              drastically altered  as local inhabitants shifted to the cultivation of indigo
              for a  world market. Ms. Sampeck wishes to examine the social changes  which
              accompanied this shift. To accomplish this she will conduct  an extensive
              survey of the region and collect surface material.  This will be followed by
              selected excavations. The ceramic,  lithic and other cultural materials
              collected will be analyzed to  allow reconstruction of social organization and
              changes which  occurred over time.     Small scale societies respond to both
              local and global pressures  and archaeologists have suggested several ways in
              which groups  may respond to such often conflicting demands. The Izalco region 
              provides an excellent situation within which to examine this  issue because
              archaeological and ethnographic data document the  transformation from a
              strictly local society and economy to one  which is rapidly enmeshed in a much
              broader world. The research  will provide data of interest to Middle
              Americanist  archaeologists and assist in the trainin g of a promising young 
              scientist.
