Title       : Production Costing and Planning for Multi-Area and Distributed Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1995    
File        : a9521603

Award Number: 9521603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Chanan Singh                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin F. Hobbs   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vira Chankong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Loparo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hobbs  9521603    Existing planning tools do not calculate expected production 
              costs while considering transmission limitations.  Further,  present frameworks
              for comparing distributed resources against  transmission and distribution
              (T&D) investments and centralized  resources lack a theoretical basis for the
              appropriate  development and use of marginal cost information.  We propose the 
              following research efforts to fill those gaps:    *    Development and
              demonstration of methods for assessing the       effect of transmission limits
              upon expected costs.  The       methods would exploit a multiarea probabilistic
              production       costing framework incorporating DC and AC network      
              representations.  Existing probabilistic multiarea methods,       aside from
              inefficient Monte Carlo approaches, do not       include DC or AC flow models. 
              This work would be of benefit       to utilities by allowing them to assess the
              long run       implications of resources and transmission decisions for      
              production costs while rigorously considering transmission       limitations
              and the entire range of possible load and       equipment states.  It could
              also benefit non-utility       providers of electric power, large power
              consumers, and       regulators by providing them a means of better
              understanding       the spatial cost structure of the bulk power market.    *  
               Creation of a theoretically defensible yet practical       framework for using
              such information for evaluating       resources and transactions. 
              Decomposition methods would be       used to develop theoretically optimal
              approaches for       coordinating models for generation planning, bulk power   
                 system operation, and transmission and distribution       planning. 
              Guidelines and procedures would be defined for       theoretically correct
              calculation of marginal costs and       coordination of models.  This effort
              would be especially       valuable to the many electric utilities who are
              beginning to       evaluate the merits of dist ributed versus centralized      
              generation and demand-side resources.  Some utilities are       presently
              testing ad hoc procedures involving coordination       of distribution planning
              methods with bulk power planning       and power flow models.    ****
