Title       : Thermal Adaptation in Polar Macroalgae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9521496

Award Number: 9521496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valrie A. Gerard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Gerard  9521496  The genetic adaptations that enable certain plant species to 
              survive and grow in polar environments where temperatures are  near or below
              0oC year-round are poorly understood.  Low-  temperature adaptation is
              complicated in terrestrial plants by  freezing, desiccation and stomatal
              conductance, and in marine  phytoplankton by a variable and unpredictable
              physical  environment.  Polar macroalgae provide an experimental system  that
              is not subject to these complications and that is well-  suited to the study of
              cold-adaptation in plants.  Cold-  adaptation is particularly well developed in
              Antarctic  macroalgae, in which rates of photosynthesis and growth at OoC  are
              comparable to rates achieved at 10-15oC by temperate species.   The proposed
              research uses endemic Arctic and Antarctic seaweeds  to answer the question,
              "What adaptations do polar algae possess  that enable them to assimilate carbon
              and grow rapidly at very  low temperatures?"    The research focusses on
              carbon-metabolism characteristics of  three closely related polar-temperate
              pairs of brown algae:  Arctic Laminaria solidungula and temperate Laminaria 
              saccharina;  Antarctic Desmarestia anceps and temperate Desmarestia aculeata, 
              and Antarctic Himantothallus grandifolius that is related to  Desmarestia
              aculeata and D. anceps, but is morphologically  similar to Laminaria
              saccharina.  Carbon-metabolism processes  (photosynthesis, respiration and
              light-independent carbon  fixation) that are important in cold-adaptation will
              be  identified in sporophytes of each species pair acclimated to the  same
              temperature.  Specific mechanisms of adaptation will be  determined by
              comparing components of the photosynthetic  apparatus as well as contents,
              activities and thermal properties  of key enzymes involved in photosynthesis,
              respiration and light-  independent carbon fixation.  Comparisons of multiple
              species  pairs and a broad suite of carbon-assimilation parameters will 
              provide a comprehensive analysis of the mechanisms of  low-  temperature
              adaptation in algal species endemic to both the  Arctic and Antarctic Oceans
              and increase an overall understanding  of low temperature adaptation in all
              plants.
