Title       : PEET: Taxonomy and Co-evolution of Trichomycetes (Gut- Inhabiting Fungi) and
               their Chironomidae (Diptera) Hosts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2000   
File        : a9521811

Award Number: 9521811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $732754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Lichtwardt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard C. Ferrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1056,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9521811  Lichtwardt   Fulgi and insects constitute large, species-rich groups
              for which there are few taxonomic specialists, the more so for those organismal
              groups in aquatic or marine environments.  This imaginative PEET project brings
              together expertise on both fungi and selected insects, to study an intriguing
              group of Trichomycete fungi that are symbiotic in the guts of primitive flies
              like Chironomidae and in crustaceans and millipedes.  Dr. Robert Lichtwardt is
              an authority on Trichomycete fungi; his entomological colleague Dr. Leonard
              Ferrington is a specialist on Chironomidae flies.  Together they have assembled
              a team of colleagues at the University of Kansas and at the USDA laboratory at
              Peoria, Illinois, along with foreign colleagues, to pursue research on the
              taxonomy, phylogeny, and potential coevolution of gut-dwelling fungi and their
              insect hosts.  Some of the fungi are known to be lethal to mosquito larvae,
              while others have recently been shown to invade the ovarian tissue of the host
              insect, where they can subsequently disperse as "cysts" during egg-laying
              behavior by the female.  In so doing, they are suspected of reducing
              significantly the reproductive output of the host insects, which include
              blackflies.  The research will build upon museum collections of the organisms
              and new collections made in the course of extensive field work, and will
              integrate traditional morphological characters with new molecular data from DNA
              sequencing and protein isozyme analyses.   Training of graduate and
              postdoctoral students emphasizes laboratory and museum work as well as field
              collecting, and includes visits to the USDA-Peoria laboratory for training in
              modern DNA sequencing of fungi.  Computerization of all aspects of research,
              including specimen databasing and construction of interactive identification
              keys, will enhance the timely dissemination of results from the University of
              Kansas' World Wide Web server.
