Title       : PEET: Monographic Research in Agaricales and Aphyllophorales(Basidiomycotina,
               Fungi)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9521526

Award Number: 9521526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $571418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald H. Petersen repete@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1056,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9521526  Petersen   Among the thousands of species of fungi worldwide, the
              larger basidiomycetes with often conspicuous fruiting bodies, the mushrooms and
              puffballs for example, are comparatively well known.  Still, their
              classification rests upon geographically constrained treatments (by region or
              by political entity), frequently with consequent duplication of scientific
              names, and with reliance often placed upon morphological features that are
              subject to environmental modification and hence prove unstable.  Dr. Ronald
              Petersen at the University of Tennessee has assembled a team of colleagues and
              contributors to study several groups of fungi in the orders Agaricales and
              Aphyllophorales from a worldwide perspective, and by employing several lines of
              evidence for taxonomic resolution and phylogenetic analysis.  These are to
              include traditional morphological characters (with contributions from such
              colleagues as Dr. Scott Redhead in Canada and Dr. Egon Horak in Switzerland);
              new molecular tools in protein electrophoresis and DNA sequencing (with
              colleague Dr. Karen Hughes); laboratory culturing and mating trials, to assess
              compatibility reactions among closely related species; and all these to be
              pursued through the use of existing herbarium collections and new collections
              assembled from extensive field collecting in various regions.  Primary emphasis
              will be given to monographic treatments of the genera Clavicorona, Flammulina,
              and Lentinellus.   Training of graduate and postdoctoral students entails
              courses and seminars, extensive laboratory and museum work, and field
              collecting in the U.S. and usually abroad as well.  Computerization of many
              aspects of the monographic endeavor, including specimen databasing,
              morphological and molecular evaluations, and construction of identification
              keys, will enhance the dissemination of results through the University's World
              Wide Web server.
