Title       : Large-Eddy Simulation of Canopy and Surface Layer Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1998   
File        : a9521586

Award Number: 9521586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268033             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger H. Shaw rhshaw@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kyaw Tha Paw U  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shaw/Abstract           The objective of this research is large-eddy simulation
              (LES)  of the atmospheric surface layer in which the lowest portion of the 
              three-dimensional computational domain represents a plant copy such  as a
              forest.  The vegetation is represented by a foliage element  are density, a
              drag coefficient, and a sensible heat and water  vapor source or sink at each
              grid point within the canopy.  In the  LES, scales of motion resolved by the
              grid network are computed  directly in time-dependent form, while
              sub-grid-scale processes are  parameterized.         Our plan is to use the
              simulations to study the nature of  turbulence in the vicinity of plant
              canopies, and to apply the  technique to more realistic (such as inhomogeneous)
              situations.  We  will perform in-depth studies of coherent structures created
              within  the computed flow fields and follow them from inception to  dissipation
              (an impossible task in the field). Structures will  initially be detected using
              wavelet and other related techniques,  complemented by computer animation.  It
              is our aim to obtain as  complete a picture as possible of coherent structures
              developing at  the  interface between the lower atmosphere and a plant canopy. 
               The method of proper orthogonal decomposition will also be applied  to
              computed LES fields.         A complete thermal energy balance of the
              vegetation and of the  underlying soil will be incorporated into the model to
              more  correctly introduce soil evaporation, transpiration, and heat  storage in
              both soil and biomass.  The influence of aeroelastic  properties of the
              vegetation will also be introduced and a study  made of the phenomenon of
              honami.  As a demonstration of our  interests in this regard, we have begun an
              examination of the  windbreak problem.         All computation will be
              performed on the Cray Y-MP at the  National Center for Atmospheric Research
              (NCAR).
