Title       : Industry University Cooperative Research on High Yield Syntheses of Activated
               Carbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9521423

Award Number: 9521423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185122             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Antal antal@wiliki.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1504,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Antal - 9521423    A new method for manufacturing charcoal from
              biomass by operating at elevated pressures doubles the yield of charcoal
              ordinarily realized by industry, and is able to convert wood logs to charcoal
              after only one hour of reaction time.  This research is aimed at employing this
              new knowledge to triple the usual industrial yields of activated carbons from
              biomass feedstocks.  Technical barriers to the synthesis of high yield (HY)
              activated carbons include:  (1) What rate laws describe the gasification of HY
              charcoal by oxygen and steam?  (2) Can these rate laws be included in a Thiele
              modulus analysis to define conditions which produce activated carbons with high
              surface areas or other desirable properties?  (3) Can activated carbons be
              synthesized at low temperatures?  (4) Can impregnants be used to synthesize
              valuable carbons with peculiarly desirable properties?  (5) What reaction
              conditions maximize the yields of desirable carbons?    To overcome the above
              barriers, this work will focus on the following objectives:  (i) Produce
              various HY charcoals from raw and pretreated biomass feedstocks.  (ii)
              Determine the rate laws governing gasification of these HY charcoals by oxygen
              and water.  (ii) Use Thiele modulus analysis to identify favorable conditions
              for activation.  (iv) Activate the NY charcoals by oxygen (air) in steam (or
              supercritical water) at moderate to high temperatures and elevated pressures,
              and by steam (or supercritical water) at moderate to high temperatures over a
              very large range in pressures,  (v) Determine the chemical, physical, and
              adsorptive properties of the HY activated carbons.  (vi) Based on a synthesis
              of the foregoing results, identify conditions and pretreatments which produce
              desirable activated carbons with yields of 20% or more.  Two experimental
              testbeds will be used to measure kinetics and activate the charcoals: a large,
              pressurized, packed bed reactor combined with a high pressure steam generator,
              both designed to satisfy ASME cod e requirements, and a small diameter, packed
              bed, supercritical flow reactor.  Collaborators with the Hungarian Academy of
              Sciences will also measure HY charcoal gasifications rates at low pressures by
              thermogravimetric analysis.  This work represents a partnership between the
              University of Hawaii, two companies concerned with recycling and biomass
              utilization, and a commercial source of activated carbons.  These linkages to
              private industry will ensure the rapid dissemination and employment of new
              knowledge generated by this research.
