Title       : RUI: Electronic, optical and dynamical properties of novel semiconductor
               materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1997        
File        : a9521659

Award Number: 9521659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Devki N. Talwar talwar@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9162,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9521659  Talwar  Recent advances in the growth of semiconductor quantum-wells
              and superlattices have made it possible to design and fabricate novel photonic
              devices for a wide variety of applications.  These photonic devices are
              critically important for optical fiber communication systems, optical
              computing, optical interconnects; data transmission and signal processing.  In
              order to keep pace with an expanding need, the electronic, dynamic and optical
              properties of the materials used in such devices must be suitably characterized
              (both theoretically and experimentally), tailored, and improved.  The purpose
              of the present proposal is to provide a comprehensive theoretical and
              experimental framework of characterizing how temperature molecular beam
              epitaxial (MBE) grown III-V (LT III-V) compounds, multiple quantum-wells (MQWs)
              GaAs/A1GaAs, Si/Si1-xGex, and strained layer InAs/InAs/InGaSb superlaticces
              (Sls).  By involving undergraduate students in this project, we will focus on
              three major tasks: (I) Identifying the presence of intrinsic defects in LT
              III-V materials using local vibrational mode spectroscopy and Greens function
              theory. (ii) Studying theoretically the band structure, dark current,
              absorptance, photoconductive gains and correlated noise in MQWs and Sls to
              assess the dependence of sensor performance on the quantum well infrared
              photodetector device design.  (iii) Measuring the absorption coefficient, on
              MQWs and Sls samples using a high resolution Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
              spectrometer.     This research, which includes a continuing collaboration with
              scientist from Wright Patterson AFB, will greatly enrich the education of our
              undergraduate students who will be working with the project leader towards
              their independent study projects or senior theses option in a newly approved
              Applied Physics program at Indiana University of Pennsylvania.  ***
