Title       : Elimination of All-Optical Cycles in Wavelength-Routed Optical Wide Area
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9521249

Award Number: 9521249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283256             (Estimated)
Investigator: Biswanath Mukherjee mukherje@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan P. Heritage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1504,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9521249  Mukherjee  A transparent (wide-area) wavelength-routed optical network
              may be created by using wavelength cross-connect switches connected together by
              fiber to from an arbitrary mesh structure.  The network is accessed through
              electronic stations that are attached to some of these cross-connects.  Such a
              wavelength-routed optical network is being studied and demonstrated as a part
              of ARPA-sponsored programs at Bellcore (ONTC and MONET).   The  wavelength
              cross-connect switches may be implemented using acousto-optic filters (AOTFs)
              or WDM multiplexer/demultiplexer-based technologies.  The wavelength
              cross-connects may or may not include a wavelength-translation functionally.   
               These wavelength cross-connect switches have the property that they may
              configure themselves into unspecified states.  Each input port of a switch is
              always connected to some output port of the switch whether or not such a
              connection is required for the purpose of information transfer.  Due to the
              presence of these unspecified states, there exists the possibility of setting
              up unintended all-optical cycles in the network (viz. a loop with no
              terminating electronics in it).  IF such a cycle contains amplifiers (e.g.,
              Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers (EDFAs), there is a possibility that the net loop
              gain is greater than the loop loss.  The amplified spontaneous emission (ASE)
              noise from amplifiers can build up in such a feedback loop to saturate the
              amplifiers and result in oscillations of the ASE noise in the loop.  Such
              all-optical as defined above (and hereafter referred to as "white" cycles) must
              be eliminated from an optical network in order for the network to perform any
              useful operation.  Furthermore, for the realistic case in which the wavelength
              cross-connects result in signal cross-talk, there is a possibility of  having
              closed cycles with oscillating cross-talk signals.  We will investigate both
              the network-routing layer and the physical layer solutions to this problem.    
              At the network-routing layer, , w e will examine algorithms that set up new
              transparent optical connections upon request avoiding the creation of such
              cycles in the network.  These algorithms will attempt to find a route for a
              connection and then (in a post-processing fashion) configure switches such that
              white cycles that might get created would automatically get eliminated. 
              Furthermore, for the more realistic case in which the cross-connects result in
              cross-talk, we propose call-set-up algorithms that minimize the possibility of
              cross-talk cycles.     At the physical layer, we will study various
              device-related issues that arise in transparent wavelength-routed optical
              networks.  The physical layer study will directly influence the network-routing
              layer work stated above.  Specifically, we propose (1) to provide device
              characterization and usable computer models of present and future optical
              devices such as optical amplifiers, optical wavelength cross-connect switches
              (with and without wavelength translation), and fiber links including connector
              models to network theorist so that "ideal" network models may be upgraded to
              "realistic" network models; (2) to explore potential solutions in the physical
              layer to problems identified by network demonstrations and network analysis;
              and (3) to identify viable alternative optical devices, particularly amplifiers
              and switches, whose physical properties will directly benefit the
              implementation of transparent optical networks.     We will feed back the
              results of this work so as to directly benefit the ARPA-sponsored ONTC
              (Bellcore, BNR/NT, Columbia University, Hughes, LLNL, Rockwell, UTRC) and MONET
              (AT&T, Bellcore, Pacific Telesis, Bell Atlantic, Bellsouth) consortia.  ***
