Title       : Magnetic Properties of Ultra Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1997   
File        : a9521126

Award Number: 9521126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy F. Willis RFW4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9521126  Willis      The magnetic properties of materials depositied as
              ultrathin films  on  crystalline  surfaces has excited much attention due to
              their  unusual  behavior  and potential for new magnetic recording and sensor
              devices.  The  scientific  goal of this research project is  to  gain  a 
              deeper  understanding of the physical laws which govern the magnetic  behavior 
              as the film thickness approached the limit of few monolayers. Evidence  for 
              different distinct classes of magnetic behavior, and a  crossover  in 
              dimensionality (from three- to two-dimensions), is observed as the  film  
              thickness  approaches  a  few  monolayers.  In  this  ultrathin  thickness 
              regime,  the  films are metastable due  to  the  `clamping'  influence  of  the
               substrate crystal's lattice.  It  is  possible  to  fabricate new phases of
              matter, with unique properties, which  do  not  exist in bulk material. New
              alloys with novel magnetic properties hold  high   promise   for  scientific 
              research  and  future  technological  application.  This  project deals with
              the fundamental  properties  of  these  ultrathin films as investigated by the
              magnetooptic Kerr effect  and related techniques.  %%%  This  project  deals 
              with magnetism studies  of  ultrathin  films  of  magnetic  atoms.  The films
              are deposited atomic-layer-by-atomic-layer  on  atomically  flat  substrates.
              The  arrangement  of  the  deposited  surface atoms is determined primarily by
              the underlying substrate.  As  a  result the surface atoms have different
              properties from what  would  be  found  for  the same atoms in a normal bulk
              phase.  These  surface  metastable  magnetic  layers  often exhibit  unusual 
              and  unsuspected  behavior, and have great potential for advanced materials for
              magnetic  recording  and sensor devices. This research probes the  magnetism 
              of  ultrathin  magnetic  layers to understand the fundamental  physics  of 
              these  materials. The results are of basic interest and could lead  to  new
              materials for practical applica tions.  ***
