Title       : Toward a Research Agenda and Infrastructure Development in Computer Assisted
               Diagnosis and Therapy; Spring 1996; Bristol, England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9521719

Award Number: 9521719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeo Kanade kanade@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie E. John  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Omar Ghattas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony M. DiGioia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9521719  Kanade  An international workshop "Toward a Research Agenda and 
              Infrastructure Development in Computer Assisted Diagnosis  and Therapy" is to
              held in the Spring of 1996 and will be  convened at a conference center near
              Bristol, England.  The  goals of the workshmp are to: 1) Produce an inventory,
              at an  international level, of the medical, engineering, and  computer science
              research in medical robotics, computer  assisted diagnosis and therapy, and
              virtual reality in  medicine and telemedicine. 2) Develop a five year research 
              agenda and development plan, and 3) Elucidate measures that  could promote the
              establishment of an infrastructure to  facilitate the development of the field.
               The workshop  report is to be widely disseminated in electronic and  printed
              formats, and a printed report of the project  recommendations will be produced.
               The project has important  implications to NSF and other research grant-making
               agencies, as well as the nation's research community, for  planning research
              programs and the allocation of limited  resources in this area.    The workshop
              organizers have high competence in organizing  and directing large scientific
              meetings.  The planning  process for the workshop involves an innovative
              technique  wherein the workshop participants will contribute to the 
              preparation of a "pre-workshop document" to facilitate  deliberations and
              conclusions during the three day meeting.  Much of the planning process is to
              be conducted using  INTERNET to hold "virtual" meetings of the workshop 
              Executive Oversight Committee.  NSF funds will support only  the U.S.
              participants.  Expenses of attendees from other  countries will be borne by
              their own institutions or  government agencies.    Biomedical engineering
              research in medical robotics and  their interventional procedures holds high
              promise for the  development of the technologies needed to provide new 
              capabilities to diagnosticians and therapists, to the  reduction of patient
              morbidity and mortality, and, in  certain  cases, to lowering the cost of
              health care.  The  workshop is expected to contribute significantly to progress
               in this area of research and technological development.  ***
