Title       : The Modelling of Thermodynamically Difficult Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9521406

Award Number: 9521406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley I. Sandler sandler@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9521406  Sandler    Experimental measurements are very time consuming, and it is
              not practical to measure the thermodynamic properties and phase behavior of all
              substances and mixtures, that are of importance for chemical and pharmaceutical
              processing, for environmental and safety engineering, and for other aspects of
              chemical processing.  Therefore, it is important to have accurate prediction or
              at least correlation methods.  This proposal deals with research on the
              development of predictive models the thermodynamical properties and phase
              equilibria of industrially important, but complex mixtures.  Three different
              types of mixtures will be considered:  hydrogen-bonding fluids, protein
              solutions and colloidal systems.    Hydrogen-bonding fluids are poorly
              described by current group contribution methods as documented in this proposal.
               The reason is that the extent and strength of hydrogen bonding is strongly
              influenced by functional groups on a molecule adjacent to the hydrogen-bonding
              groups.  We have shown this both experimentally and from ab initio quantum
              mechanics calculations.  We are now proposing to develop a new generation of
              prediction methods based on a combination of group contribution methods for the
              generalizable dispersive forces, and molecule-specific quantum chemistry
              calculations for hydrogen bonding.    Protein solutions and their purification
              are important in many bio-processing applications.  The research being proposed
              here involves the use of molecular thermodynamic and statistical mechanical
              modeling and computer simulation to develop predictive models for the
              partitioning of proteins in aqueous two-phase systems and for protein
              precipitation.    Colloids lie between the macroscopic and microscopic regimes
              of matter, and are of interest because their behavior influences many emerging
              technologies in chemical, biochemical, and pharmaceutical processing.  There
              are two scales of phase behavior in liquid-in-liquid colloidal systems.  At the
              macroscale is liquid-liquid phase  separation, or macroscopic phase
              equilibrium.  The microscale behavior is the formation of microstructures in
              some (or all) of the separated phases.  Many important characteristics of
              liquid colloids are dictated by the microstructures that form.  However, to
              investigate the microstructure, one first needs to have an understanding of the
              macroscopic phase behavior as this identifies the phase boundaries within which
              microstructures are formed.  Thermodynamic modeling of such systems has been
              rather simple, and has not captured the temperature and pressure dependence of
              the macroscopic phase boundaries of liquid colloidal systems.  Here we are
              proposing research on the modeling of macroscopic phase behavior of
              liquid-in-liquid colloids using modern thermodynamic methods to provide a more
              accurate description of the changes in the macroscopic phase boundaries of
              colloidal systems with variations in temperature, pressure and composition. 
              ***
