Title       : Chemical and Bacterial Reactions at the Surfaces of Environmentally-Important
               Metal Sulfide Minerals: Linking Atomic and Field Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9521731

Award Number: 9521731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jillian F. Banfield   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Hamers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1584,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program   is
              jointly supported by the Divisions of Earth Sciences, Chemistry, and   Chemical
              and Transport Systems Engineering.  Jillian F. Banfield, Geology   Department,
              and Robert J. Hamers, Chemistry Department, of the University   of
              Wisconsin-Madison will investigate at an atomic level the nature of   reactions
              occurring at interfaces between aqueous solutions and surfaces   of metal
              sulfide minerals.  They will use a multidisciplinary approach,   incorporating
              biological, geological and chemical factors, and integrate   results from a
              wide array of experimental methods, including STM,  XPS,   and confocal
              microscopy.   Parallel field and laboratory studies will be   conducted. 
              Surfaces formed as a consequence of natural inorganically-   and
              organically-mediated weathering will be compared to   synthetically-weathered
              minerals to explore the applicability of   laboratory-based studies to natural
              systems.  The goals of the   investigation are to determine the mechanisms and
              rates of dissolution,   precipitation, and ion adsorption at metal sulfide
              surfaces; the effect   of electrochemical oxidation and reduction on surface
              morphology; the   role of impurities in modifying rates of electrochemical
              processes at   surfaces; and the role of bacteria in controlling surface
              microstructural   characteristics and dissolution rates.  Chemical weathering
              of minerals is the process by which rocks are   converted into the constituents
              of soils and sediments.  Sulfide minerals   such as galena, sphalerite, and
              chalcopyrite are mined as sources of   important elements, such as lead, zinc,
              and copper, releasing the metals   and acidifying  water.  The increase in
              acidity accelerates weathering of   other minerals.  Understanding the
              dissolution and crystallization   behavior of metal sulfides, by chemical and
              bacterial routes, is   important to developing predictive models of metal
              speciation and   bioavailability.  The goal of this study is to improve
              understanding of   natural systems and to develop accurate laboratory tests and
              predictive   models.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
