Title       : Sustainability of Arctic Communities: Interactions Between Global Changes,
               Public Policies, and Ecological Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9521459

Award Number: 9521459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2153486            (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Kruse afjak@uaa.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Anchorage
	      3211 Providence Drive
	      Anchorage, AK  995084614    907/786-1410

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,1317,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      ABSTRACT  OPP-9521459  KRUSE    This study addresses policy questions
              about the ability of arctic communities to sustain themselves in the face of
              climate changes and development. For the past 25 years, communities in Alaska's
              North Slope Borough have sustained themselves through a combination of wage
              employment derived from petroleum revenues, harvests mf caribou, marine
              mammals, and other resources. Local control has been exercised through regional
              government and Native-owned corporations. The principal climate changes
              considered in this study are rising temperatures, increased precipitation and
              increased frequency of extreme events. Climate changes of these types will
              affect caribou and other populations important to the local subsistence
              economy, as well as construction, transportation and regional development. The
              policy audience includes state and national entities and the North Slope
              Borough. An interdisciplinary group will focus on a number of goals including:
              the development of a vegetation model that predicts forage for caribou and a
              model that responds to climate variables and human harvest; a subsistence
              hunting/wage employment model as affected by caribou and wage opportunities; an
              econometric and institutional analysis of petroleum investments as affected by
              environmental costs and public policies; a comparative analysis of policy
              vehicles for responding to forces of change; and the development of a synthesis
              framework for relating policies to future outcomes. The study will not attempt
              to link the detailed subsystem models in a single grand model. Rather, the
              subsystem models will be designed to operate independently with the outputs of
              one subsystem model serving as key inputs to the other subsystem models.
              Integration of the subsystems will start with a simple meta-model that reflects
              gross changes and then successively elaborate the model to a level of detail
              appropriate to address specific policy questions. The ultimate goal is to
              develop a means by which policy makers  can systematically examine
              relationships between policy choices and possible futures, as well as to
              provide a vehicle for scientists from different disciplines to combine their
              data and develop complementary research programs.   ***                  ??
