Title       : Dissertation Research: The Development of Hunter-Gatherer Sedentism in the Santa
               Barbara Channel Region, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9521974

Award Number: 9521974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Jochim jochim@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Jochim    Under the direction of Dr. Michael Jochim, Mr. Douglass Kennett  will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct  archaeological
              research in a 17 kilometer square area of Santa  Rosa Island located in the
              Santa Barbara Channel region of  California. Work to date indicates a long
              settlement history  which covers a period of almost 10,000 years. Mr. Kennett
              will  survey this region and sample all environmental zones from the  coast to
              the piedmont areas. Once sites have been identified, a  selected sample will be
              excavated. Analysis of faunal and  artifact assemblages will provide data
              regarding site function  within the island's larger settlement system and also
              provide  insight into subsistence and technological change through time. 
              Stable oxygen and carbon isotopic analysis of marine shell from  midden
              deposits will be used to reconstruct changes in the marine  environment and the
              season of shellfish harvesting. These data  will be used in combination with
              other archaeological indicators  of seasonality and mobility to reconstruct
              patterns of human  settlement and their change over time.    Because they are
              so clearly circumscribed, and because of their  culture history, the Channel
              Islands provide an excellent  controlled situation to study the emergence of
              complex society.  Over their prehistory, one can trace changes from small 
              egalitarian social groups to larger more sedentary aggregations  characterized
              by specialized craft manufacture and emerging  hierarchical organization. This
              same pattern has been observed in  many parts of the world and archaeologists
              wish to understand the  underlying processes responsible. Mr. Kennett has
              proposed a  number of alternative models and wishes to collect data to test 
              them. He postulates that climatic change may be involved and one  strength of
              this project rests on the fact that chemical analysis  of faunal data will
              permit detailed environmental reconstruction.    This research is important for
              several reasons. It will sh ed new  light on the development of complex
              sedentary societies. It will  provide insight into the prehistory of the United
              States and  assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
