Title       : Drilling Induced Seismicity in Middle Valley and Escanaba Trough
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1998  
File        : a9521282

Award Number: 9521282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316597             (Estimated)
Investigator: Spahr C. Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9521282  Webb  This group from Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the
              University of California at San Diego will conduct a seafloor experiment to
              determine the size of the plumbing system beneath submarine hot springs on the
              Juan de Fuca Ridge and Gorda Rise, offshore from Oregon, Washington and British
              Columbia.  They will deploy ocean bottom seismometers at two sites where the
              D/V JOIDES Resolution will drill holes in the vicinity of hydrothermal systems.
               JOIDES Resolution is the vessel chartered by an international consortium for
              basic research on marine geology; the lead agency in the program is the
              National Science Foundation through its Ocean Drilling Program.  The
              deployments will begin before drilling, and will last for about two months
              post-drilling.  It is anticipated that tiny earthquakes and flow within the
              fractured rock beneath the seabed will be recorded by the seismometers, and
              that this will allow location of events related to opening the subsurface hot
              reservoir to sea water.  Mechanisms causing seismic noise are expected to be 1)
              cracking due to thermal stress, 2) acquathermal pressure fracturing resulting
              from reservoir temperature change, and 3) hydrofracturing due to the hydraulic
              head associated with the difference in density between cold seawater and hot
              pore fluids.  The investigators expect to differentiate among these mechanisms
              based on the character of the seismic signature recorded on their instruments. 
              They also expect to place constraints on the size of the reservoir based on the
              distribution of recorded events.  This will provide the first direct
              measurement of a submarine hydrothermal reservoir, and will be an important
              step in understanding the properties of these widespread ocean ridge features. 
              ***
