Title       : Electronic Structure of Planar One-Dimensional Conductors and Precursors and
               Metalloprotein Models via Polarized Specular Reflectance Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1995   
File        : a9521548

Award Number: 9521548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Musselman r Musselman@acad.frandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program will   provide
              a grant to Franklin and Marshall College for Dr. Ronald Musselman   to
              determine polarizations of intense electronic transitions related to  
              conductivity in new materials and to bonding in metalloprotein models   using a
              unique Polarized Specular Reflectance microspectrophotometer.    This is a
              renewal proposal describing a highly collaborative effort with   Dr. Steven
              Watkins of Louisiana State University, Dr. Don Ellis and Dr.   Brian Hoffman of
              Northwestern University, Dr. H. J. Keller of the   University of Heidelberg,
              Dr. Alberto Flamini of the National Research   Council of Italy, and Dr. Edward
              Solomon of Stanford. The work at   Franklin and Marshall College will involve
              six undergraduate students who   will participate in making the measurements
              and in doing the calculations   on a variety of complexes that are of chemical
              and biochemical interest.   This program will help to refine the theoretical
              treatment of conductive   square-planar metal complexes, and of their molecular
              precursors. A   series of structurally related square planar metal complexes
              will be   synthesized allowing systematic comparisons to be made between
              experiment   and theory and thus enhancing our understanding of the electronic 
               properties of these types of compounds.  This program will address the
              fundamental nature of the interaction of   light with new materials. The
              materials of interest range from   electronically conducting materials to
              systems with biological   significance such as enzymes.  Often the
              characteristics of these   materials which make them intrinsically interesting
              also cause them to   completely absorb the light normally used to probe the
              nature of the   system.  The unique feature of this work is the ability to
              probe these   systems using a reflectance technique (specular reflectance)
              which   provides information closely related to that normally obtained by  
              absorbance methods.  Experimental measurements will be performed and the  
              results will be interpreted using sophisticated calculations in order to   gain
              fundamental new insights into the behavior of such systems.    Specific
              knowledge concerning the nature of the chemical bonding in these   systems will
              result from this work, and it has implications for   understanding how
              electrons are transmitted within and how light   interacts with conducting
              materials.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
