Title       : Geodetic Observation of Surface Displacements from the Great Bolivian Deep
               Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9521921

Award Number: 9521921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Whitcomb                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth A. Stein seth@earth.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy H. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1039,9196,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9521921  Stein                            This research will take advantage of
              an extraordinary opportunity  to use space-based geodesy to study a deep earth
              process.  On 9  June 1994, the largest deep earthquake ever seismologically 
              recorded occurred 650 km beneath Northern Bolivia.  Its  extraordinary size is
              illustrated by the fact that ground motion  was felt as far away as Seattle and
              Toronto, 9000 km from the  epicenter.  This earthquake has become the focus of
              intensive  seismological study, because the physical process permitting 
              seismic failure at these extreme depths is a long-standing  unresolved
              question.  Although geodetic studies have never been  previously used to study
              a deep earthquake, they are practical in  this case.  The earthquake is so
              large that centimeter-level static  displacements above the hypocenter appear
              likely, based on both  seismological observations and theoretical calculations.
                     Through good luck, the Principal Investigators established a  geodetic
              network in Bolivia and measured it using the Global  Positioning System only a
              month before the earthquake.  Hence a  resurvey of the network would yield the
              first direct observation of  static displacements following a deep earthquake. 
              The comparison  of geodetic and seismological results would be especially
              valuable  because the physical process causing deep earthquakes is still 
              unknown, but is most likely very different from that for shallow  earthquakes. 
              In particular, because the leading but controversial  model for the mechanism
              of deep earthquakes is that they result  from solid state phase changes, there
              may be significant  differences between coseismic and long term deformation.   
                  Time is of the essence, because the geodetic network was  established to
              measure the expected steady-state deformations  associated with shortening
              across the Andes.  As a result, the more  time that passes, the poorer the
              chances of separating the effects  of the earthquake from the tectonic
              shortening.  Moreover,  the cost  to measure the earthquake effects can be
              reduced significantly by  cooperation with a German group who plan measurements
              in Bolivia in  May, 1995.  Although the German study, which was planned before
              the  earthquake, would by itself be inadequate to resolve the earthquake 
              displacement, a modest investment in additional measurements would  permit
              joint achievement of the goal.  This research is funded  under the Small Grants
              for Exploratory Research program and is a  component of the National Earthquake
              Hazard Reduction Program.  ***
