Title       : Making Mice: The Standardization of Mus Musculus for Scientific Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9521621

Award Number: 9521621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53569              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Rader   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Models in science serve an enormously important role in guiding research. 
              Benjamin Franklin used a "two-fluid" model when he advanced the first modern
              scientific theory for electricity.  Two models, the wave and the particle
              model, have guided research on light since the time of Descartes and Newton
              though since the discovery of quantum mechanics in this century, neither model
              seems correct.  Models serve an important role in biological research as well. 
              Since we must be extraordinarily careful in experimenting on humans, biologists
              must turn to other species to model what goes on in human physiology.  In the
              19th century, the model of choice was the frog.  Primates, pigs, cats,  newts,
              even horse-shoe crab, squid and slugs serve as models for certain areas of
              research.  Each offers specific opportunities but also limit researchers in
              what they can do.  Scientists must balance the opportunities an organism offers
              researchers with the limits it places on the kinds of questions they can raise.
               The organism of choice in 20th century biology has increasingly become the
              mouse.  How and why this decision has been made and how it has shaped the
              direction of biological research for the past five decades is the subject of
              Dr. Rader's research.    Inbred mice are the most widely-used experimental
              animals in American biological and medical research.  Yet the historical
              circumstances surrounding the mouse's rise as a standard organism have been
              completely ignored.  Dr. Rader is expanding on her earlier studies of the
              process by which C. C. Little and the Jackson Laboratory chose a standardized
              mouse,  mus musculus, as a model for biomedical research.   Under this grant,
              she is examining the increasing importance of mouse models in two American
              biomedical fields:  radiation genetics and cancer research.  She is trying to
              demonstrate how the inbred mouse developed as a carefully crafted experimental
              technology which enable a wide range of productive relations, including among
              biomedical scientists and betw een these scientists and the society that
              supported their work.  The study should also elucidate the connections between
              bench-top biomedical research and research policy, as well as illuminate the
              complex social, political, and intellectual relations that constitute
              scientific practices and organisms in the life sciences.
