Title       : Dissertation Research: Regional Archaeology of the Department of Santa Rosa,
               Guatemala: A Study of Precolumbian Settlement, Land use, and the Pacific Coast
               of Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1995      
File        : a9521471

Award Number: 9521471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman D. Hammond ndch@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Norman Hammond, Mr. Francisco Belli will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological survey and test
              excavation in the Santa Rosa region of southern Guatemala. The defined area
              encompasses ca. 700 km. sq. and includes four different environmental zones,
              identified on the basis of elevation, gradient, soil types, vegetation cover
              and annual rainfall. Research will proceed in four stages. An extensive survey
              will cover all regions to provide an overall picture of the archaeological
              remains in the region. In the process selected surface material will be
              collected and sites mapped. On this basis it will be possible to determine the
              size and age of the site, site function and distribution of activity areas. A
              second stage will involve intensive systematic survey by means of a stratified
              random sample of transects 250 m. in width and variable length. On this basis
              it will be possible to generalize and reconstruct the distribution and density
              of sites across the entire research area. Again, surface collections will be
              made and sites mapped. In a third stage, a 10% sample of sites will be test
              excavated. One or two test units will be placed in each site to determine site
              function and chronology. Finally, these data will be entered into a Geographic
              Information System and analyzed to determine distributions and to see how these
              changed over time. On this basis it will be possible to gain insight into the
              underlying processes involved.  Prior archaeological work in this region has
              indicated the presence of a long history of occupation which extends from an
              early hunting and gathering period through historic times. However systematic
              survey and mapping has not been conducted. It is clear that southern Guatemala
              participated in processes noted elsewhere in Middle America and underwent
              increases in cultural complexity and elaboration over time. Many
              archaeologists, including Mr. Belli, wish to understand how cultural
              elaboration and development occurs and this region which contains abundant
              archaeological sites and which lies at the periphery of the Mayan region
              provides an excellent context in which to address this question. Mr. Belli
              wants to determine whether it is local factors or external influences which
              drive this process.  This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will apply a powerful tool
              - Geographic Information Systems analysis - to this data and will assist in the
              training of a promising young archaeologist.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
