Title       : Studies of Unusual Ferromagnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0101318

Award Number: 0101318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292744             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schiffer schiffer@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator research project includes two research thrusts
              related to the properties of unusual ferromagnetic materials in which the
              magnetic and electronic properties are strongly coupled.   The first research
              thrust will be an investigation of phenomena related to phase separation in the
              "colossal magnetoresistance" perovskite manganites. Recent experimental and
              theoretical work has indicated that intrinsic magnetoelectronic phase
              separation is an important element of the physics of these materials, and the
              research will investigate resultant novel phenomena. The second research thrust
              will be an investigation of the transport and magnetic properties of thin films
              of ferromagnetic (Ga,Mn)As and MnAs.  The basic physics of these materials
              (which are semiconducting and metallic, respectively) will be probed through
              magnetic and magnetotransport studies of the pure materials and
              heterostructures incorporating these ferromagnets with other magnetic and
              non-magnetic materials.  The educational component of the project will involve
              the dissertation work of at least one graduate student and the active
              participation of undergraduates in the laboratory.  These students will acquire
              knowledge and skills that will be use in future careers whether in academia,
              industrial, or government laboratories. 
%%%
This individual investigator
              project centers on two different research thrusts related to the properties of
              unusual magnetic materials which are ferromagnetic, i.e. displaying a
              macroscopic magnetic moment.  The specific materials studied are of particular
              interest because their magnetism is strongly connected to their electronic
              properties, and advances in the fundamental understanding of this coupling
              could potentially contribute to "spintronic" technological applications which
              exploit a combination of magnetic and electronic properties. The first research
              thrust will be an investigation of phenomena related to the coexistence of two
              different types of magnetic and electronic phases within a class of compounds
              known as the "colossal magnetoresistance" perovskite manganites.  The second
              research thrust will be an investigation of the transport and magnetic
              properties of thin films of ferromagnetic (Ga,Mn)As and MnAs which both can be
              grown epitaxially on the commonly used semiconductor GaAs and thus may have
              more immediate technological importance.   The educational component of the
              proposed research will involve the dissertation work of at least one graduate
              student and the active participation of undergraduates in the laboratory.  The
              training that these students obtain will be valuable for future careers in
              industry, government, or academia.
***



