Title       : Collaborative Research: Design and Model-based Control of Nonlinear Chemical
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0101133

Award Number: 0101133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masoud Soroush Masoud.Soroush@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Masoud Soroush 
Institution: Drexel University 
Proposal
              Number: 0101133

To achieve greater profitability, process designers have
              been creating design in regions involving complex nonlinearity where process
              controllers continue to face stiff challenges.  Steady state multiplicity,
              limit cycles, chaos, and parametric sensitivity are manifestations of the
              nonlinearity.  In addition to the nonlinearity, there are many process designs
              that have unstable and/or non-minimum-phase steady states.  In many cases,
              operation is more profitable at an unstable steady state, or at a stable steady
              state in the close proximity of an unstable steady state, often involving
              non-minimum-phase behavior (inverse response).  Examples of process designs
              that can show such behavior are chemical reactors, fermentation reactors,
              fluidized catalytic crackers, reactor-separator-recycle plants, azeotropic
              distillation towers, and reboilers.  Processes with such designs are known to
              be more challenging to control than processes with stable and minimum-phase
              steady states.

This University of Pennsylvania-Drexel University joint
              research project is aimed at addressing more efficient and easier operation of
              processes with unstable and/or non-minimum-phase steady states.  It is a study
              of the interactions between design and control in the processes, and strategies
              to develop process designs that make control of the processes easier.  The
              designs of existing chemical and biochemical processes with unstable and/or
              non-minimum phase steady states will be studied to identify the design features
              that give rise to such process behavior.  Alternative new process designs, if
              possible, will then be developed for the processes such that the same level of
              profitability is maintained but the instability and non-minimum-phase behavior
              are eliminated.  For processes for which such desired alternative designs
              cannot be found, new differential-geometric, model-based control laws will be
              developed that are applicable to general nonlinear processes, whether
              minimum-phase or non-minimum-phase.  Initially, control laws will be developed
              for general, nonlinear, continuous-time processes without deadtimes or
              input-saturation constraints.  Subsequently, the latter two complications will
              be addressed, and the methods will be extended to multi-input-multi-output
              (MINO) systems and tested for chemical, petrochemical, and biochemical
              processes.  A prototype symbolic-manipulation software that, given a process
              model, automatically generates differential geometric control laws will be
              developed to simplify their industrial implementation and testing.

