Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A 1,200-Year, High-Resolution Record of
               Hurricane Activity for Southern New England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a0101035

Award Number: 0101035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond S. Bradley rbradley@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The present record of the natural variability of hurricane activity is
              insufficient to accurately predict the recurrence intervals for hurricane
              catastrophe events.  The study of coastal sedimentary sequences that provide
              long-term proxy records of hurricane activity can be used to address this
              issue.  This doctoral dissertation research project will develop a
              1,200-year-long high-resolution record of hurricane and tropical storm activity
              for the Boston area based primarily on the sedimentary record from the Lower
              Mystic Lake.  The Mystic Lake record is laminated and appears to hold an
              annually resolvable archive of sedimentation for the last millennium. 
              Hurricane storm surge and overwash events can be detected in the sediments by
              changes in physical sedimentology and diatom assemblages.  Based on microscopic
              examination of the laminae and radiometric dating, this project will develop a
              high-resolution record of these events for the region over the last millennium.
               The record will be compared with a lower-resolution record developed from a
              marsh in Boston Harbor.  This second record is more typical of studies carried
              out elsewhere to reconstruct past hurricane frequency.  It is expected that the
              Mystic Lake record will preserve more subtle events and events that are closely
              spaced in time, occurrences that are not evident in a lower-resolution
              record.

The project will contribute to understanding of how synoptic climate
              controls may moderate different regional modes of hurricane activity.  By
              examining the frequency of hurricane events in the context of long-term climate
              changes, in particular the frequency of events over the past millennium from
              the cold episodes of the "Little Ice Age" compared to warmer periods, results
              of the project may suggest the expected hurricane activity in a climate warmed
              by greenhouse gases.  The value of better understanding hurricane activity and
              recurrence intervals is enhanced by populations that have led increasing
              numbers of people to live along or near coastlines that are subject to
              hurricanes.  More than half of the total U.S. population currently is located
              in vulnerable coastal zones, and these populations are expected to swell
              another 20 percent by 2015.  Combined with the uncertainty of how global
              warming may affect hurricane activity, civic planners, disaster management
              agencies, and the global insurance industry have begun to wonder whether recent
              disasters like Hurricane Andrew are simply a precursor to an increasing number
              of even more costly and deadly tropical storms in the coming decades.  Results
              from this project will contribute to the growing body of knowledge necessary to
              answer this question.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
              a strong independent research career.

