Title       : Collaborative Research: FRG: Mathematical and Computational Methods for
               High-Data-Rate Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0101340

Award Number: 0101340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Ablowitz markjab@boulder.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0101340 

Mathematical Sciences: FRG: Mathematical
              and Computational Methods for High-Data-Rate Optical Fiber Communications   
              

Abstract
DMS-0101340 
Ablowitz   


The goal of this research project
              is to develop new methods that can be used to determine the behavior of optical
              transmission systems under realistic circumstances.  This will be accomplished
              by a combination of various techniques.  One approach will exploit the
              mathematical structure of fiber transmission models in order to eliminate
              unessential degrees of freedom.  The reduced models that will result will be
              more tractable mathematically and also much more computationally efficient. 
              Another approach that will be used is the application of linearization and
              importance sampling techniques to enable the simulation of systems at realistic
              data error rates.  These methods will be combined to study the main sources of
              impairment in optical fibers in order to achieve an accurate evaluation of
              system performance.  All the techniques to be developed will be carefully
              validated by comparison to more computationally time-consuming models and to
              experiments.  

The development of high-data-rate optical fiber
              communications is one of the great technological achievements of the late 20th
              century; in the last decade alone, data rates have increased by four orders of
              magnitude.  This enormous increase has made possible the growth of the global
              Internet that promises to continue to revolutionize day-to-day communications. 
              Because demand for further growth continues unabated, however, system capacity
              is becoming limited by fiber transmission effects.  It has therefore become
              crucial to accurately model and calculate the impairments due to non-ideal
              fiber properties when designing systems.  Due to the tremendous data capacity
              that will be required of future transmission systems (terabits per second of
              aggregate capacity) and the need for extremely small transmission error rates
              (less than one error per trillion bits), realistic attempts to model and
              predict the effects of these impairments as they appear in practical systems
              present a number of difficult mathematical and computational challenges.  The
              techniques that will be developed in this collaborative research project are
              expected to yield large reductions in the computational time required to model
              optical communication systems, and at the same time produce new insights into
              system behavior.  Because these methods will be capable of providing detailed
              information about system performance at realistic data error rates, we believe
              they will lead to significant changes in the way in which optical transmission
              systems are modeled, and, ultimately, in the way that they are built.   

