Title       : Theoretical Particle Physics, Astrophysics, and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0101738

Award Number: 0101738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $686000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glennys R. Farrar farrar@physics.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Hogg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrei Gruzinov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roman Scoccimarro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matias Zaldarriaga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1288      ASTROPHYSICS & COSMOLOGY THEOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research supported under this proposal touches cosmology,
observational
              astronomy, aspects of particle physics, plasma physics,
high energy
              astrophysics, black holes and computational physics.
Techniques will be
              developed to best exploit future high precision data
on the cosmic microwave
              background radiation and irregularities in the
distribution of galaxies.  The
              evolution of galaxies and some aspects of
gamma ray bursts will be studied
              using the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and
Keck telescopes.  Theoretical work will
              attempt to elucidate the
properties and distribution of dark matter, the
              origin of the excess of
matter over antimatter in the Universe,  the
              underlying physics of
gamma ray bursts,  the source of the highest energy
              cosmic rays, the
process by which large black holes form and accrete matter,
              and
selected issues in particle physics.

The work will help pin down the
              fundamental cosmological parameters such
as Einstein's cosmological constant,
              the curvature of the
universe, and the matter content of the universe. 
              Conditions in the
Universe in the instant after the Big Bang will be inferred.
                The
mechanism by which the Big Bang developed and then ended will
              be
elucidated and the "Inflationary Scenario" will be tested. 
              Novel
properties of space-time, such as extra dimensions or
              intrinsically
quantum mechanical dimensions whose distances cannot be
              described by
ordinary numbers, are inherent in string theory; it is an
              important
challenge to find ways to discover these hidden features of
              the
Universe, if they are there.  Identifying and measuring the dark
              matter
and dark energy, and answering the questions above, are prerequisites
              to
deducing the fundamental theory of nature and to understanding why
              the
Universe is hospitable to life at this or any epoch in its history.

