Title       : Environmental Analysis and GIS: Addressing Regional Needs Through Teacher
               Preparation and Community Outreach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0101639

Award Number: 0101639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Semerjian csemerji@hermes.gc.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis F. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheryl Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gainesville College
	      Mundy Mill Road Box 1358
	      Gainesville, GA  305031358    404/535-6239

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is facilitating the implementation of GIS and GPS technologies in
              two-year colleges and high schools in Georgia. Curriculum modules are being
              developed for high school students, and high school teachers are being provided
              necessary field equipment, data, and software to implement the modules. The
              modules are environmentally based and address current regional needs as
              specified by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, including source
              water protection and land use analysis. The modules are based on courses
              developed through previous grant support to Gainesville College and Phi Theta
              Kappa entitled "Improving Science and Technology Education at Community
              Colleges."

Eight regional high schools are participating in the project.
              Teams of faculty/staff members from each school are working closely with
              Gainesville College faculty, staff, and students to develop custom GIS/GPS
              applications for their region and to integrate the instructional modules into
              the science classroom. The modules are being developed at Gainesville College
              and tested in geology and integrated science courses during the first year.
              Each teacher team is attending workshops and developing a plan for the
              integration of GIS/GPS into their school curricula during the second year.
              During the third year, each team is being required to implement their plans and
              disseminate their results to other teachers and schools. All teams are strongly
              encouraged to present outcomes at state and national conferences.

