Title       : A Community College-Led Partnership to Develop High School Biotechnology
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0101581

Award Number: 0101581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd Bergren Todd.Bergren@cca.cccoes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CC of Aurora
	      16000 E CentreTech Parkway
	      Aurora, CO  800119036    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award is helping to meet the growing demand for biotechnology technicians
              in Colorado's Front Range corridor by establishing close collaborations among
              K-12 school systems, two-year and four-year educational institutions, and the
              business community. The project is utilizing previous interactions with BioLink
              and BioTechEd, NSF-funded Advanced Technology Education efforts in the
              biotechnology area. High school teachers from throughout the region are being
              recruited and supported to develop biotechnology curriculum for their
              particular secondary system, they are attending the Biotechnology Institute
              established at the Community College of Aurora, and they are introducing into
              their curriculum biotechnology topics such as the handling and manipulation of
              DNA and proteins in a manner consistent with research and industry protocols.
              Once fully implemented, the project is impacting 9000 or more high school
              students over three years as the 75 teachers trained in the Institute implement
              biotechnology activities, modules, and courses in their high schools.

Final
              outcomes from the award will include:
- an active, ongoing Advisory Committee
              to provide guidance on project activities and links to needed resources.
- a
              total of 75 area high school teachers trained at the introductory and advanced
              levels in biotechnology topics.
- weekend laboratory sessions for high school
              teachers.
- on-line learning opportunities and resources to discuss and share
              implementation of Institute training in the classrooms, the opportunity to
              attend industry-related events, and assistance with guest speakers and field
              trips.
- teachers with ready-to-use biotechnology equipment and supplies from
              a college-maintained lending library.
- model curricula that additional
              teachers may use as they develop biotechnology courses appropriate to their
              district science standards.
- information for students and their parents about
              career opportunities in biotechnology with special efforts to reach those from
              ethnically diverse neighborhoods and schools.


