Title       : Advanced Research Workshop on Future Trends in Microelectronics: the Nano
               Millennium, Ile de Bendor, France on June 24-29, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a0101107

Award Number: 0101107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36618              (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge Luryi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,5914,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              



The proposed ARW is to provide a forum for free-spirited exchange and
              debate of views,
visions, and ideas. The format includes both prepared invited
              presentations and ad hoc
contributions with uninhibited exchange of views and
              rebuttals. Some of the key luminaries
will come to share their opinions and to
              lead the discussions on where the technologies 
are going and/or should be
              going. Balanced representations of advocacy and opposition
will be
              intentionally sought.

Each day will start with presentations given by key
              speakers on subjects in one or two
chosen themes. It is then followed by
              debates and invited talks by other participants.
All oral presentations (in
              morning sessions) are to focus on the presenter's views and
projections of
              future directions, assessments or critiques of important new
ideas/approaches,
              and NOT on their own achievements. The presenters are asked to be
provocative
              and/or inspiring.
Latest advances made and results obtained by the
              participants will be presented in the
afternoon sessions in the form of
              posters and group/individual discussions.

The day will be concluded by an
              evening panels session that attempts to further the
debates on selected
              controversial issues connected to the theme of the day. Each session
will be
              chaired by one forceful character that will invite 2-3 attendees of his/her
              choice
to lead with a position statement, all other attendees being the
              panelists. The debate
will be forcefully moderated and irrelevant digressions
              will be cut off without mercy.
Moderators will be also assigned a hopeless
              task to forge a consensus on critical issues.

For these considerations, a
              format has been choosen that is less rigid than normal workshops to
allow and
              encourage uninhibited exchanges and sometimes confrontation of different
              views.
A design a central theme will be designed together with the speakers
              for each day.

