Title       : Learner Connections in Biotechnology: Virtual Bioprocess
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a0101711

Award Number: 0101711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $580483             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Brigham dbrigham@ihcc.cc.ia.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Bryden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Hills Community Col
	      525 Grandview Drive
	      Ottumwa, IA  525011398    515/856-2143

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is developing a fully interactive three-dimensional model of the
              fermentation process. The virtual reality biochemical processing plant has
              three levels of immersion and is targeted to run on a standard personal
              computer. This model places special emphasis on bioprocess technology workplace
              preparedness. Indian Hills and its partners - Iowa State University, Iowa
              BioDevelopment, Southeastern Iowa Accelerated Career Education Biotechnology
              Consortium, Bio-Link, Madison Area Technical College, Pennsylvania College of
              Technology, Iowa Equity Resource Center, and Iowa Department of Education are
              developing and disseminating best practices in biotechnology education and the
              use of virtual reality for instruction in complex technical fields. The virtual
              reality bioprocessing plant provides students with an unprecedented opportunity
              to "see" how a bioprocessor works from the inside out. In addition, the virtual
              plant accurately models the controls and response of the real plant so that
              students can explore cause and effect relationships without costly plant
              shut-downs or product loss. Prior to this project, only in-plant training was
              available to technicians entering this field, yet in-plant training is
              expensive and the student cannot fully examine hazardous, non-profitable or
              transient conditions. In contrast, 3-D modeling and synthetic environment
              technology offers an inexpensive and flexible first step to training new
              operators on the biochemical processing system. Students in the Indian Hills
              Associate in Applied Science Degree program in Bioprocess Technology are
              benefiting directly from the virtual reality bioprocessor experience which is
              integrated into a number of courses. In addition, this technology is being
              utilized in a variety of settings ranging from high school to university as the
              technology has applications to a number of fields including biochemistry,
              engineering, biophysics, microbiology, and computer science. Students utilizing
              the virtual reality bioprocessor, whether in the personal computer format or in
              full immersion environment with pincher gloves and goggles, are able to
              visualize and test the information that is presented, internalizing the lesson.
              This technology fills a major gap in the academic preparation, in-service
              training, and continuing education of technicians in the biotechnology
              industry.

