Title       : Planning Project for Regional Manufacturing Education Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0101660

Award Number: 0101660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49436              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fatima L. Weathers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Abate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip Sanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Lewandowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CAMP
	      4600 Prospect Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  441034314    216/531-8359

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
CAMP Inc., in partnership with the College of Education and the Advanced
              Manufacturing Center at Cleveland State University, Cuyahoga Community College,
              Lorain Community College, and Lakeland Community College is developing a plan
              for establishing a Regional Center for Manufacturing Education. Building on the
              strengths of existing programs and relationships, the project is conducting a
              series of activities aimed at developing new training and education programs
              and curricula that incorporate the use of information technology
in modern
              manufacturing processes. 

As information technology (IT) has become critical
              to the quality and means of production, there is a growing demand for
              manufacturing workers with a thorough knowledge of IT .The introduction onto
              the factory floor of networked computers has dramatically changed the world of
              manufacturing. IT is a major factor in production control systems that may be
              monitored from remote stations; IT is at the heart of product tracking,
              monitoring quality control, ergonomic feedback systems, and in getting the
              final product to the customer on time. The proliferation of computers and the
              impact of IT in the factory demands rethinking the preparation of SMET
              educators and future technicians. 

In the planning process, the partners
              are:
1. Evaluating existing IT curriculum and manufacturing technology
              curriculum to determine where linkages need to be created;
2. Identifying
              courses that would be ideal for delivery in an on-line or distance learning
              environment; and
3. Brainstorming teacher and faculty projects to test and
              evaluate new curricula.

