Title       : Simulation, Optimization, and Analysis of High Dimensional Higher Index DAEs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0101802

Award Number: 0101802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Campbell slc@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Optimization is used in everything from the control of spacecraft to optimizing
              chemical processes. Optimization usually takes place in the presence of
              equality and inequality constraints. Differential algebraic equations (DAEs)
              are implicit systems of differential equations. Usually it is also assumed that
              the Jacobian with respect to the highest derivative is singular. An integer
              quantity called the index is one measure of how different a DAE is from being
              an explicit ordinary differential equation. Many problems are most naturally
              initially modeled as a DAE particularly those that are analyzed and simulated
              using computer generated mathematical models. DAEs occur in optimization
              because the original problem is a DAE, because of the activation of
              constraints, and when partial differential equations are numerically solved
              using the method of lines. Many problems also involve delays either because
              delays are inherently present in the process or because of delays in control or
              feedback loops. Direct transcription methods are a popular approach for the
              solution of optimal control problems. Recently it has been shown that the usual
              theory of DAE integrators needs to be substantially modified when DAEs occur
              during the numerical solution by direct transcription methods of inequality
              constrained optimal control problems. The primary focus of this proposal is the
              numerical solution of inequality constrained optimal control problems including
              those with delays using direct transcription methods. Theory will be developed,
              the theory will be applied to numerical algorithms and their implementation in
              production codes, and the algorithms will be applied to a number of
              applications. The interaction between optimization, delays, direct
              transcription, numerical discretizations, and state inequality and equality
              constraints is far from fully understood. This proposal will carefully examine
              this interaction. In addition, more general DAE simulation algorithms will be
              developed.

 	Designing controls and process behavior which are optimal in
              some sense is fundamental to designing efficient and effective processes. The
              optimization can include minimizing energy consumption, producing a part in
              minimum time, maximizing part quality or maximizing product production. In
              general, the availability of robust DAE simulation, analysis, and optimization
              software will result in more accurate models and predictions of performance,
              which in turn translates to more efficient processes and their more efficient
              operation resulting in better performance. The particular theoretical and
              computational questions to be examined are motivated by, and will be applied
              to, applications arising at the Boeing Corporation. The specific applications
              each of which may have delays, are real time control, chemical processes, and
              aerospace vehicles. However, the results will be publicly distributed and will
              find use in a variety of software packages and in a number of similar
              applications that affect a wide range of industries. High performance and
              efficient use of complex processes is a basic need in modern engineering and
              science. The training of young scientists in the areas of this project and the
              establishment of both industrial and international aspects to their research
              will be a significant contribution of this research project for years to come.
              

