Title       : Ag Knowledge The National Center for Agriscience & Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0101507

Award Number: 0101507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Brase tbrase@kirkwood.cc.ia.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert I. Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Thieman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kirkwood Community Coll
	      P O BOX 2068
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524062068    319/398-5411

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
AgTEC, a National Partnership, is improving the mathematics, science, and
              technical competencies of agriculture technology graduates who are preparing
              for careers that support the most efficient and sustainable food and fiber
              production in the world. Kirkwood Community College with partner colleges,
              secondary schools, and universities, guided by the vision of the agriculture
              industry, is institutionalizing improvements in select agriculture technology
              education programs that serve as models for the nation. 

To accomplish this
              vision, AgTEC is focusing on three areas of activity: curriculum development,
              faculty development and capacity building. Specific directions in each of these
              activity areas are being determined annually by a Critical Issues Conference.
              Conference breakout sessions address needs and establish outcomes for annual
              projects. Projects are being accomplished by a team of lead partners and then
              institutionalized, in following years, by all appropriate partners. The annual
              conferences also address best practices in the three primary areas of activity
              as improvements are institutionalized.

In curriculum development, the center
              is (a) defining advanced technological careers in Agriculture
              Business/Services, Agriculture Production, Agriculture Science and Advanced
              Agriculture Technology, and identifying the knowledge and skill competencies
              required by students entering careers in these fields; (b) validating and
              enhancing existing curriculum and developing new curriculum driven by emerging
              technologies and critical issues influencing 21st century agriculture; and (c)
              developing all courses/modules with strong science, mathematics, and technical
              skill components.

The center is also helping to develop faculty expertise by
              (a) hosting workshops for college and high school instructors to strengthen
              their skills in using and applying new technology, curriculum, and electronic
              resources; (b) coordinating instructor internships at agricultural research
              centers and in industry; (c) identifying and promoting model agriculture
              teacher education programs at four-year colleges and universities; and (d)
              assisting partner colleges and high schools to integrate advanced mathematics,
              science and technology through one-on-one mentoring and technical
              assistance.

To help build capacity, the center and partner colleges are
              enrolling students previously denied access to advanced Agriculture Technology
              Education by identifying and implementing successful recruitment and retention
              models. The Center is maintaining a national clearinghouse of electronic
              resources and reports to be used by the nation's educational institutions for
              program improvement and facilitating 2 + 2 + 2 articulation between high
              schools, two-year and four-year colleges and universities. Ongoing assistance
              is being provided by an Industry Council of leading agri-businesses, a
              University Council of leading university agriculture programs, and local teams
              of community colleges, universities, and secondary agriculture
              programs.





