Title       : Foundation Science: A Comprehensive Middle School Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0101798

Award Number: 0101798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1999313            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline S. Miller jsmiller@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen M. Robblee  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Foundation Science is a comprehensive, articulated curriculum for grades six
              through ten in which conceptual understandings are built and deepened from year
              to year.  The curriculum in grades six through eight consists of four modules
              in each of the three major science disciplines.  The sequence of modules in
              each discipline develops concepts in progressively deeper and more complex ways
              so that modules can be taught by discipline  or in an interdisciplinary manner.
               The ninth and tenth grade modules are developed in Phase One
along with the
              conceptual framework for the entire curriculum.  These modules serve as a
              prototype for all the modules; they address learning goals and formative and
              summative assessment strategies that inform instruction and measure students'
              achievement for the learning goals.  Each module consists of a student book and
              teachers guide.  Educational technology is used for instruction and learning,
              accessing and sharing information as well as for assessment, professional
              development and community outreach.  Professional development enhances the
              teachers' content knowledge, supports the hands-on, inquiry approach and
              prepares teachers for using the variety of assessments.  Also included are
              materials to inform the community about the approach of the materials and also
              to gain administrative support for their implementation.  The evaluation
              includes information about student learning of the learning goals.     
