Title       : Georgia Geospatial Technology Literacy Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0101622

Award Number: 0101622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca L. Dodge rdodge@westga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis F. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is infusing applied geospatial technology into both the
              geosciences curricula and into other curricula within the Natural Sciences,
              Physical Education and Technology Division at Gainesville College (GC), and the
              College of Arts and Sciences at the State University of West Georgia (UWG).
              Curricula is being articulated between the two institutions to ensure that
              available transfer and "reverse transfer" opportunities work smoothly for
              students in both institutions. The effort contributes toward articulated
              Bachelors of Science and Associate of Science degree programs in geographic
              information science, remote sensing, and global positioning systems at the two
              institutions.

The project has three major elements:

(1) University of
              West Georgia is including a new technology course in their core curriculum for
              mathematics, science, and technology - such courses are required for all
              undergraduate students. The course is being modeled after the Geographic
              Information Science course at Gainesville College. 

(2) Faculty members (GC
              science program, UWG geoscience program) are integrating remote sensing into
              the core course described above. This program is being used in faculty
              development workshops (Introduction to Geospatial Data Analysis for Research
              and Classroom Applications) and in undergraduate courses. Faculty from other
              regional institutions are also participating in these workshops.

(3) Faculty
              from both institutions are working together to ensure course compatibility
              across the two institutions.




						 

