Title       : Formation Dynamics and Spectroscopy of Novel Rare-Gas Atom Containing Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0101199

Award Number: 0101199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Benny Gerber bgerber@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              R. Benny Gerber of the University of California, Irvine, is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to explore the formation
              mechanism of novel rare gas containing molecules using molecular dynamics
              simulations, including "surface hopping" between the different potential energy
              surfaces that may be involved.  These rare gas molecules, such as HXeCl and
              HXeOH, have recently been discovered experimentally, and have stable bonds of
              typical chemical strength.  The simulations will compute the formation yield of
              these compounds and its dependence on radiation wavelength and temperature,
              both for the rare gas clusters and for species in matrices.  Another objective
              of the calculations is to predict if new but still unknown rare gas containing
              compounds can be made by evaporation of rare gas atoms from clusters species. 
              This research will pursue the formation of new argon-containing molecules, and
              the possibility of preparing neon and helium containing molecules.  Finally,
              simulations will be used to test whether pure crystals of HRgX molecules can be
              stable.  In addition to the dynamics simulations, calculations of the
              vibrational spectroscopy of the new molecules will be carried out using the
              Vibrational Self-Consistent Field (VSCF) method, which includes effects of
              anharmonicities and coupling between modes.  The outcomes of this effort are
              expected to greatly expand knowledge about a new and interesting class of
              molecules, enable discovery of new species within this family, and encourage
              studies of analogous compounds for non-rare gas chemically inert molecules. 
              

Until recently, it was widely assumed that rare gas atoms (helium, neon,
              argon, krypton, xenon, and radon) could not form chemical bonds in the
              electronic ground state of neutral molecules, and chemical compounds containing
              rare gas atoms have belonged to a limited class.  The new family of rare gas
              molecules that will be explored in this research could ultimately have
              significant applications in various areas of science, including atmospheric
              chemistry and materials chemistry.
