Title       : GLOBEC 2000: Responses of the Neocalanus spp. - Microplankton Community to
               Physical forcing in the Coastal Gulf of Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0101397

Award Number: 0101397
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $654754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne L. Strom stroms@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ocean and atmospheric conditions in the coastal Gulf of Alaska vary widely over
              daily, seasonal, and interannual time scales. The abundance of dominant upper
              trophic level species, including salmon, has been shown to vary in concert with
              this environmental change, most notably on decadal time scales. The mechanisms
              linking these large-scale population shifts with climate are not clear, but may
              involve lower trophic level responses (i.e. bottom-up effects). Although lower
              trophic level species are less well studied in the CGOA, preliminary data
              indicates that the abundance and activity of microplankton populations also
              respond strongly at least to short-term changes in CGOA physical regimes.
              Additionally, microzooplankton are likely the dominant consumers of
              phytoplankton on the shelf, thus consituting a key link between physical
              forcing of primary production and higher trophic levels. The PIs will examine
              the processes structuring microplankton communities and link them with
              populations of Neocalanus spp., the dominant particle-grazing copepods in the
              coastal Gulf of Alaska. Collectively, 3 species of Neocalanus (N. flemingeri,
              N. plumchrus, N. cristatus) contribute substantially to total spring and summer
              mesozooplankton biomass in the CGOA. Neocalanus are capable of consuming both
              phytoplankton and microzooplankton, though the factors dictating this diet
              partitioning are not well understood. Furthermore, these copepods have been
              shown to alter individual body size, population biomass, and life cycle timing
              in response to variations in ocean conditions. Finally, the size and abundance
              of Neocalanus make them an important potential prey for pink salmon fry and
              other coastal fish species. Thus the microplankton - Neocalanus food web is a
              potential locus for the translation of environmental variation into higher
              trophic level responses. Specific measurements to be made are: 1) Microplankton
              abundance and composition (phytoplankton size structure, microzooplankton
              species and size composition); 2) Rates of microzooplankton herbivory; and 3)
              Rates of Neocalanus spp. grazing on microzooplankton and phytoplankton. A novel
              element of the work is the use of the FlowCAM (Flow Cytometer and Microscope)
              to characterize microplankton abundance and community composition during
              feeding experiments. This new imaging-in-flow technology should allow us to
              conduct many more copepod grazing experiments than would be possible with
              complete reliance on conventional microscopy.  By sampling across a range of
              coastal physical regimes and seasons, this work will test the hypothesis that
              variation in the physical environment dictates production levels and food web
              structure in the CGOA, altering the timing, amount and quality of resources
              available to Neocalanus and ultimately to other higher trophic level
              species.



