Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Analysis of Decadal Moisture Anomalies over
               North America: 1700-1979
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0101245

Award Number: 0101245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7800               (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Stahle dstahle@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1324,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent research on the complex interactions among ocean, atmosphere, and
              terrestrial systems have highlighted the need for more complete understanding
              of the processes that influence climatic variability at seasonal, annual, and
              decadal time scales.  Once facet of vulnerability that has special significance
              for many different sectors of society is the tendency for longer-term dry and
              wet spells, which can have critical impacts because of the absence or
              overabundance of precipitation.  This doctoral dissertation research project
              will analyze the spatial and temporal variation and forcing of natural modes of
              drought and wet spells over the U.S. and northern Mexico.  Analyses will focus
              on the regional spatial scale and decadal to century time scales.  Instrumental
              and tree-ring-reconstructed Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) data sets are
              available as June-July-August means covering the U.S. for cells measuring 2
              degrees of latitude by 3 degrees of longitude, with the instrumental data
              extending over the period from 1895 to1995 period while the
              dendroclimatological data cover the period from 1700 to 1979.  The
              reconstructed data set will be expanded in this study with new tree-ring
              chronologies over northern Mexico.  The overall goal of this study is to better
              understand how moisture anomalies vary spatially and temporally and what
              factors within the natural variation of earth's climate system cause them to
              occur.  The project's first objective is a description of the spatial and
              temporal characteristics of well-known epic droughts and wet spells during the
              20th century.  Potential analogs to these epic events and their spatial
              position, progression, and severity will be characterized from the long
              tree-ring reconstructed PDSI data set and historical evidence in the
              literature.  Animations of PDSI map sequences will help analyze drought/wet
              spell progression and dissipation.  Studies of factors that lead to or "force"
              droughts/wet spells will include examination of the effects of solar insolation
              variation, Pacific sea surface temperatures, and indices like the Pacific/North
              American Pattern, Pacific Decadal Oscillation, Southern Oscillation, North
              Atlantic Oscillation, and Arctic Oscillation on the position, duration, and
              intensity of drought/wet spells.  Methods used for these "forcing" analyses
              will be the mapping of composite sea surface temperatures and correlation
              statistics obtained from pair-wise comparisons between the forcing time series
              and individual grid point PDSI time series.  The possible link between moisture
              anomalies and various forcing factorswill also be assessed and plotted using
              t-tests and spectral analyses.

This research project should result in a
              better understanding of the geographical positioning, timing, progression,
              intensity, and causes of long-duration drought and wet periods in the U.S. and
              northern Mexico.  The focus will be on long-term drought and wet periods
              because of the enormous impact they have had on the environment and society. 
              Examples are the 1930s epic drought and the wet periods of the early 1900s and
              the early 1990s.  These events are not unprecedented in the climate history of
              the U.S., however.  Based on a 300-plus-year record of U.S. moisture anomalies
              reconstructed from tree-rings, recurring long duration drought/wet periods will
              be identified and characterized.  Causal mechanisms such as variations in solar
              irradiation and sea surface temperature will then be statistically associated
              with these recurring moisture anomalies to identify common causes.  The
              expected result is an improved understanding of the timing, position, and
              severity of drought and wet spells associated with certain forcing or causal
              mechanisms.  This is expected to lead to improved forecasts of drought/wet
              spells and provide valuable insight and data for continued research into these
              profound climatic anomalies.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research career.

