Title       : Maricopa Mathematics Mentoring and Renewal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0101998

Award Number: 0101998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica M. Neagoy                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $956935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora Ramirez nora.ramirez@domail.maricopa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle Zandieh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melinda Rudibaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Maricopa County CC Distric
	      2411 W 14th St
	      Tempe, AZ  852816941    480/731-8031

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Maricopa Mathematics Mentoring and Renewal," a four-year project of Maricopa
              Community College District (AZ) in collaboration with the Chandler School
              District, the Tempe Elementary School District, Tempe High School District,
              Chandler Gilbert Community College, and Arizona State University is designed to
              address the issues of continual need for new mathematics teachers due to both
              teacher turnover and continuous growth in population.  Funded under the Teacher
              Enhancement guidelines for Teacher Retention and Renewal, the project focuses
              on preparing 81 teachers of grades 5-12 to serve as mentors/coaches to novice
              teachers.  n additional 119 teachers participate in professional development
              activities and implement standards-based units while being mentored and coached
              by the mentor teachers.

All project teachers participate in professional
              development activities designed to enhance both mathematical content and
              pedagogical practice.  In addition, mentor teachers develop their skills in
              coaching and leading collegial support groups.  Participating 5th - 8th grade
              teachers implement a minimum of two standards-based mathematics units.  In the
              last two years, each middle school becomes a site for a collegial support
              group.  Teachers from feeder elementary schools and cluster high schools are a
              part of the middle school based support group.  Both mentor and novice teachers
              participate in content courses delivered through Arizona State University.  A
              summer school practicum employs a mentoring/coaching model that engages teams
              of participants in planning lessons based on standards-based instructional
              strategies.  The teaching is followed by reflection, re-planning, and
              re-teaching by another team member.    

