Title       : In Situ Characterization of Electrical and Optical Properties of Air-Sensitive
               Ultra-Thin Films and Thin-Film Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0101856

Award Number: 0101856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur F. Hebard afh@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is on the fabrication and in situ characterization of
              air sensitive ultra-thin films and thin-film interfaces. The capability to
              perform these investigations relies on a recently constructed
              Sample-Handling-In-VAcuum (SHIVA) chamber in which thin-film samples can be
              reliably connected/disconnected at the deposition station (where optical and
              transport measurements can be made) and then transferred, without exposure to
              air, to the bottom of a vacuum-compatible cryostat for low temperature (1.3K)
              and high field (7T) magnetotransport measurements. The rationale for this
              approach centers on observations that air sensitivity can be a primary
              impediment to unraveling intrinsic behavior in a variety of systems. The scope
              of work will be concentrated in four overlapping areas: percolation and the
              metal-insulating transition, metal/C60 bilayers and composites, magnetism in
              reduced dimensions, and the determination of screening lengths at
              metal-dielectric interfaces.  Specific systems to be studied include Ag films
              near the percolation threshold (exhibits pure geometric behavior and a negative
              classical magnetoresistance), magnetic (Ni, Fe, Co, Gd) metal/C-60 bilayers and
              composites (exhibits charge transfer and anomalous positive magnetoresistance),
              thin disordered magnetic and magnetic semiconductor (e.g., Fe, GdxSi1-x) films,
              and tunnel junction capacitor structures with magnetic electrodes (exhibits
              magnetocapacitance due to dependence of screening length on magnetic field). We
              expect that the SHIVA system will greatly facilitate a comprehensive
              understanding of novel physical phenomena occurring in air sensitive systems.
              This research is carried out with students who will acquire training skills
              that will prepare them for future employment in the scientific/technological
              sector of our economy. 

As the thickness of a metallic film decreases, its
              electrical properties become increasingly sensitive to its interface with the
              underlying substrate and its interface with the ambient environment. For
              example, many freshly deposited thin films (e.g., Al, Fe) will rapidly oxidize
              when exposed to air and, if sufficiently thin, will in a short time become
              totally oxidized.  To measure the intrinsic electrical properties of such
              air-sensitive thin films, it therefore becomes necessary to utilize specialized
              techniques in which air is prevented from reaching the sample in the period
              between its fabrication and electrical characterization. The capability to
              perform these investigations relies on a recently constructed
              Sample-Handling-In-VAcuum (SHIVA) chamber in which thin-film samples can be
              reliably connected/disconnected at the deposition station (where optical and
              transport measurements can be made) and then transferred, without exposure to
              air, to the bottom of a separate vacuum-compatible chamber for electrical
              measurements at low temperatures and high magnetic fields. Specific systems to
              be studied include metal films near the conduction threshold, magnetic
              metal/Carbon-60 bilayers and composites, thin disordered magnetic and magnetic
              semiconductor films, and tunnel junction capacitor structures with magnetic
              electrodes. We expect that the SHIVA vacuum deposition and characterization
              system will greatly facilitate a comprehensive understanding of novel physical
              phenomena occurring in air sensitive systems. Students will participate in this
              research.  They will thereby acquire skills and training in preparation for
              employment in scientific/technological sectors of industry, academe, and
              government.

