Title       : Maryland Regional Consortium for E-Commerce Curriculum and Workforce Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0101598

Award Number: 0101598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $656466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Comins acomins@ccbc.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheryl Parks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barney Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Americus A. Pavese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melita E. Lykiardopoulou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Comm Coll of Baltimore Cnt
	      7201 Roseville Boulevard
	      Essex, MD  212373855    410/682-6000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Community College of Baltimore County (CCBC), the largest provider of IT
              training in Maryland, is collaborating with other organizations to implement an
              associate degree program in e-commerce and two related certificate programs for
              "Building E-Commerce Solutions for Organizations" and "Managing E-Commerce
              Enterprises." Partners include the Maryland State Department of Education, the
              University of Baltimore's Department of Business and Economic Development, the
              University of Maryland University College, the Maryland Community College
              Teleconsortium, the Baltimore County Career and Technology Education Division,
              the Next Generation Internet Company, Paragon Computer Services, Circadian
              Management Corporation, Delata Graphics and Communications, Vansant Creations,
              and the Maryland Online Network. The project builds on course work developed
              under NSF Award No. 9950056, "Internet and Multimedia Technology (I/MMT):
              Curriculum, Faculty, and Workforce Development," and also builds on the IT
              skill standards developed by the NorthWest Center for Emerging Technologies, an
              ATE Center of Excellence.

An important part of this project is the
              development and validation of skill standards needed to define the specific
              skill sets, performance indicators, employability skills, and technical
              knowledge required of technician-level workers in e-commerce in the region. The
              resulting degree and certificate programs aim to prepare students for
              entry-level employment, provide opportunities for workers to upgrade and
              acquire technical skills, and prepare students for further education in
              articulated four-year programs. Students in the new programs have access to two
              delivery options for their courses: the Internet and the classroom. Project
              faculty are obtaining professional development through graduate studies and
              internships. Workshops are upgrading K-12 teachers' skills. An annual
              professional development conference brings together K-12 and college faculty
              and industry representatives to address ongoing changes in the field. Finally,
              the project is employing an Internet-supported process to survey business
              leaders in e-commerce, in order to access business expertise, maintain the
              currency of the skill standards information, and regularly update the
              curriculum. Business and educational partners are supporting the program as
              advisory board members, in program development, and for internships and
              cooperative education opportunities for faculty and students.

