Title       : Preparation of Aircraft Technicians for the Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0101549

Award Number: 0101549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon Hoff hoffgo@mctc.mnscu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Hoxie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry Gullekson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MCTC
	      1501 Hennepin Avenue
	      Minneapolis, MN  554031779    612/359-1408

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
To date, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has certified aircraft
              technicians under its Federal Aviation Regulations. These regulations dictate
              curriculum and testing procedures for schools that prepare Airframe (aircraft
              structure) and Powerplant (engines) Technicians. Advancements in aircraft
              systems, structures and engines without regulatory updates and the current
              shortage of technicians, demand aggressive measures to improve and expand the
              current system of preparing aircraft technicians.

This project is serving as
              a catalyst for systemic change in the preparation of aircraft technicians by
              bringing together many organizations that have the capacity to influence change
              on a national basis. As a major step to involve partners, the project is
              organizing a national conference whose focus is to develop a plan for aircraft
              technician reform, addressing the basic mathematics and science requirements as
              well as the specific skills and curriculum for avionics, airframe, and other
              related aviation specialties. In particular, the topics to be considered
              include certification standards and procedures, curricula including both core
              and technical courses, internship programs, access to instructional technology,
              student recruitment, and faculty development.

A second goal of this project
              is the development and testing of three courses -- electrical connectors,
              communication, and navigation. The initial testing of these courses is with
              incumbent technicians. After the initial trouble shooting, the courses are
              being introduced as credit courses setting the foundation for new aircraft
              electronics certification programs.



