Title       : Networking Education Teacher Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0101651

Award Number: 0101651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee C. Pulis lee_pulis@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing enrichment materials and methods that use the power
              of Web-based tools to enhance students' preparation in science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology via a new hands-on virtual learning environment for
              information technology (IT) networking education.

Online features are
              supporting teachers in leading IT networking courses and supporting students in
              their learning. The goal is for innovative and scale-up applications of new,
              low-cost technologies, such as console port Telnet session sharing, to
              strengthen network training in a sample of community colleges and secondary
              systems. Network equipment configuration activities rich with student inquiry
              assignments are accessible through an online teacher and student support Web
              site. Support to teachers and students in the form of mentoring and moderated
              discussion is available. Innovative software is making possible remote
              classroom sharing of multi-vendor network routing and switching equipment
              hosted on the Internet. Flexible curriculum activities and pedagogical guidance
              are enabling real-time instructor-led mentoring in the virtual classroom and
              virtual laboratory environment. Students are benefiting by having multi-vendor
              access experiences via remote connections, a typical "real world" professional
              work mode. The pairing of realistic case problem curricula with Internet
              classroom delivery tools is saving money for school systems while providing the
              most realistic educational settings and scenarios. The reduction in laboratory
              equipment costs is encouraging networking program start-ups at resource-limited
              schools.


