Title       : Teaching Excellence and Mathematics II (TEAM II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0101193

Award Number: 0101193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica B. Mitchell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1616609            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeane M. Joyner jjoyner@dpi.state.nc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gwendolyn Clay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Meredith College
	      3800 Hillsborough St
	      Raleigh, NC  276075237    919/829-6800

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The TEAM II project, submitted in the area of Teacher Retention and Renewal,
              will develop highly qualified elementary mathematics teacher leaders throughout
              North Carolina.  Principals and central staff will locally support teacher
              leaders.  

The goal of the project is to develop the state's leadership
              infrastructure by improving teachers' leadership skills, mathematical and
              pedagogical content knowledge.  Staff development will provide in-depth
              investigation focused on: (a) national and state mathematics standards; (b)
              mathematics content and pedagogy; (c) curricular materials that support
              standards-based learning; and (d) the process of change. 

Administrators are
              extensively involved in this project.  Lenses on Learning staff development
              materials will be used to increase administrators' knowledge of mathematics
              content and pedagogy.  Administrators and lead teachers will receive support to
              develop long- and short-range plans to effectively implement reform-based
              curricula at the school level.   

Internal evaluation will include surveys
              of participants during summer institutes, interviews with project staff and
              instructors, conversations with school system principals and central office
              staff, and participants' reflections on the usefulness of project activities. 
              External evaluation will document increased knowledge of participants,
              application of this knowledge in instruction, effects of improved teaching on
              student learning, and leadership by participants in NC mathematics reform. 
              Data will be gathered through content assessments, interviews, written
              reflections, classroom observations, analysis of end-of-grade test scores and
              reports of leadership activities.

