Title       : Multivariate Statistical Methodology for the Virtual Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0101360

Award Number: 0101360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1016289            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gutti J. Babu babu@stat.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric D. Feigelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The NAS Taylor/McKee Decadal Report on astronomy for 2000-2010 recommends as a
              top priority the formation of a National Virtual Observatory (NVO) to link
              archival data sets and catalogues from many existing astronomical surveys.  The
              effective use of such integrated massive data sets involves more than just
              access and extraction of information -- scientific understanding requires
              sophisticated statistical modeling of the selected data.  This effort falls
              under the rubric of statistical inference and includes the fields of
              multivariate analysis, nonparametrics, Bayesian analysis, spatial point
              processes, density estimation and data mining.
Large-scale multiwavelength
              astronomical surveys present a variety of new challenging statistical and
              algorithmic problems that require methodological advances. The principal
              investigator and his colleagues address some of the critically important
              statistical challenges raised by the NVO. Specific approaches include:
              low-storage percentile estimation for large data sets, multi-resolutional
              K-Dimensional trees for clustering and outlier detection, and multi-dimensional
              goodness-of-fit tests for comparison of multivariate astronomical data sets
              with astrophysical models and simulations. Such an endeavor needs close
              collaboration of statisticians, astronomers and NVO specialists who reside at
              different institutions.  Developing a statistical toolkit within the NVO
              software environment implementing both new and existing methods is one of the
              central goals of this project.

As the data volume and complexity of
              astronomical findings have enormously increased in recent decades, a paradigm
              shift is underway in the very nature of observational astronomy.  While in the
              past a single astronomer might observe a handful of objects, today data mining
              of large digital sky archives obtained at all wavelengths of light is becoming
              a major mode of study.  The astronomical community thus faces a key task: to
              enable efficient and objective scientific exploitation of enormous multifaceted
              data sets.  In recognition of this need, the National
Virtual Observatory
              (NVO) initiative has recently emerged to federate numerous large digital sky
              archives and develop tools to explore and understand these vast volumes of
              data.  The investigation here aims at developing statistical and computational
              methods to achieve these goals. The cross-disciplinary team, of astronomers and
              statisticians, brings advances in these fields into the toolbox of
              observational astronomy. The project seeks not only to formulate effective
              techniques to address NVO problems, but also to code these methods into
              statistical toolkits within NVO software environments for the entire
              astronomical community. The collaboration includes two institutions skilled in
              astrostatistics (Penn State and Carnegie Mellon) and an institution at the
              center of the NVO effort (California Institute of Technology).  The
              participation by graduate students and postdocs give them a rare opportunity to
              develop skills needed for cross-disciplinary work.
