Title       : M-I Coupling: Summer-Winter Asymmetry of Nightside Field-Aligned Currents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0101086

Award Number: 0101086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shin-ichi Ohtani ohtani@jhuapl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The field-aligned current (FAC) and the auroral acceleration are related to each
              other and are most important in the magnetosphere-ionosphere (M-I) coupling. 
              The recent studies have found that on the nightside, auroral emission and
              electron precipitation tend to be more intense in the winter (dark) hemisphere
              than in the summer (sunlit) hemisphere.

The observed asymmetry of auroral
              emission, suggests that the field-aligned current is more intense in the winter
              hemisphere, even though auroral regions in two hemispheres are connected by the
              magnetic field line, and the background ionospheric conductance is lower in the
              winter hemisphere.  The proposed project seeks to study this paradoxical
              problem by observationally testing three possible explanations.  Those
              explanations are (1) The upward FAC is more confined or structured in latitude
              in the winter hemisphere creating locally more dense currents; (2) The enhanced
              electron precipitation in the winter hemisphere overcompensates for the
              asymmetry of ionospheric conductance due to solar illumination; and (3) The
              region 1 currents in the summer and winter hemispheres have different sources
              in the magnetotail, and the M-I coupling takes place separately in each
              hemisphere.

Magnetometer data from the DMSP-F7, F12, and F13 satellites and
              Geotail data will be used to examine FACs above the ionosphere.  An automatic
              procedure to identify FAC structures will be applied to those data sets, and
              the characteristics of FACs such as current intensity, current density,
              latitudinal thickness of FAC sheets, and spatial irregularity will be
              quantitatively determined.  The project will compare those characteristics
              between the summer (sunlit) and winter (dark) hemispheres.

The proposed
              project will be the first comprehensive study of the summer-winter asymmetry of
              nightside FACs and will shed new light on the role of the ionospheric
              conductance in the M-I coupling.

