Title       : Adaptation and Implementation of MATEC ATE Center Model For Web Based Controls
               Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0101725

Award Number: 0101725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doyle Meyer Meyerd@sanjuancollege.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Lesiecki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Juan Coll
	      4601 College Boulevard
	      Farmington, NM  874024609    505/599-0209

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is adapting and implementing the processes developed by the NSF
              funded ATE Center - Maricopa Advanced Technology Education Center (MATEC).
              MATEC has developed competency based multimedia modules to educate instructors
              of semiconductor manufacturing technology programs in specific processes and
              equipment of the semiconductor industry. Embedded in the MATEC model is a
              learner focus. This project uses the MATEC model to develop Web based
              experiential laboratory exercises for students in an Associate of Applied
              Science in Controls Technology and Manufacturing Technology programs. These
              simulations or experiential modules replace the traditional laboratory
              exercises of a site based Manufacturing, Instrumentation or Controls Technology
              curriculum, and instead do them in a Web environment.

The theory components
              of the curriculum are already commercially available in a digital format and
              have been satisfactorily tested for past the 5 years at San Juan College. The
              missing and critical component for effective delivery of the curriculum via
              distant education is the experiential or hands on laboratory exercise in a
              format suitable for effective learning in a Web environment. The rapid growth
              of web-based education and the rapid rate of technology changes in industry and
              society have created a need for a revised methodology in educational curriculum
              and delivery. This refocus must facilitate lifelong learning and have a learner
              driven process. 

The project is creating 16 virtual laboratory or
              experiential modules for two different classes over the two-year life of the
              project. It is developing a distance education competency based experiential
              model that can be used to implement the curricular objectives of the
              traditional 'hands on' or laboratory exercises in the virtual world of a web
              based program.

