Title       : Middle School Science Curriculum Materials: Meeting Standards and Fostering
               Inquiry Through Learning Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0101780

Award Number: 0101780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1999739            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Krajcik krajcik@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This sixth through eighth grade comprehensive, project-based, science curriculum
              focuses on students acquiring deep understandings of the concepts, principles
              and habits of mind articulated in national science standards.  The curriculum
              builds upon the experiences of the Center for Learning Technologies in Urban
              Schools developing the LeTUS modules for Chicago and Detroit Public Schools. 
              The project brings together scientists and science educators from three
              universities, teachers and administrators from six school districts, curriculum
              speialists from Project 2061, educational researchers from EDC, and
              Kendall/Hunt publishers.  The design principles, arising from research on
              teaching and learning, include alignment with standards, assessments,
              contextualization, sustained student inquiry, embedded learning technologies,
              collaboration, and scaffolds between and within modules.  Phase 1 focuses on
              the development of two units: Structure of Matter and Diversity of Life and
              Evolution.  Learning outcomes are identified, target understanding performances
              are specified and assessments are designed before the activities are developed.
               Everday authentic questions that students hold as important provide the basis
              for projects, contextualize the activities and give coherence to the
              curriculum.  In addition to the student materials and teacher guides, the
              project develops materials to provide information to administrators and the
              community to understand and support the implementation of the modules.  Issues
              of language, literacy, culture and diversity are addressed. Professional
              development materials address teacher attitudes and beliefs while educating the
              teachers about the new context and pedagogy.
