Title       : FRG: Collaborative Research-Computational Conformal Mapping and Scientific
               Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0101339

Award Number: 0101339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Rottenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This Focused Research Group is composed of pure
mathematicians,
              computational mathematicians, and
neuroscientists.  They develop
              implementations of discrete
conformal mapping for multidisciplinary use, both
              within
mathematics itself where complex analysis is being reinvigorated
by
              new discrete techniques, and in the larger scientific context
with
              visualization and analysis of scientific data.  The Riemann
Mapping Theorem
              guarantees unique conformal maps between any pair
of conformal 2-discs (or
              conformal 2-spheres); the conformal
geometry preserved by such maps carries
              valuable mathematical
structure.  Such surfaces arise naturally in many
              scientific
contexts as piecewise flat (from data) or smoothly embedded
              (from
theory) surfaces in 3-space.  Recently the new computational
technique
              of circle packing has allowed computational
approximations to these conformal
              maps.  Implementing such
approximations for large scientific datasets faces
              both
theoretical and computational challenges.  The investigator and
his
              colleagues work on three related topics: theoretical
superstructure of the
              circle packing technique, refinement and
parallelization of the circle packing
              algorithm for use on large
datasets, and the application of these conformal
              maps to
visualization and analysis of scientific data.  The main
application
              focuses on conformal flattening of human brain
cortical surfaces.  The
              investigators use uniqueness of conformal
maps to install surface-based
              coordinate systems on these
surfaces; these coordinate systems allow
              localization of
activation foci in Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
              and
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) brain scans.
Conformal
              flattening has wider applicability as a visualization
and graph embedding
              technique, and these connections inform the
research.
     This Focused
              Research Group develops algorithms to bring a
classical mathematics theorem
              (the Riemann Mapping Theorem, 1854)
to bear on problems of visualization of
              data.  The Riemann Mapping
Theorem guarantees the existence of unique
              conformal
(angle-preserving) maps between surfaces, but does say how
              to
compute these maps.  Modern computers and new algorithms have
changed all
              that, because our new computational ability can
breathe life into classical
              existence theorems of mathematics,
turning theory into computational tools. 
              This project develops
algorithms to implement the computation of conformal
              maps on
complex spatial surfaces.  The main application is the flat
mapping
              of human brain cortical surfaces.  The brain surface is
highly convoluted and
              folded in space, and most of the brain
surface is folded up and hidden from
              view.  If one flattens the
surface, one can simultaneously see down into all
              the folds.  The
mathematically unique conformal maps produced by the
              algorithms
allow surface-based coordinate systems to be computed on the
brain
              surface so that surface positions can be precisely
determined.  Moreover, if
              one puts foci of functional activation
onto the flattened surface, one can
              then visualize and measure
the relationship between brain function and brain
              anatomy.  These
new surface-mapping techniques and their application to the
              brain
surface permit biomedical researchers and clinicians to rapidly
and
              accurately map and compare the locations of physiological and
pathological
              "events" in the brains of research subjects and of
patients with a variety of
              neurological and psychiatric
disorders.  The project is supported by the
              Computational
Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and Geometric Analysis
              programs
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by
              the
Computational Neuroscience program in BIO.

