Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Embeddedness, Relationships, and Geographies of
               Global Banking: Japanese City Banks in Global Syndicated Credit Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0101016

Award Number: 0101016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6350               (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Sheppard shepp001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Deregulation and globalization of financial markets and the introduction of new
              information technologies in the financial industry have had profound impacts on
              the banking industry.  This doctoral dissertation research project will examine
              the extent to which these challenges are affecting the globalization of
              Japanese banks in syndicated credit markets.  Specifically, the project will
              investigate whether Japanese banking is becoming more similar to European and
              U.S. banking in the face of similar global pressures or whether Japanese banks
              remain distinctive because of the Japanese political and economic context in
              which they are embedded as well as the competitive pressures from the existing
              banking structure, especially networks among non-Japanese global banks.  The
              research will examine the globalization of Japanese banks as the outcome of
              changes in the Japanese financial markets, the existing structures of the
              global financial markets, and the networks strategies of Japanese banks
              embedded in the other two forces.  Using the DealScan database, the student
              will compare the behaviors of six Japanese city banks and those of eight banks
              from U.S. and Europe with respect to the overall lending practices and
              performance and the geography of financial intermediation (the international
              networks of investors and borrowers in which they participate).  The student
              will examine the domestic and the global context in which Japanese banks have
              evolved since the mid-1980s.  Second, using the league tables in DealScan, the
              student will identify the major players and the country shares in the global
              syndicated credit markets.  The student then will create Arranger-Participant
              matrices and Arranger-Borrower matrices of individual banks and statistically
              measure the extent to which the international networking behavior of Japanese
              banks differs from those of non-Japanese global banks.

Geographers have not
              explored the possibility of quantitative and empirical research on the behavior
              of global financial institutions due to lack of geo-referenced data sources. 
              Through the use of the DealScan database, this project will demonstrate
              elements of the geography of international portfolio lending by banks of
              different nationalities, an aspect of international investment that rarely is
              documented.  The study will also illustrate the importance of geography in
              understanding financial networks by showing how the different status of
              financial institutions in various markets has been considered in network
              creation.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

