Title       : FRG: Development of Geometrical and Statistical Models for Automated Object
               Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0101429

Award Number: 0101429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $522037             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anuj Srivastava anuj@stat.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric P. Klassen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Erlebacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Anuj Srivastava 0101429

Abstract

The proposed research will focus on
              developing methods for automated object recognition using tools from
              statistics, differential geometry and computer graphics.  The main objective is
              to design algorithms for recognizing (3D) objects from their (2D) camera
              images, with an emphasis on automated face recognition. The biggest challenge
              comes from the variability manifested in the images. How do we model it and
              what efficient procedures can be used to analyze it?  Many current methods seek
              dominant subspaces (e.g. PCA, ICA, Fisher discriminant) of the observed images
              to capture and characterize this variability. Although the hardware technology
              has advanced significantly for both computing and imaging,the current
              mathematical techniques and algorithms for computer vision remain  limited in
              their ability to fundamentally handle 
the image variability. Recent
              technological advances, such as 3D imaging, super fast graphics, and
              high-performance computing, make this project both feasible and timely.

Our
              approach builds upon the physical considerations that will lead to
              representations in stochastic geometry.  We highlight the physical factors
              behind the image variability  and propose methods to model them. A distinct
              advantage of modeling the physical factors is the ability to incorporate the
              contextual information in the resulting recognition algorithms.  In particular,
              we will develop (i) geometric models for facial shape variability, (ii) tools
              for synthetic illumination and facial rendering, and (iii) algorithms for
              statistical inference on these models/parameters. We use coordinate and
              differential geometry to characterize object shapes, pose, motion, reflectance,
              illumination, and their time variations, and show that these variables take
              values on the Lie groups and their quotient spaces.  Following the "analysis by
              synthesis" paradigm, where the observed images are statistically compared to
              the synthesized images, we propose inferences over the nuisance variables to
              seek the best match, and thus perform recognition.  In a Bayesian framework,
              the contextual knowledge of these physical representations can be incorporated
              as a prior model, to add to the observed information. The inference engine is
              based on the Monte-Carlo methods particularized to these representations. These
              stated goals require expertise from distant areas of statistics, geometry,
              computing, and graphics.  Through this FRG collaboration, we will create an
              atmosphere for synergistic, multi-disciplinary research that will support many
              future endeavors.


