Title       : Botanical Inventory of the Madidi Region, Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0101775

Award Number: 0101775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Jorgensen peter.jorgensen@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria T. Telleria  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Killeen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Churchill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0101775
Jorgensen, Churchill, Killeen, Telleria.
Bolivia is one of the most
              biologically diverse countries in the world and the Madidi region has the
              highest level of biodiversity within Bolivia. A collaborative research effort
              is underway to catalogue and describe the plant and fungal diversity of that
              region. The survey is designed to measure biodiversity at different levels
              using complementary methodologies: 1) A general inventory will be based on
              newly collected specimens in order to produce a comprehensive list of fungi,
              mosses, and vascular plants. Collections will contribute to phylogenetic and
              biogeographic research carried out by specialists all over the world using both
              traditional and DNA sequencing techniques. 2) Permanent study plots will be
              used to determine plant species richness within specific habitats and to
              establish a long-term effort to monitor the health of the ecosystems that house
              that biodiversity. 3) Satellite images will be combined with data on
              topography, elevation, geology, and climate in a geographic information system
              (GIS) to create detailed vegetation maps that provide estimates of both habitat
              and landscape-level biodiversity.
The project involves research institutions
              and conservation organizations from Bolivia, the United States of America, and
              Spain, as well as the close collaboration of the Bolivian National Park
              Service. The lead institution in Bolivia is the National Herbarium of Bolivia,
              which is coordinating with the Missouri Botanical Garden (under the overall
              supervision of Dr. Jorgensen) and the Royal Botanical Garden of Madrid. Also
              collaborating are the Ecology Institute of La Paz, the Noel Kempff Mercado
              Natural History Museum of Santa Cruz, Bolivia and the Center for Applied
              Biodiversity Science of Conservation International. The project involves a
              large training component for both graduate and undergraduate level students at
              Bolivian universities. The information produced by the project will be used by
              the Bolivian National Park Service to support a variety of management
              initiatives within Madidi National Park and the adjacent Pilon Lajas and
              Apolobamba Biosphere Reserves.

