Title       : Constraint Databases: Optimization Techniques and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0101134

Award Number: 0101134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianwen Su su@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar H. Ibarra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Constraint databases integrate database and constraint technologies for
              spatio-temporal database applications including GIS and moving objects.
              Constraint data models emphasize logical properties while hiding physical
              representations; they enable general purpose data management capabilities. The
              project investigates constraint databases in three aspects: algorithms,
              applications, and foundations. In algorithms, it aims at optimization
              techniques for constraint database queries. Joins with the intersection
              predicate are known as spatial joins. Traditional algorithms use heuristics,
              indexes, and computational geometry techniques to evaluate the join on minimum
              bounding rectangles of objects as a filter. Recent algorithms allow better
              approximations for filter, or even perform a direct join on objects. A focus of
              this project is to study and compare performance of such new algorithms and
              develop further improvements and models for predicting filter effectiveness in
              terms of dataset properties and approximations. Moreover, the techniques for
              intersection join are extended for joins with other topological (e.g.,
              containment, meet), distance, and direction predicates, and to multiway spatial
              joins. More fundamentally, optimization issues are often related to decision
              problems of logical properties such as containment, equivalence, and
              disjointness of transactions (queries/updates). Abstract machines are a
              recently developed tool for studying such problems. Transactions are often
              designed in advance with parameters instantiated at runtime. The abstract
              machine techniques are extended for studying logical properties of
              parameterized transactions and related computational complexity issues. In
              applications aspect, the project uses the constraint approach to develop data
              models and query languages for moving object databases and study query
              optimization Constraint databases integrate database and constraint
              technologies for spatio-temporal database applications including GIS and moving
              objects. Constraint data models emphasize logical properties while hiding
              physical representations; they enable general purpose data management
              capabilities. The project investigates constraint databases in three aspects:
              algorithms, applications, and foundations. In algorithms, it aims at
              optimization techniques for constraint database queries. Joins with the
              intersection predicate are known as spatial joins. Traditional algorithms use
              heuristics, indexes, and computational geometry techniques to evaluate the join
              on minimum bounding rectangles of objects as a filter. Recent algorithms allow
              better approximations for filter, or even perform a direct join on objects. A
              focus of this project is to compare and characterize performance of such new
              algorithms and develop further improvements and models for predicting filter
              effectiveness in terms of dataset properties and approximations. Moreover, the
              techniques for intersection join are extended for joins with other topological
              (e.g., containment, meet), distance, and direction predicates, and to multiway
              spatial joins. More fundamentally, optimization issues are often related to
              decision problems of logical properties such as containment, equivalence, and
              disjointness of transactions (queries/updates). Abstract machines (in automata
              theory) have been found to be a very useful tool for studying such problems.
              Transactions are often designed in advance with parameters instantiated at
              runtime. The project intends to extend these automata-theoretic techniques for
              studying logical properties of parameterized transactions and related
              computational complexity issues. In applications aspect, the project applies
              the constraint approach to develop data models and query languages for moving
              object databases. The goal is to provide a conceptual framework and
              optimization techniques for managing and querying moving objects.
