Title       : Hamiltonian Motions Under Strong Constrains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a0101969

Award Number: 0101969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70339              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chongchun Zeng cz3u@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project focuses on Hamiltonian ODEs and PDEs under strong
              constraining
forces. For an given Hamiltonian composed of the kinetic energy
              and a
potential energy, consider particles restricted to a
              submanifold
(independent of time) in the configuration space, i.e. a
              holonomic
constraint. The idealization of the constrained particles' motion
              is
governed by a Hamiltonian system defined on the tangent bundle of
              this
submanifold involving geometric notions. In physics, an alternative way
              to
realize the constraint is to consider the system in the original
              space
with an extra strong potential which penalizes the distance to
              the
constraining submanifold. This idea applies to both Hamiltonian ODEs
              and
PDEs. While the convergence of the motions under strong
              constraining
potentials to the limit geometric Hamiltonian motions on finite
              time
intervals has been studied for ODEs, the problem in PDEs is
              basically
untouched. The project focuses on two questions. The first is
              the
convergence of the strongly penalized motions, both on finite and
              infinite
time intervals. The second question is the relation between the
              dynamics of
the strongly penalized motions and their limits, i.e. the
              structural
stability under strong constraining forces. The subjects are
              stability,
periodic motions, homoclinic motions, resonances, etc. The problem
              can also
be viewed as homogenization or elliptic type singular
              perturbations.

The problem of motions of particles restricted to
              submanifolds in the
configuration space appears naturally in both classical
              mechanics and
PDEs. For example, in classical mechanics, whenever a rigid rod
              is
considered as elastic with a large elastic coefficient, the problem
              falls
in this category. Also, it is found, in material science, that
              some
anti-ferromagnetic systems converges to geometric wave
              equations
targeted on the unit 2-dimensional sphere formally. Therefore, it
              is
important to study how the constrained motions converge. Moreover, as
              the
penalized motions have high frequency oscillations, it is even
              more
important to investigate the relation between the asymptotic
              qualitative
behaviors.

