Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Intrametropolitan Geography of Producer
               Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0101052

Award Number: 0101052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Fainstein fainstei@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In recent decades, suburbs have expanded their share of the metropolitan job
              base and matured into bustling economic centers blurring the once distinct
              boundaries between the urban core and the suburban periphery.  As metropolitan
              regions have been transformed, so has the nature of the relationship between
              central cities and suburbs, prompting a debate that has penetrated both policy
              circles and the popular press about the importance of the central city to the
              metropolitan economy.  This doctoral dissertation research project will examine
              urban-suburban economic relationships and the unique agglomeration economies
              central cities are purported to have through an analysis of the
              intra-metropolitan location of producer service industries and the spatial
              linkages between producer service establishments and their clients, competitors
              and suppliers.  Producer services are an important group of industries to study
              given that they are held to be traditional "city" industries and represent a
              dynamic segment of the economy.  This project will use data on employment,
              wages, output, and the spatial linkages between major U.S. firms and their
              producer service providers to examine the intra-metropolitan location of
              producer services and the spatial division of producer service functions in 20
              major U.S metropolitan areas.  This analysis will provide a backdrop for a
              comparative case study of the accounting industry in the New York and
              Minneapolis-St. Paul regions.  Case study data will be collected through a
              telephone survey of accounting firms and supplemental interviews with firm
              representatives, development officials, and industry experts.

This research
              project will contribute to the industrial location literature by identifying
              trends in the intra-metropolitan location of producer service industries and
              the factors that drive location decisions.  This research also has the
              potential to influence local and regional development policy.  Greater insight
              into why certain producer services continue to cluster in central cities and
              the extent to which suburbs and central cities compete as producer-service
              providers will advance understanding of the economic interdependencies of
              cities and suburbs and help to determine if agglomeration economies represent a
              competitive advantage of central cities.  Identifying and building upon
              competitive advantages will help jurisdictions in crafting local and
              metropolitan-wide development strategies aimed at maximizing economic
              competitiveness.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
              strong independent research career.

