Title       : Technological Education Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0101415

Award Number: 0101415
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $741521             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Peterson gpeterson@abet.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Pagano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fred W. Emshousen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfredo G. de los Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Accred Bd Eng & Tech/ABET
	      111 Market Place Suite 1050
	      Baltimore, MD  212024012    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET), partnering with
              several ATE Centers of Excellence, is conducting a series of hands-on regional
              faculty workshops to bring together technology program faculty to enhance their
              knowledge of "emerging technologies," explore ways in which these technologies
              may be incorporated in programs, and provide faculty with experience in
              developing effective assessment strategies that measure the impact of
              curricular innovation on the performance of their graduates. These workshops
              are providing tools for the development of programs that are innovative,
              relevant to emerging technologies, and attractive to students; thus, preparing
              graduates of technology programs to enter their careers with greater mobility
              and transitional capabilities. These workshops are also enhancing the faculty's
              technical professional development and providing them with a sound basis for
              assessing the quality of their curricular innovations.

Part I of the
              workshops is an exploration of emerging technology relevant to the future of
              technology graduates conducted by industry partners. Part II consists of
              sessions on developing educational programs based on continuous quality
              improvement methodology and outcomes based assessment. The workshops are being
              facilitated by engineering professionals experienced in implementing ABET's
              outcomes-based criteria -- Engineering Criteria 2000, consultants with
              expertise in assisting schools with assessment planning, industry
              representatives current in their company's continuous quality improvement
              efforts, key representatives for the NSF Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
              Centers, and members of ABET's Technology Accreditation Commission (TAC).
              Facilitators are motivating faculty to analyze different university and college
              missions and to develop programmatic objectives in light of those missions;
              determine specific outcomes to achieve those objectives; discuss ways to
              achieve those outcomes (such as curricular innovation) and decide how to
              measure the success of the actions taken. The workshops are producing case
              studies and examples highlighting different university and college missions and
              program objectives which can be used by faculty to develop program specific
              assessment plans to determine success of their curriculum reform and program
              innovation. Key features (and strengths) of this initiative are the active
              support and participation of industry and ATE Centers. This assures that the
              workshops address the most important issues facing industry and
              academia.

The workshops are being conducted over a three-year period at
              geographically dispersed locations chosen to provide ease of access to the
              nation's technology faculty. The workshops are open to faculty members from
              both non-accredited and ABET accredited technology programs. While offering
              tools for program innovation, these workshops also provide faculty the
              opportunity to enhance their own technical knowledge, thereby enriching their
              educational programs. Additionally, faculty benefit from networking with
              faculty from other institutions and programs to share best practices in
              curriculum improvement and techniques of incorporating new technologies in
              their programs.

