Title       : Northern Colorado Community College/University Teacher Preparation Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0101679

Award Number: 0101679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Ginsberg ginsberg@cahs.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              BT Y. Huntley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monica E. Ramirez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul B. Prestwich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the recruitment and retention of rural and
              underrepresented students into teaching careers in mathematics, science, and
              technology through a partnership involving Colorado State University and four
              community colleges: Aims Community College, Morgan Community College,
              Northeastern Junior College, and Front Range Community College. Preservice
              preparation competencies required of future teachers are being incorporated
              into an associate degree program. Future Teacher Mentors on each community
              college campus advise and mentor community college students as they transition
              into university programs preparing them to teach mathematics, science, and
              technology. The project focuses on three outcomes: 1) to attract and retain
              greater numbers of students into targeted teaching areas to serve rural
              communities; 2) to attract and retain larger numbers of minority students into
              teaching in the targeted areas; and 3) to improve the preparation and current
              teaching of mathematics, science, and technology teachers and preservice
              providers. Recruitment efforts include Future Teacher Clubs on each campus,
              scholarships for prospective teachers, and recruitment in high school
              mathematics, science, and technology classes. An annual needs assessment
              determines the professional development needs of K-12 and community college
              faculty and guides yearly conferences and on-line workshops. The project builds
              on the course reform efforts of the Rocky Mountain Teacher Education
              Collaborative (RMETC). 


