Title       : Expanding the Impact: Bringing Effective Biotechnology Instructional Resources
               to Diverse Students and Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0101093

Award Number: 0101093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $639220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Seidman lseidman@madison.tec.wi.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joy A. McMillan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Lowndes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanette Mowery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Madison Area Tech College
	      211 N Carroll Street
	      Madison, WI  537032285    608/266-5050

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this award is to expand the impact of previous work
              supported by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program in order to
              increase the number of well-prepared individuals, including those from
              under-represented groups, entering technical positions in the biotechnology
              work force. This goal is being accomplished through two tightly interrelated
              objectives. The first objective is focussing on faculty enhancement workshops
              related to biotechnology methods and the biotechnology workplace. The second
              objective is focussing on the dissemination of quality biotechnology
              instructional materials directly to secondary school classrooms. Activities for
              both objectives incorporate instructional materials created by other ATE
              projects. This project involves partnerships with the Wisconsin School for the
              Deaf, the University of Wisconsin-Madison College of Education, the Wisconsin
              Department of Public Instruction, the Wisconsin Educational Communications
              Board, and the ATE-funded "Cases in Industry Practices in Biotechnology", the
              "Shoestring" Biotechnology Project, and the Bio-Link Center of Excellence in
              Biotechnology.
Project objectives and outcomes are expected to be:
OBJECTIVE
              1: To enhance the skills and knowledge of faculty from two- and four- year
              colleges and secondary schools so that they:
    Effectively incorporate
              important biotechnology workplace skills into their curricula
    Promote
              student awareness of varied technical career opportunities in biotechnology
  
               Incorporate effective active learning and laboratory activities into their
              classrooms
    Establish relationships among educators and industry
              representatives
    Introduce laboratory and work place curricula into
              traditional baccalaureate programs
OBJECTIVE 2: To adapt and disseminate
              quality instructional materials for biotechnology technical education that were
              developed with previous ATE funds so that:
+ Quality materials are customized
              for different target populations of students, including those in
              under-represented groups 
+ Secondary students are aware of biotechnology
              workplace opportunities
+ Secondary students' math and science skills improve
              
+ Secondary students' skills in biotechnology improve 
+ Quality
              instructional materials reach diverse students
+ Pre-service teachers learn
              about biotechnology and the biotechnology workplace






