Title       : Parallel In Vitro and In Vivo Evaluation of Bone Tissue Engineering Constructs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0101239

Award Number: 0101239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Guldberg robert.guldberg@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0101239
Guldberg
Tissue engineering strategies have recently emerged as an
              alternative approach to bone grafting to augment the regeneration of bone in
              vivo. The basic elements required for successful regeneration of bone include
              an extracellular matrix scaffold, cells, and bioactive genes or proteins.
              Whether these elements are provided by the host or must be included within a
              tissue-engineered construct depends critically on the local biochemical,
              mechanical, and vascular environments at the defect site. Mesenchymal stem cell
              (MSC)-based approaches to bone regeneration have advanced rapidly in recent
              years in parallel with an increased understanding of musculoskeletal cell
              biology. Cellular augmentation is especially important for difficult clinical
              cases involving older patients, smokers, patients receiving chemotherapy or
              radiation, and patients with severely damaged wound beds where the endogenous
              cellular supply may be diminished. Well-characterized in vitro and in vivo test
              bed systems with quantitative outcome measures are required to evaluate the
              efficacy of these and other bone tissue-engineering technologies.

The
              objective of this project is to quantifiably compare in vivo and in vitro bone
              formation within 3D mesenchymal stem cell constructs subjected to identical
              cyclic mechanical loading conditions.  For all experiments, tissue-engineered
              constructs will be created by seeding demineralized trabecular bone allografts
              with MSCs purified from canine marrow aspirates. 

In vivo experiments will
              be conducted using a canine hydraulic bone chamber (HBC) implant model that has
              been used previously to test bone tissue engineering constructs. Cylindrical
              MSC constructs measuring 6.35 millimeters in diameter and length will be
              implanted within bilateral chambers located in the distal femoral metaphyses of
              canines. The HBC model has the ability to apply a controlled cyclic mechanical
              stimulus to constructs implanted within the chamber. Separate experiments will
              evaluate the effects of time, seeding density, and mechanical loading on MSC
              differentiation and mineralized matrix synthesis in vivo. The amount and
              organization of mineralized matrix formation will be quantified and compared
              using microtomography (microCT) imaging and 3D stereology.

Parallel in vitro
              experiments will be conducted using a novel 3D tissue culture system with the
              ability to simultaneously perfuse cylindrical cell-seeded constructs in the
              transverse direction and apply a cyclic axial mechanical stimulus. As in the in
              vivo experiments, cylindrical MSC constructs measuring 6.35 millimeters in
              diameter and length will be tested. The effects of time, seeding density, and
              mechanical loading on in vitro bone formation will be quantified using microCT
              and 3D stereology. The hypothesis that the 3D tissue culture system will
              accurately predict the relative effect of experimental variables such as time,
              seeding density, and mechanical loading on mineralized bone formation in vivo
              will be tested. 

The proposed experiments provide a basis for better
              understanding the interaction between physical factors in vivo and the efficacy
              of cell-seeded constructs designed to enhance bone regeneration. Identifying
              aspects of the in vivo bone formation response that may be predicted by a 3D,
              load-bearing in vitro system may lead to improved in vitro screening protocols,
              potentially reducing the number or size of animal studies required to benchmark
              and optimize bone tissue engineering technologies. A validated 3D system would
              facilitate, for example, efficient evaluation of a wide range of design
              parameters that may influence overall construct efficacy such as the scaffold
              architecture, material, and mechanical properties as well as cell type and
              seeding density.


