Title       : SGER: Exploratory Research: Interactive Visualization and Control of Mobile
               Network Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a0101866

Award Number: 0101866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kalpathi R. Subramanian krs@cs.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa A. Dahlberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to explore information visualization schemes
              to interactively control, drive and analyze simulations of adaptive resource
              management protocols in mobile networks.  The considerable number of system
              variables and metrics that characterize adaptive resource management protocols
              and the need to monitor them in real-time results in a data explosion,
              necessitating data visualization schemes for efficient analysis and
              optimization.  Two ideas will be explored:

1. Interactively steer
              simulations to optimize multi-layer adaptive protocols, via visualization
              interactions of appropriate simulation variables (system monitoring metrics,
              metric paramaters and simulation system parameters).
2. Characterize and
              segment simulations in terms of their critical features (e.g., congestion,
              failure) under a variety of dynamic network conditions.

Objective 1 is aimed
              at making the user central to the simulation environment, allowing simulations
              to be conrolled (stopped, backed up, variables/protocols changed) and directed
              towards certain predefined objectives.  Dynamic visualizations of system
              variables and interactions among them are fundamental to this interactive
              exploration, and more important, the user's intuition and domain expertise
              helps explore (reduce) a large search space of these variables.  Objective 2 is
              targeted at characterizing simulations by focusing on critical features of a
              simulaltion, such as normal, congestion, transient and steady state failure,
              and recovery conditions.  A robust scheme to detect and track these features
              will permit large amounts of simulation data to be compactly represented,
              stored and searched.  The goal is to evaluate the application of this approach
              to automating adaptive protocol design and optimization.

The two proposed
              ideas will be evaluated for a specific problem instance that is being addressed
              by an ongoing NSF project on survivable wireless access networks.  The problem
              is to develop a scaleable resource management scheme that integrates the use of
              adaptive admission control and adaptive multiple access control within
              hierarchical cellsite architectures of mobile networks.  This multi-layer
              analysis and optimization problem presents a hugh search space of simulation
              scenarios, posing significant challenges to any type of comparative or
              systematic study.  Earlier work has largely been restricted to individual
              components of such problems, at best.  The approach is to cast this as a
              multi-variate data analysis problem, and explore several interactive
              multi-variate visualization methods.  This should help in understanding the
              complex spatial and temporal relationships among the search space variables. 
              Interactive steering is an efficient means to exploring this space and lead to
              desired objectives, while abstracting simulations by extracting and
              parameterizing critical features serves to facilitate automated evaluation of
              batch siumlation runs or network monitoring.

Support by an SGER is being
              requested for two reasons.  (1) The proposed application of information
              visualization to the mobile networking domain has not previously been
              attempted.  The proposed work shows great promise to dramatically
              change/improve current approaches to development and simulation-based analysis
              of adaptive protocols.  However, this work requires experimentation with new
              ideas in emerging research areas (interactive steering and feature
              characterization), and specific outcomes are not guaranteed.  (2) Immediate
              support is needed since the proposed work is to be conducted in conjucntion
              with a newly-funded NSF project.  It is expected that this will greatly enhance
              the progress achieved within both projects.

