Title       : ATE Regional Center for Nanofabrication Manufacturing Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0101635

Award Number: 0101635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1993320            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Fonash sjf2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent Zimmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Rutkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Bachmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Harter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An ATE Regional Center in Nanofabrication Manufacturing Education is being
              established to meet the increased demand in Pennsylvania and nationally for
              associate degree-level workers in the field of nanofabrication, including
              semiconductor manufacturing. The ATE Regional Center is built upon a unique
              educational consortium, the Pennsylvania Nanofabrication Manufacturing
              Technology (NMT) Partnership, and the ATE Regional Center will capitalize on
              Penn State's state-of-the-art Nanofabrication Facility.

The NMT Partnership
              involves Penn State, Pennsylvania industry, Pennsylvania community colleges,
              and public school districts throughout the state. Key to the NMT Partnership is
              the Penn State Nanofabrication Facility, a $23 million investment in class 10
              cleanrooms and equipment, and its engineering staff. This Facility is part of
              NSF's National Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN). It is shared among
              Pennsylvania community colleges and secondary schools and with Pennsylvania
              industry through the Partnership. Initial funding from the Commonwealth of
              Pennsylvania for the Partnership has supported facility expansion and has
              supported resident instruction at the Facility for a small number of students,
              allowing community colleges across Pennsylvania to offer NMT degrees and
              certificates. It has also supported NMT workshops for community college and
              secondary school educators, "chip camps" for secondary school students, and
              assistance for Pennsylvania industry in nanotechnology development.

The ATE
              Regional Center is being built on the current NMT program in order to
              strengthen and institutionalize collaboration among all 15 Pennsylvania
              community colleges, the 14 comprehensive universities comprising the
              Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education (PSSHE), secondary schools
              (including vocational-technical schools), private industry, and the Penn State
              Nanofabrication Facility. New activities address 
(1) continued improvement
              and expanded delivery of resident instruction in NMT at the Facility,
(2)
              creating curricula and strengthening NMT capacity at Pennsylvania's 15
              community colleges, 
(3) strengthening NMT capacity at PSSHE institutions,
              
(4) strengthening professional development of secondary and post-secondary
              educators and industry personnel in NMT,
(5) promoting awareness among
              secondary and post-secondary school students and educators of NMT career
              opportunities, and 
(6) promoting increased participation in NMT educational
              programs by underrepresented groups.

