Title       : Development of a Distance Learning Program for K-12 Science and Mathematics
               Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0101935

Award Number: 0101935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1352150            (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Gomez m_gomez@upr1.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hector J. Alvarez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis de Jesus-Berrios  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Puerto Rico Resource Center for Science and Engineering (RCSE) and partners
              are instituting a distance learning program for K-12 science and math teachers.
               The content strands are the "areas of special emphasis" that emerged from the
              Puerto Rico Statewide Systemic Initiative (PRSSI).  The workshops and courses
              are delivered by the University and designed to meet the needs of local
              teachers in district efforts to implement standards-based mathematics and
              science instruction.  Thirty lead teachers provide local technical and content
              support for districts that participate in the project.  Over five years, 1000
              K-12 teachers will participate in and take courses through the project.  Much
              of this is done through telecommunications technologies, which are used for
              delivery, collaboration, access, reflection, inquiry, online discussions and
              mentoring.  

The project builds on the SSI which has impacted nearly 50% of
              the island's schools.  It clearly notes the work completed under the SSI and
              delineates what is left to be done.  It is this remaining work that constitutes
              the core of the project.  These efforts are supported by networking being
              installed throughout the island (T1), a number of earlier grants, and links to
              New York City (Lehman College).  In addition, the project uses a supporting
              technology called mindtools.  These are defined as "computer-based tools and
              learning environments that have been adapted or developed to function as
              intellectual partners with the learner in order to engage and facilitate
              critical thinking and higher order learning." In addition to content and
              methods, the project provides teachers with badly needed training in the use of
              computer-based technologies.  The project also carries out research on the
              necessary conditions to scale such technologies.

