Title       : Computer Science 2000/ARIES Alliance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0101726

Award Number: 0101726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $574635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Sanna mjsanna@austin.cc.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Rasco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Saflund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Navarro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale McCollough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Austin Community College
	      5930 Middle Fiskville Road
	      Austin, TX  78752    512/223-7000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Technology companies in the Austin area face a shortage of qualified information
              technology (IT) workers. To help solve this problem, the Austin Regional
              Industry Education Systems (ARIES) Alliance is putting in place a
              competency-based system for IT education at the high school and community
              college levels. This effort includes (1) the development of IT skill standards
              for Texas, (2) alignment of existing IT curricula with the skill standards, (3)
              design and implementation of new curricula based on the skill standards, (4)
              professional development for teachers, and (5) portable, performance-based
              assessments and appropriate certifications.

The project is tailoring for the
              state of Texas the industry-validated IT skill standards developed by the
              NorthWest Center for Emerging Technologies (an ATE Center of Excellence in
              Bellevue, WA). The project is also adapting and implementing the NorthWest
              Center's vendor-neutral "Introduction to IT" course and the center's curricula
              in eight career concentrations: programming/software engineering, network
              design and administration, enterprise systems analysis and integration,
              database development and administration, Web development and administration,
              digital media, technical support, and technical writing. A team of statewide
              community and technical college faculty are using the new Texas IT skill
              standards to align the IT curriculum in all Texas community and technical
              colleges. Articulation between the curricula at the high school and community
              college levels provides multiple entry and exit points for students.

