Title       : Field Dependent Penetration Depth in Unconventional Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0101872

Award Number: 0101872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell W. Giannetta russg@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The temperature and magnetic field dependence of the London penetration depth of
              a superconductor yields direct information about the underlying quantum state. 
              This individual investigator project will use high resolution penetration depth
              measurements to explore Andreev bound states, a new quantum phenomena that
              arises from the unconventional angular momentum state of the charged pairs in
              high temperature superconductors.  Andreev states modify the energy spectrum
              and significantly influence the electromagnetism of these materials.  These
              states are greatly enhanced in superconductors containing defects of nanometer
              size produced by heavy ion irradiation.  The penetration depth in irradiated
              samples will be studied in order to explore how high temperature
              superconductivity changes when nanoscale structures are introduced into a
              crystal.  If fully successful, this project will add a new spectroscopy of the
              pairing state, a new chapter in the electromagnetic properties of
              superconductors and a window into the behavior of high temperature
              superconductivity at the nanoscale.  The students and postdoctoral researchers
              involved in this research will obtain training and experience in modern
              electronic instrumentation, cryogenics, graphical computer programming,
              electron microscopy, materials characterization and research at national
              accelerator facilities.  This will provide them with skills useful in many
              scientific or technological careers.
%%%
The ability to shield a magnetic
              field is a property shared by all superconductors.  The degree of shielding is
              determined by  a quantity known as the London penetration depth.  This
              individual investigator project will use high resolution measurements of the
              penetration depth to explore a new class of quantum phenomena called Andreev
              bound states that arise in high temperature superconductors.  Andreev states
              are unique to these "unconventional" materials and can provide a new tool with
              which to understand them.  The question of how high temperature
              superconductivity is modified in devices of nanometer size remains an
              outstanding problem.  Andreev states will be particularly important in this
              realm and experiments are proposed to understand their role.  Superconductors
              have a potentially huge technological impact, largely by virtue of their
              unusual electromagnetic properties.  This project will lead to a deeper
              understanding of these properties and if fully successful, to a hybridization
              of high temperature superconductivity and nanoscience.  The project will train
              students and postdoctoral researchers in modern electronic instrumentation,
              cryogenics, graphical computer programming, electron microscopy, materials
              characterization and research at national accelerator facilities.  These skills
              will be important for research in industrial, academic, or government
              research.
***

