Title       : North Carolina Regional Center for Plastics Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0101468

Award Number: 0101468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben R. White brwhite@waketech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don Magoon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cathy Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Kimball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Technical Cmty Col
	      9101 Fayetteville Road
	      Raleigh, NC  276035655    919/772-0551

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An unmet need exists for associate level technician education programs that
              target rural and minority populations. In North Carolina, rapid growth in
              emergent technology-intensive sectors is creating opportunities for skilled
              technicians, even as the State's traditional economic powerhouses of textiles,
              tobacco and agricultural continue their precipitous decline. A serious
              disconnect exists between the skill sets that satisfied the traditional
              industries and those required by new sectors. The Eastern North Carolina
              Plastics Technology Consortium was created to address these impediments as they
              affect the plastics industry. The three-year program is leveraging resources of
              multiple community colleges to educate students for careers as technicians in
              plastics manufacturing. Catalyzed by industry requests, the Consortium has
              secured State funding for facility construction and approval from the North
              Carolina Community College System to develop an AAS degree program in plastics
              technology. Students complete the first year of courses at their respective
              home institutions and a second year of technology-intensive, hands-on courses
              at a shared centrally-located facility. Goals include curricular reform based
              on industry standards, professional development for faculty including
              industrial experiences, and recruitment and retention of students using an
              innovative mentoring model that calls on faculty and industry partners. 

