Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biogeography of Island Flora in the Georgian
               Bay, Lake Huron, Ontario
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0101004

Award Number: 0101004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Bendix jbendix@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Concepts of species-island relationships originated in and have been widely
              applied to islands in marine environments.  Among the factors most often
              examined biogeographers and ecologists exploring variations as they examine
              species richness on islands have been the relative and absolute distances
              separating islands from sources of colonists and the area of the islands under
              examination.  More recent studies have highlighted the possible role that
              factors like effective distance, island morphology, environmental
              heterogeneity, disturbance, species interactions, and vegetation dynamics may
              play.  This doctoral dissertation research project will expand the application
              of island biogeography concepts through analysis of islands in freshwater
              environments, particularly the factors influencing spatial and temporal
              variation of island vegetation within the Massasauga Provincial Park on the
              eastern shore of the Georgian Bay.  Among the research questions to be
              addressed are:  Do species-area and species-distance relationships apply in the
              Massasauga islands?  What mediating factors besides area and distance affect
              species richness on the islands?  Do forest age-class structures help determine
              whether there is a long-term equilibrium of species richness, or do current
              characteristics of vegetation represent only one stage in a process of dynamic
              change?  To answer these questions, herbaceous and woody species richness will
              be determined along two 1-m-belt transects on each of 50 islands selected
              through stratified random sampling.  Within 100-m-squared quadrats centered
              randomly along the transects, the number of trees, saplings, and seedlings will
              be recorded by species.  The diameter of all trees within the quadrats will be
              recorded, and tree cores will be taken from a subset of those trees.  Substrate
              texture, pH, and depth to bedrock will be recorded from the center of the
              quadrats.  Topographic maps and hydrographic charts will be used to measure
              island size and perimeter, island distances, and topographic variability. 
              Distance variables, prevailing atmospheric patterns, lake currents, and island
              density (i.e. stepping stones) will be used to determine effective distance. 
              Island shape will be calculated as a perimeter/area ratio.  The dependent
              variable, species richness, will be calculated for the overall data set and for
              subsets consisting of forest, shrub, and herbaceous species.  The ratio-level
              independent variables will be tested for their relative impact on species
              richness using multiple regression.  Simple regression will be used to
              establish relationships between diameters and age in order to estimate ages for
              all of the sampled trees.  Age-class plots of stands on each island will be
              drawn to help determine whether or not dominant species are reproducing
              themselves.  This will allow inferences to be made about the possibility of
              changing species dominance and therefore of changing species richness within
              ecological time scales.  

Investigating measurable factors influencing
              species richness of Massasauga park will further understanding of island
              biogeographic concepts in freshwater settings.  By incorporating a temporal
              dimension of forest dynamics as an indicator of the stability or impermanence
              of current species richness, the results of the proposed research will be
              generalizable to broader issues of ecological change.  This research will
              provide management officials with baseline data and insight regarding island
              vegetation and biodiversity.  Research results will also pertain to current
              issues concerning the ecological integrity of the Georgian Bay shoreline,
              including the Massasauga islands. Two initiatives (Ontario's Heritage Coast
              Project and the Thirty Thousand Islands United Nations Biosphere Reserve
              proposal) are planned to generate eco-tourism and development activities in the
              region, which would increase island use.  Increasing human pressures may
              eventually lead to shifts in the species richness and composition of the
              islands.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

