Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Compensators and Coercion in Systems of Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0101044

Award Number: 0101044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6853               (Estimated)
Investigator: Shane R. Thye srthye@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the role of compensation and coercion in relationships
              that involve exchange of social goods among actors.  Whereas compensation is
              the promise of a positive reward to be delivered in the future, coercion is the
              promise of impending punishment.  According to theories of the relationships
              between religious leaders and followers, and theories of power in exchange
              relationships, the ability of person A in a dyad to use compensation or
              coercion in dealing with person B will increase the exchange payoff for person
              A.  For example, control over a generalized reward (such as Heaven) or a
              punishment (such as Hell) gives power to one person over another.  However, the
              two forms of control may differ in the power they generate and the timing of
              the emergence of that power.  This project uses data from a laboratory
              experiment to compare the effects of compensation and coercion for power
              differences in systems of exchange.  In the experiment, subjects in separate
              rooms negotiate through connected PCs.  In the negotiations, the subjects vary
              according to their position in the exchange relationship, and their ability to
              use compensation or coercion, which in turn affect the payoffs the subjects
              receive in the exchange.  In addition to contributing to the general
              understanding of how people interact with one another in exchange
              relationships, the results offer insights into relationships between religious
              leaders and followers.
