Title       : Annual ISEF Bok Awards and Lines Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0101770

Award Number: 0101770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susana Deustua deustua@aas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin B. Marvel  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amer Astronomical Soc
	      2000 Florida Ave N.W.
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/659-0134

NSF Program : 1798      Special Projects (AST)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Marvel, Kevin
American Astronomical Society


This award to the American
              Astronomical Society will be used to provide financial awards to three high
              school students who present astronomical research projects that are judged to
              be outstanding at the annual Intel International Science and Engineering Fair
              (ISEF).   The American Astronomical Society (AAS) administers the awards on the
              behalf of all participating institutions: the National Science Foundation, the
              Astronomical Society of the Pacific (ASP), the International
              Amateur-Professional Photoelectric Photometry (IAPPP), and the American
              Astronomical Society.   The Priscilla and Bart Bok Awards, awarded jointly by
              the AAS and the ASP, and the Richard D. Lines Special Award in Astronomy,
              sponsored by the IAPPP, are used by students to further their education and
              research efforts.  Each student's school also receives a modest amount that can
              be used by their science departments to enhance their science programs. 

The
              annual ISEF is the culmination of a series of local, county, regional, state
              and national science fairs conducted in over 40 countries and involves several
              million students annually.  Originally sponsored by the Westinghouse Corp,
              which also sponsored the Westinghouse Science Talent Search, these two
              competitions are now jointly sponsored by the Intel Corporation. 
***


