Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: CISE Pervasive Computing: Applications and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0101247

Award Number: 0101247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1710288            (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Dobkin dpd@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kai Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward W. Felten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Martonosi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1088,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0101247
David P. Dobkin
Princeton University

CISE Research
              Infrastructure:  CISE Pervasive Computing: Applications and Systems

We are
              entering a new era in computing, the era of ubiquitous computing. In this
              world, our classrooms, labs, offices, and homes will be filled with a diverse
              collection of sensor, display and computing devices. Ubiquitous and pervasive
              displays will revolutionize the way we use computers.

In such an
              environment, the conventional view of the network as providing bit-pipes
              between clients and servers will no longer be appropriate. Many of the devices
              available in the environment will have limited computational capabilities and
              be connected by limited-capacity networks. So, we need an intelligent network
              that will be implemented by a collection of servers and programmable routers
              that overlay the physical network substrate.

The award is to build a
              research infrastructure consisting of three components. At the "edge" of the
              system, will be a variety of display technologies and sensors. At the "core''
              of the system, will be an intelligent network using commodity PCs and emerging
              network processors. Underlying everything will be commodity wired and
              wireless
networks to provide connectivity among the edge devices and nodes in
              the intelligent network. This network will augment the CS Department's current
              network, which already includes both wired and wireless components.

