Title       : A Collaborative Biotechnology Program for Delaware
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0101719

Award Number: 0101719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Barber jbarber@college.dtcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Helen S. Hauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Theis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Klopfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Del Tech&CC Stanton-Newark
	      400 Stanton Christiana Rd
	      Newark, DE  197021659    302/368-6900

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is in direct response to the needs of the emerging biotechnology
              industry and involves major industrial companies that are developing strong
              technical capabilities in biotechnology such as AstraZeneca, DuPont, Gore and
              Hercules. Spanning the market from pharmaceuticals to health care, food,
              agricultural products, and biomaterials, the Delaware region is becoming a
              major source in biotechnology. As the biotechnology industry grows and matures,
              there is an increasing demand for well-trained biotechnicians in both research
              and manufacturing. Through the development of a Biotechnology Program, this
              project is enabling AAS degreed technicians to perform many of the same jobs
              and job tasks previously being done by BS degreed professionals.

The
              partnership with the Delaware Biotechnology Institution (DBI), its research
              facility and industry network, is serving as an extension of Delaware Tech's
              laboratories and provides a transition to the real world working environment.
              DBI provides a facility for faculty and students to learn new skills and
              applications in the field of biotechnology and assists college faculty and
              staff in determining short-term training needs of industry workers. This
              collaboration creates a unique opportunity for college faculty and students to
              use the latest laboratory and manufacturing equipment in the industry while
              learning alongside experts in the biotechnology field. A focus on functional
              genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics and bioimaging makes this program unique
              among community college biotechnology programs and builds upon the partnership
              with DBI which specializes in these research areas. 

This project
              incorporates adaptations of exemplary educational materials; upgraded
              laboratory equipment and experiments; student technical internships coordinated
              through the DBI; and extensive faculty development including attendance at
              workshops, seminars, and conferences and participation in technical internships
              coordinated by DBI. The biotechnology program serves a diverse student
              population including those who wish to graduate as AAS technicians and those
              who transfer to baccalaureate institutions. A certificate in Biotechnology,
              based on the program's capstone courses, is offered to individuals with
              baccalaureate degrees in science who need hands on experience in the
              biotechnology laboratory. Specialty training courses for technicians employed
              in the field provide continuing education opportunities to program graduates
              and others who wish to enhance their skills. 


