Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: An Infrastructure for Integrated Systems Education
               and Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0101254

Award Number: 0101254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $872490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Hauck hauck@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mani Soma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl M. Sechen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Ebeling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Allstot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1088,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0101254
Scott A. Hauk
University of Washington

CISE Research
              Infrastructure:  An Infrastructure for Integrated Systems Education and
              Innovation 

The research contained in this proposal represents a
              wide-ranging investigation into the future of single-chip systems.  We will
              seek to develop a design methodology that can provide the benefits of multiple
              different resource types for numerous design domains.  To support the design of
              such cutting-edge silicon systems, we will develop innovative techniques to
              handle numerous design issues.  These will include investigations into the
              following critical issues in chip design:  Development of techniques for
              integrating RF and Analog components into future 1V SoC designs.  Creation of
              high-performance, power efficient digital logic families for supporting the
              stringent requirements of these systems.  Investigation into reconfigurable
              subsystems for SoC designs, providing post-fabrication customization for
              support of multi-protocol and multi-algorithm systems.  Integrated testing
              methodologies for complex, heterogeneous systems that can provide complete
              system test.  Complete simulation and design methodologies that can handle
              complete system integration, architectural exploration, and validation.  In
              addition to the development of new approaches to future chip design, we will
              also develop innovative techniques for educating future chip designers.  By
              providing an integrated curriculum in VLSI/CAD,  embedded systems, and complex
              system design, we will help create system architects capable of  harnessing
              these radically new design techniques and opportunities.  We will also seek to 
              increase the opportunities in chip design for new constituents, especially
              under-represented  groups to help increase the pipeline of new designers

