Title       : Inorganic and Organic Thin Film Interface Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0101231

Award Number: 0101231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Irene GENE_IRENE@UNC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses inorganic and organic interfaces composed of inorganic
              films resulting from key microelectronics reactions of oxidation and
              nitridation of Si (SiO2 and Si3N4 and SiOxNy) and organic polymer films (poly
              o-methoxyaniline (POMA), poly p-phenylenevinylene (PPV) and the hererocyclic
              polypyrrole and derivatives that have interesting electronic and optical
              properties with semiconductors (Si, Ge and GaAs) metals (Au, Al, Ir, ITO) and
              insulators (SiO2 and Si3N4). The fundamental materials science aim is to
              understand the nature and extent of interface reactions. The key research
              strategy is to follow the evolution of interface formation in real time. The
              approach is to use in situ real-time ellipsometry along with in situ real-time
              characterization methodologies in a configuration that can provide interface
              and film formation dynamics, chemical composition, and structure and optical
              properties. Additional interface sensitive characterization techniques include:
              spectroscopic immersion ellipsometry, Fractal analysis, and Fowler-Nordheim
              tunnel current oscillations. Interface and thin film preparation processes
              include: thermal (rapid and conventional), electron cyclotron resonance (ECR)
              plasma and ion sputtering for inorganic interfaces and chemical and
              electrochemical solution methods for organic films. Interface reaction models
              to be used for ellipsometric data analysis can be compared in both the
              inorganic and organic materials systems. In both systems metal oxide/insulator
              semiconductor (MOS) devices can be used as electronics properties test vehicles
              with similar electronics characterizations. Comparisons that are not usually
              made are a feature of the approach. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
              relevance. These studies will improve the fundamental understanding of
              dissimilar materials interfaces, which are key to advanced microelectronics and
              photonics. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
              and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. 
*** 

