Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transferring Juvenile Offenders to Adult Court
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0101192

Award Number: 0101192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reeve D. Vanneman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5031               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Schwartz mschwartz@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A 1994 Florida law that separates the state juvenile justice system from social
              welfare agencies marked a change in the ideology behind juvenile justice.  Once
              focused on protection and rehabilitation of children, the juvenile justice
              system, like the adult criminal justice system, now focuses more on punishment.
               Where previous laws reflected beliefs that children are still unformed and not
              fully responsible for their actions, and that they require guidance rather than
              punishment, the new laws reject such beliefs.  This project examines how the
              shift in the law reflects changing attitudes toward the children it most
              affects, particularly African-American children.  It uses two major research
              strategies to understand the sources and consequences of the reform of
              Florida's juvenile justice system.  First, analysis of quantitative data on a
              randomly selected sample of all cases processed by Florida's juvenile courts
              reveals the effects of the new statewide policy on the treatment of problem
              youth.  Second, a detailed legislative analysis of how the policy was developed
              and adopted into law identifies the changes in values and ideologies of
              childhood that guided the new policy.  The results contribute to research
              literatures on the social construction of childhood, the workings of the
              criminal justice system, and the emergence of criminal justice policy.
