Title       : Beowulf Based Curriculum Enrichment Integrated Laboratory (B-CEIL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0101648

Award Number: 0101648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fitratullah Khan khan@utb1.utb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mahmood Quweider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Brownsville
	      80 Fort Brown
	      Brownsville, TX  78520    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A Beowulf cluster is a low-cost supercomputer based on inexpensive computer
              nodes networked together. It provides a low-cost parallel processing
              environment that can be used to enrich curricula in computer science and
              related fields at the associate's and bachelor's levels. This project is
              developing a Beowulf-Based Curriculum Enrichment Integrated Laboratory (B-CEIL)
              for enhancing important concepts and principles in key courses of several
              degree programs: B.S. in computer science, Associate of Applied Science
              (A.A.S.) in computer information systems, and Bachelor of Applied Technology
              (B.A.T.).

The central component of the lab is a 24-node Beowulf cluster,
              built from an existing inventory of 24 Pentium computers and three Alpha
              workstations, with the addition of complementary equipment to simulate a Public
              Switched Network (PSN).

Two levels of student lab projects are being
              developed in the B-CEIL environment. The first level covers topics such as
              computer interfacing, networking, clustering, task scheduling and optimization,
              and benchmarking. The second level focuses on enhancing students' understanding
              of real-world PSN-based networking and computationally intensive fields such as
              artificial neural networks, image compression, image analysis, numerical
              analysis, and distributed databases. The student lab projects are applicable to
              a number of courses in the university's B.S., A.A.S., and B.A.T. programs,
              including Networking, Systems Programming and Concurrent Processes, Computer
              Organization, Operating Systems, Database Management Systems, Principles of
              Programming Languages, Numerical Methods, Image Processing, and PC Hardware.

