Title       : FRG: Modeling Waves and Sediment Transport in Coastal Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0101572

Award Number: 0101572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $865749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry L. Bona   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward B. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposed here is a study featuring models for the interaction of surface and
              internal oceanic waves with sediment-laden bottom topography.  The project
              includes derivation and mathematical analysis of models, development of
              algorithms for the approximation of solutions, implementation of the algorithms
              as computer codes, comparisons of the output of numerical simulations with
              field data, the use of the models for prediction and their development as a
              tool for effective coastal engineering.  The basic issue under consideration is
              challenging in that it involves the temporal evolution of two free surfaces
              whose dynamics are connected in a complex and nonlinear way.  The wave motion
              involves the deformation of the water's  surface, or in the case of internal
              waves, the pycnoclines.  Even over a fixed bottom, these issues are difficult
              in their exact formulation, and consequently model equations are typically
              used.  In the present conception, the bottom is not fixed, and this added
              complexity is what makes the issues proposed here for study scientifically very
              interesting.  In view are three-dimensional models that are initiated by
              incoming wave fields from deep water.   These models will allow for long-shore
              variation and take account of reflection.  It is planned to develop such models
              and to test them extensively against both laboratory experiments and field
              observation.  Comparisons are in view at several sites around the world,
              including the Field Research Facility of the US Army Corps of Engineers at
              Duck, NC, a site of the Polish Academy of Sciences on the Baltic Sea, the North
              Coast of the Magdelan Islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the Gold Coast of
              Australia, the Island of Djerba off the Tunisian coast and two regions in
              Morocco (Alger in the Gibraltar Strait and Agadir on the Atlantic coast).    	
              

The motivation for carrying out the study outlined above is several-fold. 
              First is the pure science of the subject.  The project involves interesting and
              substantial issues from hydrodynamics, partial differential equations, and
              sediment transport theory.  Secondly, it is an ideal venue in which to acquaint
              students with interdisciplinary research.  There is a strong practical reason
              for this study as well.  The erosion and retreat of coastlines is a worldwide
              phenomenon.  Global warming will increase the activity of storms, raise the sea
              level, and further degrade the present, sometimes catastrophic state of many
              beaches.  Fragile Arctic coasts, beaches on the Great lakes and on many coastal
              regions already display the unmistakable signs of deterioration caused by these
              global changes and aggravated by social developmental pressure.  Severe erosion
              is likely to spread to many coastal areas within half a century and thus
              increase the demand for effective prevention methods.  The present project aims
              at deepening our understanding of fundamental wave-bottom interaction
              processes, especially as regards sediment dispersal. Going beyond the science,
              the project also grapples with the intelligent use of this kind of knowledge in
              designing coastal protection strategies.  With experience already in hand, it
              is clear that there are a variety of protection options and that it is not
              always smart to simply build some permanent, often-ugly structure.  So-called
              'soft' protection methods are a useful addition to the reperatoire of the
              coastal engineer.  These are much less expensive when they can be made to work.
                The assessment of the practicality of a protection plan, be it 'hard' or
              'soft' relies upon the kind of knowledge investigated under the auspices of
              this project. 


