Title       : Building for Tomorrow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0101568

Award Number: 0101568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $648000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack L. Waintraub Jack_Waintraub@middlesex.cc.nj.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Armando A. Abina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ashok K. Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlesex County College
	      2600 Woodbridge Avenue
	      Edison, NJ  08818    201/548-6000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Building for Tomorrow project is bringing together teachers from 35 urban
              high schools for participation in structured professional development workshops
              that are equipping them to attract underrepresented high school students into
              science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) fields. The medium for
              this is participation in the FIRST (For Inspiration and Recognition of Science
              and Technology) Robotics Competition and other national SMET competitions. With
              participation in these competitions, students are increasing their interest in
              SMET careers, and this interest is translating into increased enrollment and
              success in related high school courses and in SMET majors at postsecondary
              institutions. 

The collaborating institutions (Middlesex Community College,
              St. Louis Community College, and San Diego City College) are conducting a
              series of summer institutes to train teams of practicing high school teachers
              and preservice teachers from urban districts so they may guide their students
              through these tournaments. The institutes also assist the teams to establish
              partnerships with corporations and academic institutions to support the
              participation of their high schools in SMET competitions.

FIRST is
              sponsoring an annual robotics competition that partners teams of high school
              students with engineers from businesses and universities and introduces the
              students to the excitement of engineering. In a six-week program, each team is
              brainstorming, designing, constructing, and testing a champion robot for the
              tournament. Through these activities, students are discovering the connection
              between classroom lessons and real world applications. Annually, teams from
              about 400 schools are participating in FIRST regional and national
              competitions.

The strategic goals of Building for Tomorrow are to:
 1.
              Cultivate and direct student enthusiasm, generated by participation in national
              and local SMET-related competitions, towards effective learning.
 2.
              Capitalize on students desire to succeed in SMET competitions to expand their
              knowledge of and interest in SMET disciplines and SMET careers in industry and
              education through transmission of real-time competition-related information (
              e.g., how to design, engineer, problem solve, construct, communicate ideas, and
              work in teams.)
 3. Increase SMET high school teacher knowledge of and ability
              to apply effective team building, project management, effective communication,
              creative problem-solving, time management, and conflict resolution.


