Title       : Materials Processing for Ferromagnetic Wide Bandgap Nitride Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0101438

Award Number: 0101438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Pearton spear@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate advanced materials processing methods that do not
              disrupt spin-injection and transport in order to polarize, inject, transport,
              control, store and detect spins in semiconductors. The discovery of
              ferromagnetism in (In, Mn)As and (Ga,Mn)As opens an opportunity to explore the
              combination of high purity heterostructures and ferromagnetism. However the low
              Curie temperature for these materials (<35K and 110K, respectively), limits
              their practical impact; in sharp contrast, (Ga,Mn)N is predicted to have a TC
              ~400K. This project will address the following topics: (i) development of low
              resistance p-ohmic contacts with sharp metal/semiconductor interfaces to allow
              efficient injection of spin-polarized currents into various heterostructures,
              e.g., (Ga,Mn)N/GaN, (Ga,Mn)N/InGaN; (ii) the development of appropriate plasma
              chemistries for equi-rate and selective dry etching of (Ga,Mn)N and related
              materials. For etching Mn, high density F2-based plasma chemistries have been
              successful. The normal Cl2-based chemistries for GaN will need to be altered in
              order to obtain equi-rate removal of all three lattice constituents in the
              (Ga,Mn)N; (iii) implantation/isolation needed in selective area doping for
              contact formation and for intra-device electrical and optical isolation. It is
              expected to achieve efficient doping of (Ga,Mn)N using Si+ for n-type and
              Mg+/P+ for p-type doping. The thermal stability of the (Ga,Mn)N during
              annealing will also be explored, in order to study formation of other phases or
              precipitates; (iv) examine the interaction of H with Mn-if passivation occurs,
              this will lower TC. The thermal stability of the effect, the reactivation
              kinetics (both thermal and by minority-carrier injection) and the H
              diffusivity, will be investigated; (v) fabrication of various test structures
              to enable a measurement of the spin injection efficiency-
these include a
              GaMnN/AlGaN/GaN light-emitting diode and a GaMnN spinfet. The significance of
              the research will be the development of an understanding of how to process
              (Ga,Mn)N to achieve efficient spin injection and transport, as the basis for
              novel device structures.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a
              topical area of materials science having high technological relevance. The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to important aspects of electronic/photonic devices. The basic knowledge
              and understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to
              improving the perform-ance and stability of advanced devices and circuits by
              providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing
              improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature of the
              program is the integration of research and education through the training of
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
***

