Title       : Magnetic Phenomena on the Nanometer Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0101814

Award Number: 0101814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chia-Ling Chien clc@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on the investigation of the spin polarization of
              ferromagnetic metals and the switching of ferromagnetic components.  These
              phenomena, occurring on the nanometer scale, are of crucial importance to
              magnetoelectronic devices.  We propose to use the point-contact Andreev
              reflection technique, with appropriate analyses, to measure the intrinsic spin
              polarization of a variety of materials, especially CrO2 and the Heusler alloys,
              which have been predicted to be 100% spin polarized.  We also propose to
              address key issues in multilayers with exchange bias, particularly the type of
              antiferromagnetic spin structure present, antiferromagnetic domains, and the
              switching of exchange-coupled systems using synthetic antiferromagnets.  The
              graduate students involved in the project receive training in cutting-edge
              technology of careers in academe, industry and government.

Magnetoelectronic
              devices are new devices that manipulate both spin (magnetic dipole moment) and
              charge of electrons as opposed to only charge of electrons in traditional
              electronic devises.  These new devices depend crucially on the substantial spin
              polarization of certain ferromagnetic materials (a difference in the number of
              resident spin-up and spin-down electrons) through which the itinerant electrons
              flow, and the ability to switch the magnetization of the ferromagnet channels. 
              Example of such devices employing these components include giant
              magnetoresistance (GMR) read-heads in virtually all computers manufactured
              today, and magnetic random access memories (MRAM) that one day may be replace
              the current dynamic random access memory (DRAM) used in current computers. 
              This work is directed at measuring the intrinsic spin polarization of metals
              (the ferromagnetic channels) using the technique of Andreev reflection, which
              depends on fundamental properties of superconducting junctions that are
              employed in the experiments.  The other part of this work is to understand how
              thin magnetic layers, which exist in many magnetoelectronic devices, can be
              made to switch easily by a small external field, or be designed to resist
              switching.  Students in this program will receive extensive training in
              physics, new materials, and measuring techniques to enable them to pursue
              careers in academe, as well as in industrial and government labs.


