Title       : Wisconsin Online Resource Center-Core Manufacturing Digital Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0101443

Award Number: 0101443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $819850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay P. Chitwood chitwood@fvtc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly Curran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Timmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Anderegg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Rockwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fox Valley Technical Col
	      1825 North Bluemound Drive
	      Appleton, WI  549132277    920/735-5600

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project combines the benefits of two national initiatives in the sixteen
              Wisconsin Technical College System districts to advance the teaching and
              learning of common manufacturing concepts in technician education using the
              power of online multimedia resources. The NSF-ATE TECH SPAN project has
              developed a common manufacturing curriculum isolating twelve core competency
              clusters that cut across over forty manufacturing/engineering related technical
              degree programs. The Wisconsin Online Resource Center, a FIPSE-LAAP project
              focused on a general education digital learning library, builds web-based
              learning objects that are designed and linked to a competency driven
              curriculum. This NSF-ATE project is adapting this Center framework to create a
              manufacturing digital library, and multimedia-based chunks of learning are
              being designed that stimulate and accelerate student understanding of core
              concepts. In addition, a post-associate degree advanced technological
              certificate in emerging industrial practices of integrated cellular
              manufacturing is under development using an associated learning object
              collection in the digital library. Secondary teachers, prospective teachers in
              industrial technology, and community-based trainers of disadvantaged women and
              minorities are being trained in Center resources to inspire the next generation
              of manufacturing technicians.




