Title       : Representation Theory of p-adic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0101451

Award Number: 0101451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Kutzko pkutzko@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It is proposed here that support be provided for four projects as part of the
              investigator's continuing work in the representation theory of p-adic groups
              with applications to local number theory.  The first of these projects would
              extend to classical groups much of the investigator's work with Bushnell on the
              groups GL(N).  The ultimate goal is to construct inducing representations for
              the supercuspidal representations of these groups and then to produce covers
              for the resulting supercuspidal types.  This would allow the use of earlier
              methods in studying the harmonic analysis of these groups and would hopefully
              have arithmetic applications, especially to Langlands functoriality.  The
              second project involves working out what might be called a Plancherel theory
              for affine Hecke algebras with possibly unequal parameters.  These algebras
              play a critical role in applying the techniques alluded to above; it is to be
              hoped that results already obtained in low rank may be extended to this general
              situation.  The third project involves the K-theory and homology of p-adic
              groups and builds upon some recent results on the module theory of Hecke
              algebras.  The fourth project is to apply methods involving compact, open
              subgroups to study the oscillator representation, especially in case p=2.

A
              basic problem in the mathematics of almost every ancient culture was to
              determine solutions to equations where the solutions were constrained to be
              whole numbers.  Such equations, called Diophantine equations after the late
              Greek mathematician Diophantos, have motivated much of the development of that
              part of mathematics referred to as the theory of numbers.  As an example, one
              has the so-called Fermat equation, an equation that has been much in the news
              of late due to the recent determination of its lack of solutions except in case
              n=2.  One way of attempting to solve a Diophantine equation is to replace the
              equation by a congruence:  that is, one picks an integer N and one replaces the
              condition that the two sides of the equation be equal by the less stringent
              condition that the difference of the two sides of the equation be divisible by
              N.  Solving these congruences for enough integers N often gives good
              information about the existence or non-existence of solutions to the original
              equation.  Often it is useful to fix a prime number p and then to study the
              congruences that result when N runs through all powers of p.  In this case, one
              says that one has localized the problem to the prime p.  This process of
              localization has, over the last two hundred years, led to the development of a
              part of number theory called local number theory.  This is the general area in
              which this project is to be carried out.   One of the most powerful
              conceptualizations in local number theory is to be found in the conjectures of
              R.P. Langlands which, if verified, would go a long way to clarifying the nature
              of local Diophantine problems.  The project proposed here would build on the
              investigator's earlier work in an attempt to provide some of the tools
              necessary to verify these conjectures.

