Title       : Cross-Training Technicians and Engineers for Semiconductor Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0101311

Award Number: 0101311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Wood wood@me.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bassam Matar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fabian Lopez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Midgley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project extends work begun under Award No. 9850310.

A consortium
              consisting of three universities (University of New Mexico, Arizona State
              University, and University of Texas at Austin) and three community college
              systems (Albuquerque Technical Vocational Institute, Maricopa County Community
              College District, and Austin Community College) in three contiguous states,
              each of which has semiconductor manufacturing as an economic backdrop, is
              implementing "cross-training" of technicians and engineers.

Supported by a
              previous NSF grant, the consortium developed a suite of six computer-based
              training (CBT) modules designed to be integrated into factory-like labs and
              related courses for co-training of technicians and engineers. The first six
              modules covered lithography, metalization, design of experiments, etch,
              chemical vapor deposition, and statistical process control. In the current
              project, the consortium is (1) developing three more modules covering oxidation
              and diffusion, doping and annealing, and factory dynamics; (2) deploying the
              modules in side-by-side training of engineering and technician students at the
              partnering universities and community colleges; and (3) completing the
              evaluation of the full suite of nine modules.

The project is built around
              the premise that "cross-training" technicians and engineers, such that each
              group better understands the roles and skill sets of the other, will enhance
              their effectiveness as team members in real factory settings. The project's CBT
              modules cover basic semiconductor unit processes (lithography, metalization,
              etch) and their facility demands, design of experiments, and factory-level
              dynamics from both the technician's and the engineer's perspectives. The
              modules include interactive, schematic-based simulator panels for selected
              manufacturing machines, to support a need-based, top-down learning paradigm. In
              addition, the modules have structured exercises that require interactive roles
              between technicians and engineers. The "side-by-side" presentation of text,
              graphics, animations, videos, simulations, and exercises give technicians
              enhanced exposure to mathematics and science and give engineers enhanced
              exposure to machine (tool) operation issues. The multimedia modules are
              designed to operate stand-alone or coupled to a multi-level manufacturing
              simulator package. They can serve training needs in real, mock, or virtual
              factory-like labs.


