Title       : RUI: Interpolation and Sampling in Bergman Spaces; Factors of Harmonic
               Polynomials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0101530

Award Number: 0101530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander P. Schuster schuster@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheldon Axler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The methods used to characterize interpolation sequences vary depending upon
              whether the context is the Hardy space, the Bergman space, the Fock space, or
              the Dirichlet space. This research will attempt to unify these theories, using
              the concept of weak interpolation, which can be defined in the general context
              of a Hilbert space of analytic functions with a reproducing kernel. Moving away
              from the Hilbert space setting, an additional avenue of research will focus on
              obtaining a geometric characterization of interpolating sequences for the Bloch
              space. Yet another direction of research, suitable for experimental computer
              work by undergraduates who could search for useful evidence, involves the
              question of polynomial factors of harmonic polynomials in Euclidean spaces of
              arbitrary dimension. A polynomial that has an isolated zero at the origin
              cannot be a factor of a nonzero harmonic polynomial. This raises the question
              of which polynomials are factors of nonzero harmonic polynomials.

Harmonic
              and analytic functions have been the subject of intense scrutiny by
              mathematicians, scientists, and engineers for the past two centuries. The
              Laplacian operator, whose vanishing characterizes harmonic functions, appears
              naturally in several areas of science and engineering, ranging from the heat
              equation to the distribution of electric charges. This project investigates
              properties of collections of analytic and harmonic functions in an attempt to
              understand deep aspects of the behavior of these functions. A key part of this
              project is the involvement of advanced undergraduates, who will be introduced
              to the world of mathematical research in the hope of inspiring them to pursue
              further studies and a career in mathematics. Showing these students the
              excitement of discovering new mathematical knowledge may help create the next
              generation of mathematicians.

