Title       : Introductory College Physics/Twenty-First Century (ICP/21)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0101433

Award Number: 0101433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander K. Dickison dickisoa@mail.seminole.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin L. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry Savrda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pearley Cunningham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seminole Community Coll
	      Highway 17 92
	      Sanford, FL  32771    305/323-1450

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The ICP/21 project provides an innovative curriculum in introductory physics,
              offering an attractive, student-centered alternative to the standard
              lecture/laboratory format using conventional textbooks. For the two-semester
              course, 10 content modules and a supplemental skills toolkit have been
              developed. Each module consists of activities designed to encourage active
              student engagement using the following models: inquiry and experimentation
              activities (Explorations), reinforcement exercises (Dialogs),
              expanding-the-concept activities (Extensions), assessments (Ranking Tasks), and
              Application ( which require groups of students to solve engineering problems
              involving several physics concepts). This project is: (1) conducting a
              full-scale field test (2) developing three additional modules needed to meet
              the needs of many technology programs, and (3) implementing a dissemination
              plan with a commercial publisher. The full scale field test of ICP/21 involves
              participants from the high school, two year college and four year college
              teaching communities. An external coordinator is responsible for all aspects of
              the field test. The results of the field test are used to improve and
              strengthen the ICP/21 modules. The test also gives data and information related
              to the success of module implementation in the classroom, and the impact it has
              on the students in understanding the concepts of physics. 

During the first
              phase of the ICP/21 project, physics teachers have repeatedly asked for
              additional modules in physics areas not covered in the original 10 modules. As
              a result of this input, three new modules are being developed: electrostatics,
              fluids, and physical optics. The third component of the project is to conduct a
              major dissemination program for ICP/21. This is being done in conjunction with
              a commercial publisher, Ztek. Ztek is a publisher that specializes in
              electronic media for physics and physical science. Because of the innovative
              nature of the ICP/21 material, most instructors will need training or
              assistance in using it in the classroom. The role of the instructor is much
              different when using the ICP/21 material properly than when in a traditional
              classroom lecture format. During the field testing and initial implementation
              this will be done through workshops. 

Evaluations are being done by an
              independent evaluator, who has been the evaluator during the first phase. The
              evaluation is concentrating on three areas. The first is to monitor the modules
              and make sure they fulfill what was promised in the first phase of the project.
              The second is to evaluate the efforts of this phase, and determine its
              effectiveness for student learning. The third area will be to evaluate the
              effect of ICP/21 on students' attitudes and feelings about physics. This
              information will complement the field test results to give a complete picture
              of the effect of ICP/21 on student learning.

