Title       : Effect of Alloying and Thermo-Mechanical-Treatment on Anisotropic Creep and
               Deformation of Ti-alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0101309

Award Number: 0101309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald O. Scattergood ron_scattergood@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the influence of thermo-mechanical-treatment (TMT) and
              alloying on deformation and creep anisotropy of titanium alloys. The research
              involves characterization of anisotropic biaxial creep of Ti alloys using
              closed-end internally pressurized thin-walled tubing superimposed with an axial
              load. The approach is to investigate these behaviors in Ti and Ti- 3Al-2.5V
              following stress-relief anneal and complete recrystallization. Alloying
              additions such as Al to Ti result in significant modification of
              crystallographic texture and operating slip systems. Cold-working leads to
              grain-shape anisotropy of the otherwise equiaxed grain structure of Rx
              materials. The effects of these variables on deformation microstructures are to
              be investigated along with deformation anisotropy following biaxial loading
              under varied stress-states and stress-levels. Transitions in creep mechanisms
              and the effect of underlying deformation mechanism(s) on creep anisotropy will
              also be addressed. Such studies are important for realistic estimates of creep
              strains and life of these structural materials in service.
%%% 
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a contemporary topical area of materials
              science with technological relevance in aerospace, automobile, and chemical
              sectors where Ti-alloys are used in tube form. An important feature of the
              program is the integration of research and education through the training of
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project
              is expected to provide unique opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
              students to develop strong technical, communication, and
              organizational/management skills through experiences in a forefront research
              environment. 
*** 

