Title       : Topics in Stochastic Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0101428

Award Number: 0101428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell H. Fleming whf@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program concerns several topics in stochastic control
theory and
              related areas of applied probability and nonlinear partial
differential
              equations. One topic is risk-sensitive control on an
infinite time horizon,
              motivated by problems of robust feedback
controller design for nonlinear
              systems. Another application of
risk-sensitive control is in mathematical
              finance, including dynamic
portfolio allocation problems on long time
              horizons. Yet another
research topic concerns first order partial differential
              equations of
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman type. While such equations are nonlinear
              in the
usual sense, they are linear with respect to max-plus
              algebra
operations. This allows for approximate solution via max-plus
              basis
expansions. Finally stochastic control models for economic growth
              and
debt which arise in international finance are being studied.

Stochastic
              control provides a framework for modeling and analysis of
dynamic decision
              making in the presence of uncertainty. The method of
dynamic programming
              provides a way to obtain optimal stochastic control
policies by solution of
              corresponding nonlinear partial differential
equations. The research funded
              through this grant is motivated by a
range of applications in engineering and
              financial economics, including
robust feedback controller design, nonlinear
              estimation and filtering
and optimal dynamic investment allocation. In
              international
finance,growth/debt models are considered in which the goal is
              to choose
national investment and consumption policies which optimize a
              suitably
chosen criterion subject to imposed constraints. The model
              performance
under optimal control may provide benchmarks to suggest whether
              actual
current account deficits and levels of foreign debt are
              sustainable
under current policies.

