Title       : FRG: Solutions for Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0101458

Award Number: 0101458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1010879            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce R. McLaughlin mclauj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford J. Nolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Cheney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antoinette M. Maniatty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the work proposed here, four researchers at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
              work in teams with postdocs and graduate students to solve inverse problems. 
              The goal is to identify material properties or surface features from indirectly
              related data sets.  Each problem is modeled as an elastic, electromagnetic, or
              acoustic medium and the mathematical model is strongly taken into account to
              develop solution techniques. Two of the four problems to be considered are: (1)
              find variations in stiffness in biological tissue so that regions that are
              abnormal (usually with 7 to 17 times stiffer than normal tissue) can be
              identified.  The model is the equations of elasticity and measurement of low
              frequency propagating shear waves using Doppler ultrasound provide the data. 
              Noise reduction, use of models with random media, determination of the minimum
              size of abnormal regions that can be identified, reconstruction algorithms and
              images are all targets of this investigation; and (2) create radar images from
              satellite or airborne radar equipment by developing solutions that correct for
              deviations from ideal flight paths, that correctly identify object positions
              (break left-right symmetry problems) and that can image objects that are
              moving.  The problems involve establishing mathematical results, utilizing
              engineering expertise and development and implementation of numerical
              algorithms.

In this work, four principal investigators, together with
              postdocs and graduate students, solve problems where noninvasive sensing is
              followed by the creation of images.  To solve these problems, the researchers
              work in teams to combine mathematical analysis, engineering and numerical
              computation to achieve results.  Two of the problems that will be addressed
              are: 
(a) elastography with ultrasound measurements of tissue movement created
              by a second low level propagated signal yields data that can distinguish the
              stiffer tissue of cancerous tumors from normal tissue.  The goal, then, is to
              determine algorithms for computing the location of the stiff and normal
              regions, to find the minimum size of regions that can be identified, and to
              create images in 'real time';
(b) airborne and satellite topographic and
              object sensing where signals reflected from the earth's surface are used to
              locate positions of objects and topographic features.  The goal is to improve
              resolution and accuracy, to reduce the size of objects and features that can be
              identified and to correctly represent features that are partially hidden from
              view.  

