Title       : Diophantine Equations and Algebraic Points on Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0101636

Award Number: 0101636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Granville andrew@math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Tucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies diophantine properties of points on curves and related
              questions involving solutions to diophantine equations.  A diophantine equation
              is simply a polynomial equation with integer coefficients.  One is generally
              interested in solutions to these equations that are rational numbers or
              integers.  The investigator uses the p-adic method Chabauty-Coleman to study
              the number of solutions to Thue equations, which are equations of the form
              F(x,y) = m, where m is an integer and F is a homogeneous polynomial with
              integer coefficients and without repeated roots.  The investigator has shown
              that the number of integer solutions (x,y), with x and y coprime, can be
              bounded in terms of the degree of F under certain hypotheses and is now working
              on weakening these hypotheses, sharpening his bounds, and extending his methods
              to attack other similar problems.  The investigator also looks at various
              questions related to Vojta's conjecture for algebraic points on curves, which
              implies a variety of important results in diophantine number theory, most
              notably the abc conjecture.  In addition, he uses techniques from arithmetic
              geometry to study class groups of quadratic fields, consequences of the abc
              conjecture, and curves over finite fields.

The investigator studies problems
              having to do with whole number and rational solutions  to polynomial equations
              in two or more variables.  Such problems are among the oldest in the branch of
              mathematics known as number theory.  Indeed, they derive their name
              "diophantine equations" from Diophantus of Alexandria, a Greek mathematician
              who lived in the 2nd century BC.  Over the past few years, mathematicians have
              succeeded at completely solving many diophantine equations that were first
              examined hundreds of years ago: Andrew Wiles solved the famed Fermat equation
              (which has the form "x to the nth power plus y to the nth power equals z to the
              nth power", where x,y, and z are positive whole numbers and n is a whole number
              greater than or equal to 3) that was initially studied by French mathematician
              Pierre Fermat in the 1600's, and others have solved problems posed by
              Diophantus himself.  Contemporary investigations of diophantine equations have
              given rise to a host of new questions and conjectures; for example, it has been
              conjectured that the number of solutions in rational numbers to a polynomial
              equation in two variables depends only on the degree of the equation.  Number
              theory has proven to be of more than historical and theoretical interest in
              recent years.  It provided the theoretical ideas that led to the development of
              error-correcting codes employed by compact disc players and has found
              applications in the areas of cryptography and data encryption, which are
              important both for national security and for e-commerce.

