Title       : Puget Sound Consortium for Manufacturing Excellence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0101582

Award Number: 0101582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $962976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Imelda Cossette icossett@ctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Stoebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley Keltto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shoreline Cmty College
	      16101 Greenwood Avenue North
	      Seattle, WA  981335696    206/546-4101

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Puget Sound Consortium for Manufacturing Excellence (CME) is a regional
              education-industry partnership that is improving the connection between
              manufacturing technology education, student career goals, and private sector
              demand. The CME is working with its education partners to modularize
              manufacturing technology curriculum based on existing, regionally focused
              industry skill standards. Instruction is seamlessly combined for customization
              of instruction to students and incumbent workers, and leads to a degree. CME
              partner colleges and tech-prep programs are using CME modules in their
              manufacturing and engineering programs. Professional development activities are
              providing workshops for faculty on the design and use of the modularized
              curriculum system. The CME is also assisting high schools and colleges in
              promoting manufacturing career opportunities to students. Through its
              curriculum and professional development services, the CME is:

-- adapting
              and organizing already-developed instructional modules to form a manufacturing
              technology curriculum that is responsive to regional industry skill
              requirements;

-- developing a Teaching Factory model that develops skills by
              having students apply classroom instruction to real problems in a work-like
              setting;

-- training over 30 high school instructors, college faculty, and
              other instructors on how to utilize the modular curriculum system; and 

--
              improving curriculum articulation between high schools, community and technical
              colleges, and 4-year colleges and universities.

The long-term impact of the
              CME will be more and better skilled manufacturing technology graduates,
              improved technology instruction, articulation of the curriculum and enhanced
              coordination among secondary and post-secondary
              institutions.















