Title       : Additivity Problems in Quantum Information Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a0101205

Award Number: 0101205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher King king@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns several related problems in quantum information
theory,
              all arising from the study of noisy quantum channels. The first
problem is to
              prove additivity of minimal entropy and multiplicativity of
the maximal trace
              norms for a unital qubit channel. This result would imply
additivity of the
              Holevo capacity for such channels, thereby settling one
particular case of a
              longstanding conjecture. The second problem is to
investigate a conjectured
              equality between the Shannon capacity of a noisy
quantum channel and a new
              quantity which was introduced in earlier work of
the P.I.. The third problem
              involves a study of one special class of
non-product measurements for product
              channels, with the goal of providing
an interesting laboratory for testing
              ideas about entangled measurements.


Advances in nanotechnology have
              provided the opportunity for scientists to
study and manipulate the quantum
              properties of microscopic systems,
including single-atom systems and
              single-photon states. Recent theoretical
discoveries indicate that such
              systems may have extraordinary properties. One example
is the quantum
              computer, which is a theoretical device capable of
outperforming any standard
              computer. Another example is a protocol for
unconditionally secure encryption,
              which would be achieved by encoding
messages as quantum states. Mathematics
              played a key role in the
development of both of these ideas. The current
              proposal concerns a similar
mathematical investigation of quantum devices
              which would be used to
transmit and store information. A fundamental problem
              is to determine the
information capacity of such a system, and thereby find
              the quantum analog
of Shannon's famous expression for the capacity of a noisy
              channel. The
P.I. describes a strategy for determining this capacity in an
              important
special case, namely a memoryless channel where "qubits" are used to
              encode
the information. The method of solution would involve some new
              mathematical
ideas which may have applications to other areas of quantum
              information
theory.

