Title       : M-I Coupling: Quantifying High Latitude Electric Field and Conductance
               Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0101825

Award Number: 0101825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey Crowley gcrowley@swri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will study electric field and conductance variability in the
              high latitude ionosphere.  The study will be conducted using the Assimilative
              Mapping of Ionospheric Electrodynamics (AMIE) model for a large number of
              intervals for which a variety of ground-based and space-based measurements are
              available.  The study addresses three scientific questions:  (1) What are the
              spatial and temporal scales of structures in the electric field in the
              ionosphere? (2) What are the spatial and temporal scales of structures in the
              ionospheric conductance? (3) How do the structured electric field and
              conductance affect the global Joule heating?  The variability of electric
              fields and conductances from the AMIE model will be summarized as a function of
              magnetic latitude, magnetic local time, and geomagnetic activity.  The analysis
              will provide guidance on the amount of variability being omitted in models that
              have coarser spatial and temporal scales.  It also provides guidance on the
              geophysical processes that need to be understood before physics-based models
              can completely capture the variability and its effects.  The ultimate objective
              is a better understanding of the coupling between the thermosphere, ionosphere,
              and magnetosphere during geomagnetically disturbed conditions.
