Title       : Applied Research -- A Study of Teacher Education: Research on Instructional
               Design (Project ASTEROID)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0101799

Award Number: 0101799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $608839             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Smith pegs@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Kay Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Despite the recent popularity of case-based instruction and other practice-based
              forms of teacher education, we know little about how such instruction is
              enacted and what teachers actually learn from participating in courses that
              utilize such an approach.  The goal of Project ASTEROID is to produce empirical
              evidence of what teachers learn as a result of participating in practice-based
              teacher education courses.  Three primary kinds of data will be collected in
              this regard:  (a) pre- and post-measures of teacher knowledge of mathematics,
              of pedagogy, and of student learning; (b) continuous measures of teachers'
              developing understanding during the courses; and (c) observational data that
              focus on teachers' classroom practices.  We plan to map what teachers learn on
              to various course experiences and how that learning does or does not transfer
              to actual classroom teaching.

The courses will focus on two areas of the
              middle school mathematics curriculum that have been problematic for teachers: 
              proportional reasoning and algebra as the study of patterns and functions.  In
              the courses, the everyday work of teaching is the object of on-going
              investigation and thoughtful inquiry.  Through the examination of records of
              authentic practice -- mathematics tasks selected from innovative curricula,
              student responses to mathematical tasks, and episodes of classroom instruction
              -- teachers develop an understanding of mathematics, of mathematics pedagogy,
              and of students as learners of mathematics 

As we develop procedures for
              studying the implementation and impact of the courses, we will systematically
              document the processes and instruments that we find effective.  These will be
              made available to the field for use in the documentation and evaluation of
              other teacher education and professional development efforts.


