Title       : IT Applications Across Career Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0101703

Award Number: 0101703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce Malyn-Smith JoyceM@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Wong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shara Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly A. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In December 1999, the U.S. Department of Education redefined career education by
              structuring occupational programs into 16 new career clusters. One of these
              clusters is Information Technology (IT), but the remaining 15 all have IT
              aspects. The basic premise of this project is that there should be commonality
              of approach to IT curriculum over the remaining 15 clusters. The project
              assumes that all technician workers need IT content as part of their
              preparation, and that content should include a core of knowledge necessary for
              IT literacy. This project is developing a guiding curriculum framework and
              associated materials for instructors in schools and two-year colleges to use in
              addressing the IT aspects in 6 of the clusters. 

The major objectives are
              to:
a. Develop a common language defining "IT applications" and to develop a
              common curricular framework that apply across the clusters; 
b. Work with
              community and technical college faculty to develop, pilot and validate a set of
              resource guidebooks in 6 of the 15 clusters (Manufacturing; Transportation;
              Distribution and Logistic Services; Health Services; Human Services, Scientific
              Research, Engineering and Technical Services; and Education and Training
              Services.) Each guidebook is designed to give practical information for
              teaching IT applications in a particular cluster, providing instructional
              models on how to develop scenario-based lessons structured around tasks and
              problems found in authentic workplace situations, assessment rubrics, and
              student record-keeping tools.
c. Enhance the educational outcomes of the
              career cluster initiatives by ensuring that the IT applications are integrated
              into the curriculum developed by each of these clusters.
d. Disseminate
              Resource Guides through each career cluster's own dissemination mechanism and
              through the national leadership organizations.

Partners in this project
              include Lorain County Community College, Middlesex Community College, MPR
              Associates, and The National Association of State Directors of Vocational and
              Technical Education.




