Title       : Collaborative Research: Training Water Science Technicians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0101697

Award Number: 0101697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Munson   (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Host  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Axler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia A. Hagley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This collaborative project between a four-year and a two-year institution is
              developing an Internet-based laboratory curriculum in water science, with a
              goal of preparing future water science technicians for the increasingly
              high-technology, interdisciplinary, and often contentious world of water
              resource management in the 21st century. Through the on-line curriculum,
              students learn and apply their knowledge and skills using inquiry-based
              problems derived from real-world and real-time data collected by state-of-the-
              art water quality monitoring technology. The curriculum is designed as a
              two-semester lab sequence targeted toward second-year technical students in
              water resource management, water science, or environmental resource management
              programs. It consists of six key units that cover the range of knowledge and
              skills needed by future water science technicians: the knowledge base,
              experimental design, data collection, data management, data analysis and
              interpretation, and management policy, outreach and education. Each unit in
              turn consists of a series of three to eight interactive modules that cover
              specific topics (e.g. the Data Analysis Unit includes web-based modules on
              Exploratory Data Analysis, Trend Analysis, Spatial Analysis, and Modeling). The
              modules are linked through a series of inquiry lessons designed around current
              water quality management issues and using real-time water quality data. This
              approach allows community college teachers considerable flexibility in adopting
              the entire curriculum, or in using the units, modules and inquiry lessons to
              fit the needs of their particular program. This curriculum serves as either a
              capstone experience for students completing a technician program, or a gateway
              for students interested in pursuing water science degrees at four-year
              institution.













