Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Consumption in Late Soviet and Post-Soviet
               Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0101249

Award Number: 0101249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria Bonnell vbonnell@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates how and why consumption tastes and practices have
              changed in Russia from the late-Soviet period to the post-Soviet period.  In
              the last 25 years, party-state control over production and distribution of
              consumer goods, so central to the organization of Soviet power, has been
              supplanted by private production and exchange.  As Soviet scarcity of goods has
              given way to post-Soviet scarcity of money, Russians have developed diverse
              strategies for provisioning themselves and their households.   Despite the
              emergence of a market economy, then, consumption in Russia differs from that in
              western capitalist nations, and the changes taking place there require separate
              study.  Further, since existing theories of how class and status affect
              consumption in western capitalist societies may not explain the changes in
              Russian consumption, theoretical work on the topic needs to be revised and
              extended.  In addressing these needs, this project contributes both to a
              specific understanding of changes in consumption in one former socialist
              nation, and to a broad-based understanding of the importance of the political
              and economic context to consumption.

To reach its goals, the project surveys
              consumers of different socioeconomic status in a medium-sized Central Russian
              city (Kaluga).  The retrospective interviews used in the survey draw on the
              memories of consumers who lived through the great transformation, and describe
              changes in the correspondence between status, class, and consumption.  The
              analysis uses quantitative techniques to describe types of consumption
              lifestyles, position in the stratification system, and upward and downward
              mobility.  It also uses qualitative techniques to analyze preferences and
              values not easily captured with quantitative techniques.

