Title       : Creating Avenues, Support and Equity for Women and Minorities in Advanced
               Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0101736

Award Number: 0101736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $556833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri Greenfield tgreenfi@pcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Sloan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice McKinnon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rosalyn Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. VanAmerongen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland Comm Col
	      12000 SW 49th Avenue
	      Portland, OR  972197132    503/244-6111

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing, implementing, and evaluating a model that uses a
              non-traditional approach to the recruitment of women and minorities into
              advanced technical careers, particularly in the information technology (IT)
              field. The model features not just recruitment, but academic advising, career
              exploration and support services. Over 800 students are being served by the
              program. 

Project objectives are:

1: Introducing and exposing women and
              minorities in a five county area of Portland to education and employment
              opportunities in advanced technical fields in which they are underrepresented.
              Key outcomes include increased awareness by women and minorities about advanced
              technical careers and programs and identification of potential project
              participants.

2. Facilitating enrollment and success of educationally and/or
              economically disadvantaged women and minorities in advanced technical education
              programs. Key outcomes include increased enrollment by women and minorities
              into advanced technical programs; increased retention and improved academic
              performance in technical programs such as Computer Information Systems, Welding
              Technology, Advanced Facilities Maintenance, Computer Sciences,
              Microelectronics, and Engineering Technology; and enhanced educational
              opportunities in specialized fields.

3: Facilitating school-to-work
              transitions in Information Technology (IT) and other advanced technical fields.
              Key outcomes include women and minorities employed in higher paying jobs and a
              20% increase in the number of women and minorities who are participating in
              cooperative education with an industry partner in targeted science and
              technology fields.

4. Training instructors, tutors, career counselors, and
              academic advisors in gender and culturally equitable teaching, learning,
              assessment, and advising practices. Key outcomes include improved instruction,
              career counseling and academic advising delivered with more equity.

5.
              Involving IT and other employers in recruitment, retention, and school-to-work
              transition activities. 



