Title       : Collaborative Project: Kentucky Information Technology Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0101573

Award Number: 0101573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499636            (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell H. Abney darrellh.abney@kctcs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Vos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith W. Bird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Pasley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent A. DiNoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kentucky Community & Techn
	      2624 Administration Park Drive
	      Lexington, KY  405114092    859/246-

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Kentucky Information Technology Center (KITCATE) is a regional information
              technology (IT) center. This consortium of the Kentucky Community and Technical
              College System and Lexington Community College enables two-year colleges to
              prepare skilled information technology (IT) workers needed by new and existing
              Kentucky companies. The goals of the Center are to increase the IT enrollment
              and completion rates of students in two-year colleges; to implement widely an
              industry driven IT curriculum; to provide professional development for high
              school and two-year college IT faculty; and to increase the support and
              participation of business, government and industry in Kentucky for IT
              education. To reach these goals the number of capable, qualified faculty to
              teach IT courses must be increased. A physical center provides the education
              for faculty and staff and for business, government and industry workers. A
              virtual center provides information on the IT curriculum, offers IT courses,
              and supports workshops. Mobile centers provide workshops for instructors and
              for workers in business, government and industry at their locations. The two
              year-colleges provide articulation for high school students with vendor
              certificates who enroll in appropriate degree programs. An IT industry advisory
              board provides guidance and support to the Center.
