Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: The Metaverse: A Laboratory for Digital Media
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0101242

Award Number: 0101242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $824621             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Griffioen griff@netlab.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan M. Mazur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Seales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Calvert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher O. Jaynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1088,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0101242
James Griffioen
University of Kentucky

CISE Research
              Infrastructure:  The Metaverse: A Laboratory for Digital Media Networks

The
              primary goal of our research is to investigate and develop new techniques to
              support networked, collaborative, visually immersive environments and
              applications.  The objective is to design visually compelling collaborative
              spaces (where people interact with computer simulations and each other) that
              are inexpensive, extensible, automatically configurable, adaptable, and
              scalable. The work involves an interdisciplinary team of researchers exploring
              system-level issues including visualization, network communication, and
              computer vision, with others studying application-level issues such as
              scientific (CFD) visualization, presentation of new-media/art, and the
              educational 
efficacy and impact of the technology.

The requested
              infrastructure will be used to create three physically separate, networked
              visualization laboratories supported by two new technical staff.  Each
              visualization environment will have a distinct configuration and objective. The
              CORE (COllaborative Rendering Environment) will explore compelling
              collaborative immersive spaces, while the VIDE (Visually Immersive Display
              Environment) investigates stereo visualization. Unlike the CORE and VIDE, where
              users are immersed in pixels, the DOME (Digital Object Media Environment) will
              be a head-tracked ``outside looking in'' configuration.  The environments will
              demonstrate the versatility of the underlying base technology by using the same
              techniques to support multiple application domains.  A fourth environment will
              be deployed at the University of Puerto Rico.

