Title       : Protein-Protein Interactions in Prokaryotic Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0101918

Award Number: 0101918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George V. Stauffer george-stauffer@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Escherichia coli gcvTHP operon, coding the glycine cleavage enzyme system,
              provides one-carbon units for essential cellular methylation reactions. This
              operon is controlled by gcv -specific (GcvA and GcvR)and global-acting (Lrp,
              CRP and PurR)transcriptional regulatory proteins that are integrated into a
              regulatory network that allows the cell to respond to multiple environmental
              signals to either activate or repress transcription. The gcvB gene, encoding
              two small non-translated regulatory RNAs, is controlled solely by the GcvA and
              GcvR proteins. GcvA activates both operons in the presence of glycine, and
              represses the operons when glycine is limiting.  Repression by GcvA requires
              the negative-acting GcvR protein.  It is hypothesized that GcvR interacts
              directly with GcvA and not with DNA to repress the operons.  Generally,
              repressors must bind to DNA to be functional.  It is also hypothesized that a
              specific surface on GcvA interacts with different subunits of RNA polymerase to
              activate the gcvTHP operon and the gcvB gene.  A combination of genetics,
              physiology and biochemistry will be used to address two major and interrelated
              questions to understand this regulatory network.  First, what is the molecular
              mechanism used by the gcv -specific regulatory proteins GcvA and GcvR to
              control expression of the gcvTHP and gcvB operons?  Second, how does a surface
              on the GcvA protein interact with different regions of RNA polymerase to
              activate transcription at the gcvTHP promoter versus the gcvB promoter?  Since
              there are many functional and structural similarities between the
              transcriptional apparatus from both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms,
              understanding the mechanisms of bacterial transcription initiation will
              contribute to our general understanding of gene expression and its regulation.
