Title       : Studies of High-Tc Superconductors and Molecular Materials under Extreme
               Hydrostatic Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0101809

Award Number: 0101809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366750             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Schilling schill@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5939,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Despite enormous efforts, high-temperature superconductors have yet to fulfill
              the vaunted expectations placed in them.  There exists neither a good basic
              understanding of these materials, nor the ability to process them for many
              potential applications.  Progress has been impeded by the complexity of the
              perovskite-like structure and the important influence of defects.   This
              individual investigator award will fund a project to study the temperature- and
              pressure-activated defect relaxation processes in both bulk high-Tc materials
              and their grain boundaries.  The knowledge gained will help develop strategies
              to optimize the superconducting properties, in particular the current carrying
              capacity, and stabilize them for long-term applications.  In addition, by
              suppressing the relaxation processes in a low-temperature experiment, the
              intrinsic dependence of Tc on pressure will be determined over a broad range of
              lattice parameter and carrier concentration, thus allowing a meaningful test of
              theory and perhaps pointing the way to higher values of Tc.  High-pressure
              experiments on molecular magnets and superconductors are also planned.  The
              research will involve a collaboration with a Russian scientist.  Graduate and
              undergraduate students working on this project will benefit from the exposure
              to international collaborations as well as learn skills that will prepare them
              for future scientific careers.
%%%
High-temperature superconductors have yet
              to fulfill the vaunted expectations placed in them after their discovery nearly
              15 years ago.  Only a few specialized applications have reached the
              marketplace.  Progress has been impeded by the complicated structure of these
              materials and the presence of many kinds of structural defects.  Some of these
              defects can even migrate around at room temperature, thus degrading important
              properties, such as the current carrying capacity.  This individual
              investigator award will fund a project to study the properties of mobile
              defects and try to develop a strategy to prevent their migration.  This will
              open the door to further applications and also permit a better understanding of
              why these materials are superconducting at such high temperatures and perhaps
              point the way toward superconductivity at much higher temperatures.  The
              research will involve a collaboration with a Russian scientist.  Graduate and
              undergraduate students working on this project will benefit from the exposure
              to international collaborations as well as learn skills that will prepare them
              for future scientific careers.
***

