Title       : Disturbance Response of Old Growth Bryophytes: A Dual Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0101616

Award Number: 0101616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin W. Kimmerer rkimmer@esf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1228,9136,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0101616
Kimmerer

This project supports sabbatical activities to initiate a
              new research direction and strengthen future research capability for Dr.
              Kimmerer. This project on the bryophytes of the Pacific Northwest complements
              and extends her expertise on Eastern mosses. These studies will 1) provide
              information to advance understanding of the reproductive ecology of common and
              rare bryophytes in coastal forests, 2) provide a framework for further studies
              of the population biology of epiphytic moss communities, and 3) have direct
              application to conservation in old growth forests.

Western scientific
              knowledge of bryophytes in the Pacific Northwest is largely taxonomic in
              nature, with little data on population ecology or on moss response to
              anthropogenic disturbance. Until the harvest of bryophytes for floriculture
              began 20 years ago, bryophytes were not considered an exploitable resource and
              received little scientific attention. The reverse is true among the traditional
              native peoples of the region, for whom bryophytes have long been part of the
              indigenous subsistence economy. Both the history of intensive indigenous use,
              as well as cultural traditions that encourage close attention to biotic
              communities, suggest that there may be a significant body of traditional
              indigenous knowledge concerning bryophytes. Therefore, in parallel to the
              scientific investigations, I plan to evaluate the extent of traditional
              ecological knowledge (TEK) concerning bryophyte response to a specific type of
              habitat alteration/disturbance, i.e., moss harvesting.

The use of dual
              approaches of TEK and scientific tools is largely unknown in the academic
              community and support from the NSF-MCAA to explore feasibility is critical to
              development of this dualistic approach. I will use a full-year sabbatical leave
              to undertake field, laboratory and ethnographic research in collabroation with
              Dr. Bruce McCune and colleagues in Oregon State University (OSU)'s Department
              of Botany and Plant Pathology. OSU is also home to the Northwest Traditional
              Ecological Knowledge Institute, directed by Dr. Judith Vergun, who works
              extensively in ecological restoration with Native American tribes in the
              region.

The research involves three complementary scientific and TEK
              approaches to questions of moss conservation biology and the potential for
              sustainable use:
1) Quantitative description of reproductive life histories of
              mosses designated as "survey and manage" species, versus attributes of a
              control group of ubiquitous species from similar habitats.
2) Field and
              experimental assessments of dispersal and establishment success of "survey and
              manage" species subject to exploitation, versus success of the ubiquitous
              epiphytic species.
3) Exploration of TEK levels held by local indigenous
              people that might be specific to the habitat requirements and post-harvest
              disturbance response of old-growth forest mosses and might offer insights into
              species biology and conservation.


