Title       : GOALI: Adhesion, Lubrication, and Wear of Aluminum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0101840

Award Number: 0101840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Adams jim.adams@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis G. Hector  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yang-Tse Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0101840
Adams
This award is a GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison
              with Industry) grant supporting research and education in the area of adhesion,
              lubrication, and wear of aluminum surfaces.  This GOALI award involves
              collaborative research with the Aluminum Company of America (ALCOA) and General
              Motors (GM) and addresses fundamental tribological issues that impact aluminum
              processing and long-term durability of aluminum parts.  Adhesion and wear
              processes are complex, and can involve many mechanisms. This project focuses on
              three important mechanisms, namely metal adhesion (when the lubricant and bulk
              oxide are penetrated), lubricant adhesion (how to maintain the lubricant on the
              surfaces during high stresses and temperatures), and wear processes (how
              material is removed, and the factors that control that removal).  There are
              three major goals of the work.
1. Understand the factors that control
              metal-ceramic adhesion: In previous work, interfaces between aluminum and a
              model oxide and a model carbide were investigated. Density functional
              calculations explored many possible interface structures to determine the most
              favorable one.  The PI investigated the electronic structure of these
              interfaces, using density of states, charge density, bond-order, Mulliken
              population analysis, and the Electron Localization Function, which, when
              combined, give a rich understanding of the type of bonding across the
              interface. The PI will extend this work from model systems to new carbide and
              nitride interfaces, as those materials are the most promising candidates for
              wear-resistant coatings.  The effect of common alloying elements (Cu, Mg, Mn,
              Zn, and Si) on adhesion will be investigated because it is known that they have
              a major effect on adhesion and wear.  In support of this work, GM will carry
              out experimental studies to measure interfacial adhesion energies for direct
              comparison with these calculations.
2. Investigate how lubricant boundary
              additives react with and bond to aluminum surfaces: These molecules are added
              to lubricants so that one end can bind to the surface while the other end is
              compatible with the lubricant, so that the lubricant is kept on the surface
              during high stresses.  Previous work involved electronic structure
              investigations of how typical boundary additives (alcohols, carboxylic acids,
              and esters) react and bond to the surface. A combination of ab-initio molecular
              dynamics and geometry optimization enabled the determination of optimal
              reaction paths and typical products for several boundary additive species. This
              award will extend previous work that focused on additives used for metals
              processing to investigate additives used for automotive engine lubricants. A
              similar set of complementary simulations and calculations will be performed to
              determine optimal reaction pathways and final structures of typical bound
              species.  The PI will also explore how high compressive and shear loads can
              cause some interfacial lubricants to react with and soften the surface.
3.
              Investigate the factors that control nanoindentation and wear: In previous
              work, empirical MD simulations were used to investigate many factors that
              affect nanoindentation, including temperature, surface orientation, indent
              load/speed, tip geometry, and tip-substrate interactions.  Atomic scale
              deformation mechanisms, including local amorphization/melting and dislocation
              nucleation and motion, were visualized. Similar studies for asperity-asperity
              shear were also carried out.  These calculations were complemented by
              experimental nanoindentation studies at GM, AFM tip dragging studies at ALCOA,
              and GM's continuum mechanics/finite element modeling of nanoindentation/wear.
              In this award, the PI plans to extend these nanoindentation and
              asperity-asperity simulations to include the effect of alloying elements (Cu
              and Mg), for both low concentrations (solid solutions) and high concentrations
              (precipitate formation), to see how those affect deformation mechanisms.
              Simulations of AFM tip dragging will be performed and compared with
              experimental results.  The effect of thin native oxides on the surface, and
              boundary lubricants will also be explored.
%%%
This award is a GOALI (Grant
              Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry) grant supporting research and
              education in the area of adhesion, lubrication, and wear of aluminum surfaces. 
              The research is a collaborative effort involving the University of Arizona, the
              Aluminum Company of America (ALCOA), and General Motors (GM) and addresses
              fundamental tribological issues that impact aluminum processing and long-term
              durability of aluminum parts. Adhesive and abrasive wear during bulk aluminum
              forming limits the stresses that can be applied, damages processing equipment,
              and impacts surface properties such as image clarity, spot weldability, and
              lubricant retention. Similarly, improvements in wear and lubrication of
              aluminum will enable greater use of aluminum in automobile engine applications,
              allowing weight reduction and increases in fuel efficiency, durability, and
              performance.  The award supports interaction with industry on problems of
              fundamental and industrial interest using the tools of molecular dynamics
              simulation and electronic structure tools.  The results will be tested at ALOCA
              and GM laboratories.  The award provides an opportunity for graduate students
              trained in the use of materials simulation methods and electronic structure
              theory to tackle real-world problems and develop skills useful for industry and
              academe alike.
***

