Title       : Studies of Tertiary and Quaternary Structure in Rigid Abiotic Nanoscopic
               Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0101399

Award Number: 0101399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick M. MacDonnell macdonn@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1966,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Frederick MacDonnell of the University of Texas, Arlington is supported by the
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program, and by the
              Nanoscience and Engineering Initiative, for a program of research on tertiary
              and quaternary structures in rigid supramolecular assemblies.   Rigid
              dendrimers (previously prepared by the PI) will be used in synthesis and
              self-assembly of rigid, spatially well-defined, macromolecular assemblies.
              Enantiomerically pure complexes of the trisphenanthroline ruthenium(II) type
              will serve as the the fundamental building blocks for these assemblies. The
              resulting structures will be spatially well defined, since the components are
              conformationally inflexible. This project will examine the 'quartenary
              structure' and behavior of larger aggregations of these macromolecular species
              -- that is the structure and properties of 'assemblies of assemblies'. Those
              rigid, spatially well-defined nano-scale composites will be examined  as
              colloidal aggregates in solutions and on surfaces, using several techniques,
              including microscopy (STM and AFM).

This project involves preparing small
              molecular complexes containing ruthenium atoms surrounded by organic ligands
              arranged in a known, regular and rigid structure and linking these units, in a
              controlled way,  into larger aggregates that also have known, rigid, and
              regular spatial arrangements. These macromolecular assemblies will then be
              combined to form nano-scale aggregates, in solution, in colloidal suspension
              and as particles adsorbed on surfaces. This effort will examine how the
              properties and behavior (both physical and chemical) of the nano-scale
              aggregates is related to the known characteristics of the component fundamental
              units that comprise each system. This multilevel approach has high probability
              of generating understanding and technical experience that will be of
              considerable benefit to the progress of nanoscience and technology.


