Title       : Engineering Technology at a Distance: Information Systems Technology
               Articulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0101699

Award Number: 0101699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy C. Morse morse@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Selter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bettye J. Parham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig L. Tidwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bahman Motlagh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is delivering a baccalaureate degree in Information Systems
              Technology (IST) to associate degree graduates at a distance within the state
              of Florida. This involves the collaboration of a university, community
              colleges, and industry. This partnership is developing, implementing, and
              evaluating a model distance education program that enables students to make a
              successful transition from an associate degree program to the IST degree
              Bachelor of Science. The IST option is becoming an integral part of the
              Engineering Technology at a Distance (ETD) program currently offered. Students
              from the community colleges may complete these degree programs without having
              to come to the University of Central Florida (UCF) campus. The initial target
              group of associate degree students is comprised of graduates of the Southeast
              Center for Networking and Information Technology Education at Daytona Beach
              Community College (DBCC) and Seminole Community College (SCC). Also included
              are Valencia Community College (VCC) students participating in their ATE funded
              Information Technology System and students at the College University Center at
              St. Petersburg Junior College. The Information Systems Technology Articulation
              project is giving these students the final plus 2 years for their bachelor's
              degree.

The objectives of the project include developing Information Systems
              Technology courses for delivery at a distance and beginning to offer these
              courses in the 2001-2002 academic year to partners; ensuring that support
              services for distance learning are in place; and marketing the degree to
              community colleges and industries within Florida.


