Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regional Economic Integration and the Changing
               Spaces of Politics in the Caribbean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0101219

Award Number: 0101219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5926,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Supra-national and transnational regional economies are emerging as a
              territorial response to the competitive pressures of trade-led development. 
              Analysis of these emerging regional institutions has tended to focus on their
              implications for the management and control of economic flows and their
              potential threat to the sovereignty of nation-states.  Less attention has been
              directed to the impact of regional economic integration on the political spaces
              in which local communities can articulate their concerns over trade-led
              development.  Preliminary evidence suggests regional economic integration is
              remaking the geography of political opportunity and creating new possibilities
              for marginalized communities to demand accountability and action at scales
              beyond the nation-state.  Focusing on regional integration in the Caribbean,
              the doctoral dissertation research project will compare how two
              non-governmental organizations (one labor- and one feminist-oriented) have
              interpreted and interacted with regional economic institutions to advance the
              interests of those they represent.  A combination of archival research,
              interviews with organizational representatives and participant observation will
              be employed in three locations:  Barbados, Guyana, and Trinidad.  Using a
              text-based manager, data will be analyzed to reveal a narrative of the changing
              nature and scale of political opportunity in the Caribbean.  Comparing two very
              different organizations makes it possible to assess which issues have been
              addressed most successfully at the regional scale.  Understanding how non-state
              actors operate within this complex landscape of political opportunities will
              advance theoretical and empirical understandings of how regional economic
              integration transforms political space.

The significance of this research
              lies in its investigation of how regional economic integration reorganizes
              political space to create opportunities for political action at scales beyond
              the nation.  The research contributes to empirical and theoretical debates
              within political and economic geography and feminist studies.  It extends and
              deepens analysis of regional economic integration through its attention to
              cultural discourses and the activities of non-state actors.  Exploring how
              Caribbean community is transformed and how different actors interpret
              regionalism is key to understanding how supra-national regions are emerging as
              potential sites for increased public engagement and reinvigorated democratic
              politics.  Advancing empirical understanding of the process of regional
              development in the Caribbean provides unique insight into meeting the needs of
              poor and marginal populations at a time of intensified globalization and
              institutional erosion.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
              a strong independent research career.

