Title       : The Intermediate Phase in Network Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0101808

Award Number: 0101808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Punit Boolchand pboolcha@ececs.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the properties of glasses and their phase transformations.
              The physical nature of the Intermediate phase (IP) that separates the Floppy
              phase (FP) from the Rigid Phase (RP) in select chalcogenide glass systems will
              be examined. These properties will be investigated in four different sets of
              experiments. First, temperature-dependent Raman scattering studies of  Ge-Se,
              As-Se and Ge-As-Se bearing bulk glasses will be performed over the range from 
              78K to Tg+200 K to examine the nature of molecular structure changes taking
              place across Tg in the FP, IP and the RP. Second, the same glass systems, but
              now synthesized as obliquely deposited thin-films (obliqueness angle in the
              range from 0 to 80 degrees) will be examined in their virgin and
              photo-illuminated state in Raman, 119Sn Mossbauer effect and photo-contraction
              studies. The columns formed in the porous (obliquely) deposited films may
              represent the elements of medium range structure responsible for the rather
              unique physical properties of glasses in the IP. Third, pnictide based glass
              systems, such as As-Se, As-S and As-Ge-Se bearing glasses will be examined in
              Raman, NQR, EXAFS and 129I Mossbauer spectroscopic studies to elucidate new
              aspects of molecular structure recently inferred from the discovery of the IP
              in Modulated Differential Scanning Calorimetry (MDSC) measurements. Lastly,
              119Sn Lamb-Mossbauer factors in select glasses will be established as a
              function of mean coordination number to contrast the local elastic response of
              glasses in the IP from those in the FP and the RP. Students will participate in
              this research and will thereby be prepared to enter the scientific technical
              work force of the 21st Century.

This research concerns the properties of
              glasses and glass systems. Glasses are characterized by progressive
              cross-linking of a floppy network that will render it rigid at a critical
              connectivity. This is often realized by systematically changing the chemical
              composition in a glass system. Experiments on sulfur- and selenium-bearing
              glasses have shown however that a floppy phase (FP) and a rigid phase (RP) are
              separated by an intermediate phase (IP). Four different sets of experiments
              will be performed to establish the physical nature of the IP in select glass
              systems. Different experimental techniques will be brought to bear on  selected
              glass systems over a range of glass compositions that encompass the three
              different phases.  The experiments will be performed over a wide temperature
              range that embraces the transitions among the phases. Furthermore, specially
              fabricated thin films of these glasses will be investigated.  These experiments
              are expected to shed light on the intricacies of glass systems under various
              conditions of temperature and composition and the results will be of use for
              the incorporation of new glasses in advanced technological devices.  Students
              will participate in these investigations.  They will thereby acquire training
              in one of the important contemporary areas of condensed matter physics and
              materials science and will be prepared to enter the scientific/ technical work
              force in industry, academe, and the government.

