Title       : Collaborative Research: Contrasting Styles of Ca. 1.4 Ga Tectonism in the
               Southern Rockies: Evidence for a Fossil Rheologic Transition in a Deeply
               Exhumed Intracontinental Orogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0101314

Award Number: 0101314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25174              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine S. Siddoway csiddowa@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Karlstrom   0003500
Connelly      0003528
Williams     0003569
Siddoway    
              0101314
Proterozoic rocks in central Colorado preserve a transition, from
              semi-brittle upper crust to pervasively ductile middle crust, that was frozen
              in at about 1.4 Ga.  This rheologic transition is expressed as a regionally
              significant change in the style of ca. 1.4 Ga intracratonic tectonism.  Field
              observations suggest that a subhorizontal boundary separates a domain in
              northern and central Colorado (exemplified by the Colorado Mineral Belt), where
              1.4 Ga deformation is characterized by discrete mylonite zones, from a domain
              in southern Colorado and northern New Mexico dominated by penetrative ductile
              deformation.  Geodynamic models developed for intracontinental orogens such as
              Tibet, Altiplano-Puna, and the Sevier-Laramdie indicate that such mechanical
              decoupling may be a critical factor in controlling the tectonic evolution of
              intracontinental deformation.  Like some of its younger analogs, the structural
              transition of central Colorado apparently corresponds with a magma- and
              fluid-rich, high-strain layer. 

These deeply exhumed rocks present
              intriguing opportunities to directly investigate 
deep-crustal processes that
              are inaccessible in younger orogens.  Issues of general impact include
              characterization of: (1) the controls on the depth and thickness of the
              brittle/ductile transition (e.g. temperature, lithology, fluids), (2) the
              kinematics and dynamics of deformation near the rheological transition, (3)
              mechanisms of accommodating strain incompatibility between different
              deformation regimes, and (4) the role of granitoid melts and/or a widespread
              melt-fluid layer, in localizing middle crustal flow and structural decoupling
              of upper and lower crust.  In addition to exploiting the deep crustal exposures
              of central Colorado to study general processes of intracontinental deformation,
              this study is contributing to the understanding of the Proterozoic tectonic
              evolution of the southwestern United States.  In particular, alternate models
              for "anorogenic" (extensional) versus "orogenic" (transpressional) tectonic
              settings for 1.4 Ga tectonism can perhaps be reconciled in an orogenic plateau
              model where regional horizontal contraction is balanced by more localized
              gravitational collapse. 

The study uses an integrated data set involving
              structural, petrologic, and U-Pb geochronologic data to evaluate the kinematics
              and evolution of this important structural transition.  Focus is on a well
              exposed transect across the structural transition. Specifically, studies of the
              Black Canyon of the Gunnison and adjacent areas within the Colorado Mineral
              Belt are characterizing the style, extent, and P-T conditions of mylonite shear
              zones and emplacement of syn-kinematic 1.4 Ga plutons above the transition. 
              Work in the Wet Mountains and Sangre de Cristo Range is characterizing
              pervasively ductile deformation and fabric reactivation within and below the
              transition.  The geochronology is emphasizing both U/Pb zircon dating of
              critical syn-kinematic plutons in central Colorado and microprobe monazite
              dating of high-grade metamorphism along the transect. 

