Title       : ELMSS: Enhancing Leadership for Middle School Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0101829

Award Number: 0101829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia K. Freitag                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra K. Abell abells@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oran A. Pringle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Kyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. McClure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The intended two-year pilot Local Systemic Change project seeks to increase
              scientific understanding and literacy among middle school students in four
              diverse districts in Missouri.  Professional development will be provided by
              science and science education faculty from the three of Missouri campuses
              (Columbia, Rolla and St. Louis).  A total of 16 teachers, four from each
              participating district will be selected.  Each participant will be offered 5
              hours graduate credit each year, tuition waivers, an annual stipend, career
              ladder credit and STC/MS materials.  One administrator from each district will
              also be involved.  Summer institute sessions will be supplemented by a web site
              to enable continuous electronic interaction for teachers to discuss content and
              pedagogy concerns, compare experiences and engage in collective problem
              solving.  The site will also be used to link participants to other web based
              information sources such as the Online Journal for Teacher Research
              (http://www.oise.utoronto.ca).  Bi-weekly study sessions (teachers will keep
              journals to record the experience), site meetings and day-long project meetings
              will be held.  
The project will develop and test a sustainable structure of
              teacher professional development and support to facilitate the implementation
              of exemplary instructional materials and teaching practices.  
With the
              support of the University of Missouri science and science education faculty
              members, school administrators and middle school science teachers will
              collaborate to create an inquiry based classroom environment as a step towards
              broad comprehensive science education reform.  

