Title       : Micro-Scale, Multi-Spectral Flourescent Imaging for Bio-Heat Transfer
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0101161

Award Number: 0101161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59859              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. McGrath mcgrath@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0101161
McGrath
Living biomaterials spanning the size scale from cells and
              tissues to entire organs can be damaged by accidental exposure to temperature
              extremes (e.g. frostbite and burns). Unusually high or low temperatures can
              also be used clinically to kill tumors by heating or freezing respectively. In
              contrast, proper use of low temperature exposure can be used to preserve cells
              and tissues for virtually indefinite periods. Furthermore, between the extremes
              of preserving and killing there are many surgical and biotechnology procedures
              that amount to producing biomaterials with modified characteristics by using
              heating or cooling (freezing). Examples include heating treatments for
              stabilizing joints, relieving spinal pain, cosmetic surgery and heart disease.
              

In all of these cases it is very important to understand how the
              biomaterial responds to the temperature changes and associated events such as
              the phase changes which occur during freezing. Unfortunately, very often not
              enough is known about the detailed responses of cells, tissues and organs to
              temperature excursions. Furthermore, the experimental tools available to study
              the detailed responses are limited or lacking. We have identified two specific
              needs that are the focus of the proposed research. Current methods often use
              temperature-measuring devices that disturb the system measured (invasive), only
              measure at one location and are too large relative to the small sizes of
              interest. Thus the first need addressed by the proposed research will be to
              provide a means of continuously measuring temperature non-invasively (using
              optical methods) over entire surfaces of biomaterials (rather than single
              locations) with micro-scale spatial resolution. The current state of the art is
              also limited with regard to methods to measure whether cells within tissues are
              alive or dead. Thus the second need addressed by the proposed research will be
              to provide a means of continuously measuring tissue cell viability
              non-invasively (using optical methods) within tissues with micro-scale spatial
              resolution. Molecular biology methods are applied to accomplish this using
              tumor cells as an example. These two optical methods provide a means of
              directly linking the applied thermal history of the biomaterial to the
              biological response in a manner not possible previously. Examples of the
              successful implementation of these two methods will be developed as part of the
              proposed research. The successful completion of this research will provide
              tools that can be used to develop a better understanding of the response of
              many types of biomaterials to a variety of applied thermal challenges. This
              will form the basis of future methods of rationale design of thermal treatments
              for improved health care. 



