Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rainfall Characteristics and the Influence of
               Urban Land Use on Shallow Landslide Initiation in Seattle, Washington
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0101269

Award Number: 0101269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5280               (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Nelson Caine cainen@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9196,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Shallow landslides often occur on natural hillslopes during rainstorms of high
              intensity or long duration.  While researchers have examined the profound
              effects that that an urban environment can have on surface hydrology and
              drainage morphology, relatively little attention has been given to the effects
              of urbanization on landslide hazards.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project will address the influence of impervious surfaces on shallow landslide
              occurrence in Seattle, an urban area with a precipitation climatology
              characterized by winter rainstorms of long duration and low intensity.  The
              project will use a geographic information system (GIS) framework to combine
              rainfall data from a dense gauge network, high-resolution digital topography, a
              historical record of landslide occurrence, and a remotely sensed map of
              impervious surfaces.  Analyses of these data will facilitate evaluation of the
              watershed-scale effects of surface drainage alteration on landslide
              susceptibility.  Research methods will include compilation of historical
              shallow landslide occurrence and associated precipitation climatology. 
              Empirical relations between rainfall intensity/duration will be defined.  Field
              investigations of large or recent landslides will provide information on the
              geologic setting, style of landslide failure and deposition, and influence of
              drainage modifications.  To evaluate the effect of impervious surfaces on
              landslide occurrence, a coupled rainfall-infiltration/slope-stability model
              will be used to describe the spatial distribution of pore-water pressures at
              depth during rainstorms in which landslide are known to have occurred.

This
              project will examine the influence of impervious surfaces on landslide hazard
              in an urban setting where slope failure occurs during rainstorms of low
              intensity and long duration by applying a coupled, physically based model in a
              GIS framework.  The study will illuminate the processes through which the urban
              environment has a significant impact on hillslope processes at the watershed
              scale.  In a broader context, the project will add to the understanding of
              human impact on geomorphic systems.  Results from this study should provide
              predictive and design tools for emergency management and planning.  As a
              Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
              support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

