Title       : North Carolina Middle Mathematics Project (NCM2)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0101943

Award Number: 0101943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2035422            (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Rowlett rowlett@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerry M. Madrazo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sidney L. Rachlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the North Carolina Middle Mathematics Project (NCM2) is to improve
              mathematics education in grades 6-8 across the entire state of North Carolina,
              supporting teachers in their professional development and providing academic
              renewal and financial recognition to support their retention.  The project will
              help middle grades mathematics teachers become local and statewide leaders,
              secure National Board certification and take the crucial first steps toward
              master's degrees.  To carry out the project, nine centers of the University of
              North Carolina's Mathematics and Science Education Network (MSEN) will combine
              their efforts and the talents of faculty, school system administrators and
              talented middle school mathematics teachers. 

The project will form an NCM2
              Leadership Network combining teams from each MSEN regional center including
              university mathematicians, university mathematics educators, school district
              administrators and highly qualified middle school mathematics teachers (two
              teachers from each region).  The Leadership Network will assist NCDPI in
              revision of the North Carolina Standard Course of Study and revision of the
              state's tests, including End of Grade Tests and the End of Course Test for
              Algebra I.
 
The NCM2 Leadership Network will also develop three
              graduate-level courses for middle school mathematics teachers, one each in the
              content areas of statistics and data analysis, geometry and measurement, and
              number and algebra. The MSEN centers will provide these courses to teachers
              statewide. The teachers will use this course work in obtaining National Board
              Certification in Early Adolescence/Mathematics and as the foundation for
              obtaining master's degrees in middle school mathematics education.  National
              certification and master's degrees are both rewarded in North Carolina with
              salary supplements.


