Title       : Suppression of Friction-Induced Oscillations Through Use of High-Frequency
               Dither Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0101122

Award Number: 0101122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Cunefare ken.cunefare@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aldo F. Ferri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI: Kenneth A. Cunefare, The Georgia Institute of Technology
Proposal number:
              01001122
Proposal Title: Suppression of Friction-Induced Oscillations Through
              Use of High-Frequency Dither Signals

Project Abstract: This research project
              investigates the suppression of friction-induced oscillations through the use
              of high-frequency dither signals. The primary application of this research
              effort is that of brake squeal, which is a self-excited vibration that afflicts
              most braking systems. Brake squeal has been an elusive problem to solve because
              it involves an interaction of multiple brake components. This project builds
              upon research conducted on Georgia Tech's brake squeal dynamometer, which
              demonstrated that a high frequency dither in the brake pressure could
              effectively eliminate squeal. This dither force, supplied by means of a
              piezoceramic actuator, used frequencies beyond the audible range, thus
              silencing the brake system. This research project aims to understand more fully
              how dither suppresses brake squeal and how to develop more effective
              dither-control strategies.  The proposed work uses a combination of analytical
              and experimental techniques. Nonlinear mathematical models of brake systems and
              subsystems will be developed and validated against experimental observations.
              The experimental program will explore the use of alternative dither signals as
              well as feedback to enhance performance and robustness. The influence of dither
              on mean braking torque will also be assessed. This work promises to have a
              significant impact in a variety of industrial and scientific applications.
              Brake squeal-related warranty claims impose a high cost upon the automotive
              industry. Additionally, brake manufacturers must currently make design
              compromises in the selection of brake pad materials, compromising on materials
              that are less prone to induce squeal. Therefore, a low-cost, simple technology
              that permits improved braking performance while reducing development and
              warranty costs would yield substantial benefits.




