Title       : Furthering U.S. Interests and Leadership in the International Council for
               Science (ICSU)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0101288

Award Number: 0101288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4934624            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy D. White wwhite@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 5984      OFFICE OF TRANS-REGIONAL AFFAI
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0101288
White
                                                                
                                                                                             
                                   Furthering U.S. Interests and Leadership in 
the
              International Council for Science (ICSU)

Due to the global character of
              contemporary science and engineering, it is essential for U.S. scientists and
              engineers, as well as their professional organizations, to remain in close
              contact with the activities and plans of their foreign counterparts, in part as
              a means to facilitate the development of collaborative programs. Additionally,
              gaining a better understanding of many important problems, such as those
              associated with the global environment, data quality and access, and the
              training and utilization of research personnel, require cooperative efforts on
              a multilateral basis. An increasing number of such problems cut across and
              transcend individual scientific disciplines. The
oldest and most extensive
              mechanism for facilitating world-wide communication between U.S. scientists and
              engineers and their foreign counterparts is the array of non-governmental
              international disciplinary unions and interdisciplinary organizations that
              together comprise the International Council for Science (ICSU), a
              non-governmental, multilateral organization comprised of an adhering
              organization in over 90 countries. This award will enable the National Academy
              of Sciences/National Research Council (the U.S. adhering organization to ICSU)
              to continue to manage U.S. participation in ICSU. The award provides dues
              payments to ICSU, and support for two international disciplinary unions (the
              International Commission of Mathematical Instruction and the International
              Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics) as well as two interdisciplinary
              organizations (the Pacific Science Association and the Committee on Science and
              Technology for Development).  

