Title       : A Collaborative Effort between the United States and Colombia on the Research
               with Linearly-Polarized Photons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0101815

Award Number: 0101815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Cole cole@jlab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0512205   Xray & Electron Beam Lith               
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0101815
Cole

This Americas award will support a collaborative effort between
              Dr. Philip L. Cole, University of Texas at El Paso, Dr. Franz J. Klein, Florida
              International University, and Dr. Juan Carlos Sanabria, Universidad de los
              Andes, Colombia, with the purpose of completing a series of experiments, which
              will make use of the unique probe of a beam of linearly-polarized photons. 
              These experiments will measure the polarization observable for reactions
              involving meson photoproduction.  The objective is to improve the understanding
              of the underlying symmetry of the quark degrees of freedom in the nucleon; the
              nature of the parity exchange between the incident photon and the target
              nucleon, and the mechanism of associated strangeness production in
              electromagnetic reactions.  

The first phase of the experiments,
              investigation of the nature of the underlying structure of protons and
              neutrons, will be performed at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
              Facility (Jefferson Lab) in Newport, Virginia, where powerful computers will
              allow for the rapid acquisition and thorough analysis of the data.  This will
              enable the researchers to measure high-multiplicity events over most of the
              phase space at high rates with an unprecedented high quality beam of
              continuous-wave electrons.  The collaboration will make possible the search of
              previously unmeasurable baryon resonances and will shed considerable light on
              the internal symmetries and dynamics of an assembly of three quarks, further
              aiding in understanding the nature of the strong force.

**** .

