Title       : Strengthening Aquatic Science Programs in Secondary Schools and Community
               Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a0101714

Award Number: 0101714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343068             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Neal Tharp ntharp@gadsdenst.cc.al.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Cline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Donlon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Caddell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard Lovshin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gadsden State Com College
	      George Wallace Drive
	      Gadsden, AL  35903    256/549-8222

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is expanding an NSF-funded, pilot program that is improving aquatic
              science education at the college and in high schools located in Eastern and
              Western Alabama. The project is (1) allowing existing educational resources to
              be used more efficiently; (2) increasing the quality of aquatic science
              education in high schools; (3) increasing the technical proficiency of
              secondary school teachers; (4) improving the technical quality and reputation
              of the college's Aquatic Sciences Program; and (5) increasing recruitment,
              retention, and placement of students in technical careers in the aquatic
              sciences, especially the aquaculture industry.

These goals are being
              enhanced by installing recirculating systems in high schools and establishing
              distance education capability at the college's aquaculture facility. A core
              group of secondary teachers is participating in technical workshops.
              Self-sufficiency among teachers and their classes is being accelerated by the
              establishment of an electronic network. The focus is on the improvement of
              aquatic science education and career preparation through distance education and
              locating intern positions for students within the private sector. An additional
              18 high schools (bringing the total to 28) are being equipped with a tilapia
              recirculating system and at least 20 additional secondary teachers are
              increasing their technical knowledge and teaching capacity. The college is
              developing a 2-year degree program and a transfer degree program in aquaculture
              technology. Partners include Auburn University and the University of Alabama in
              Birmingham.

