Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Consequences of Incarceration for Racial
               Stratification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0101236

Award Number: 0101236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reeve D. Vanneman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9605               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Hauser HAUSER@SSC.WISC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While stratification researchers typically focus on education and the family as
              primary institutions affecting inequality, a new institution has become of
              central importance for racial stratification:  the criminal justice system. 
              With lifetime probabilities of incarceration nearing 30 percent for young black
              men, experience with the institution of criminal justice has increasingly
              important consequences for racial inequality.  Yet, research has only begun to
              examine the social and economic consequences of large scale incarceration, and
              to assess the implications for racial disparities.  This project investigates
              the effects of incarceration on the socioeconomic attainment in employment,
              occupational status, and earnings of white and black men.  It uses data from
              the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to obtain quantitative estimates of
              these effects on racial stratification.  It then uses in-depth interviews with
              a sample of Milwaukee parolees to purse a deeper understanding of the
              mechanisms that generate the quantitative effects.  Together, the quantitative
              and qualitative data provide for a comprehensive analysis of how race
              differences in incarceration affect race differences economic success later in
              life.
