Title       : Northwest Center for Sustainable Resources (NCSR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0101498

Award Number: 0101498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wynn W. Cudmore wync@chemeketa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susie Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur McKee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chemeketa Community Col
	      P O BOX 14007
	      Salem, OR  973097070    503/399-5121

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Major challenges face the Northwest and the nation both in sustaining
              environments and economies and in developing educational programs to meet
              present and emerging needs. Natural resources and resource-based economies are
              severely threatened; restoration and conservation based on ecosystems
              approaches must be implemented through public-private partnerships supported by
              education programs developed in concert with new land management efforts. As an
              Advanced Technological Education (ATE) focal point, the Northwest Center for
              Sustainable Resources (NCSR) is transforming two-year community college
              programs to meet the needs of the technological, high performance workplace in
              natural resource management. 

The Center is:
(a) marketing and distributing
              curriculum projects and clearinghouse materials both in traditional formats and
              electronically through the Center's website.
(b) offering faculty development
              institutes for high school teachers (NCSR's Natural Resources Institute) and
              community college instructors (NCSR's Ecosystem Institute and GIS
              Institute).
(c) developing and delivering new NCSR Adaptation Institutes to
              provide frameworks for curriculum adaptation for community colleges and high
              schools across the nation.
(d) disseminating the Center's model partnership
              approach through institutes and presentations; emphasizing employer connections
              and infusion of industry and professional standards into technician education
              programs.

This project is building on successful Center activities including
              the development and beta-testing of over 30 courses; production of materials,
              newsletters, reports, and a Website; and the offering of over 20 faculty
              development institutes.

