Title       : RUI: New Catalytic Materials for Hydrodesulfurization Catalysis - Metal Borides
               and Phosphides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0101690

Award Number: 0101690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Bussell Mark.Bussell@wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9178,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Research in Undergraduate Institution project at Western Washington
              University, a renewal of an earlier award, is to synthesize and characterize
              metal oxide-supported boride and phosphide catalysts to remove sulfur from
              organic sulfur compounds by hydrodesulfurization.  This interdisciplinary
              project is jointly supported by the Advanced Materials and Processing Program
              in the Chemistry Division of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate
              and the Kinetics, Catalysis and Molecular Processes Program in the Division of
              Chemical Transport Systems of the Engineering Directorate. Professor Bussell
              and his students will prepare novel catalysts based on borides and phosphides
              of cobalt, nickel and molybdenum, and they will characterize them to optimize
              the catalyst synthesis and to determine the relationship between surface
              chemistries and catalytic properties.  The research will introduce
              undergraduate and masters degree students to state of the art techniques in
              materials and surface chemistries, and will provide training to them in
              synthetic methods to prepare novel materials for heterogeneous catalysis.  
              

This award will provide fundamental information for the design, synthesis,
              characterization and application of novel bimetallic systems for
              hydrodesulfurization by heterogeneous catalysis.  Metal oxide based borides and
              phosphides of nickel, cobalt and molybdenum will be prepared and evaluated for
              the removal of sulfur from organosulfur compound for potential application in
              the removal of sulfur from crude oil and coal. In addition, the research
              program will provide a rich multidisciplinary education and training
              opportunity to undergraduate and masters degree students in material and
              surface chemistries.
