Title       : Regional Center for Manufacturing Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0101795

Award Number: 0101795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $719760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Crampton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Randy Seidel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mott Community College
	      1401 E Court Street
	      Flint, MI  485036208    810/762-0597

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Design and Manufacturing Simulation Project (DMSP) is supporting systemic
              reform through education, applied research, curriculum development and reform,
              professional development, and dissemination. It is also providing a forum for
              joint industry/education collaboration focused on identifying manufacturing and
              simulation technologies critical to the success of the automotive industry
              centered in the southeastern Michigan region. Curriculum work is addressing
              mathematics, science and technology components essential to the lean
              manufacturing enterprise and its virtual design and manufacturing simulation
              activities. Expertise is being developed by engaging subject matter experts and
              by providing workplace experiences for faculty, teachers and students from a
              variety of diverse backgrounds. The DMSP is utilizing the Wisconsin
              Instructional Design System (WIDS) to create educational modules designed to
              enhance existing manufacturing programs and develop modules that focus on
              industry-validated simulation competencies.

DMSP partners include Mott,
              Macomb, Oakland, and Henry Ford Community Colleges, Central Michigan
              University, General Motors, Daimler-Chrysler, Delphi Automotive, Detroit Center
              Tool, Delmia, Mechanical Dynamics, and the Tech Prep consortiums of Genesee,
              Macomb, Oakland, St. Clair, and Wayne counties. This partnership involves the
              Design and Manufacturing Alliance (DMA), an established partnership between the
              four community colleges and several business/industry representatives focused
              on design and manufacturing careers. 

The DMSP is enhancing existing
              Design/Drafting/CAD Associate Degree programs by incorporating and using
              simulation to validate design scenarios. In addition, the Manufacturing
              Simulation Technology - Robotics program (NSF/ATE #9950052) is being modified
              to address the needs of the virtual machining simulation industry. Curriculum
              deliverables include modules that update existing design and manufacturing
              degrees for 21st century industry and post-Associate degree or certificate
              programs that address simulation competencies and software products. The goal
              is to supply the automotive manufacturing industry with skilled workers capable
              of embracing advanced design and simulation activities that support more
              efficient development of automobiles. The DMSP seeks to increase the number of
              minority and underrepresented candidates in the field and is marketing programs
              and opportunities to schools, businesses, and parent/professional groups.
