Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Political Contestation of Race and State
               Response During the Civil Rights Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0101092

Award Number: 0101092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4420               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth S. Clemens clemens@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Studies of the Civil Rights Movement have done much to describe and explain how
              such movements emerge and recruit members, are influenced by the political
              environment, and change their strategies and leadership.  However, the response
              of states to challenges of the Civil Rights Movement is less well-studied and
              understood.  When movements engage states in battles over inequality and the
              meaning of race, for example, the state can defend its use of racial
              classifications, make symbolic rather than real concessions, or bring about
              reform through voting rights and integration.  At the same time, state
              officials in choosing their response must consider the meanings their actions
              have to diverse audiences - the federal government, the national public, local
              officials, movement activists, and state voters.  This project thus examines
              the actions one state took in response to civil rights challenges and to the
              competing claims of multiple audiences.  In so doing, it contributes to our
              understanding of how states deal with political conflict and change, try to
              maintain their legitimacy, and obstruct or facilitate changes in
              inequality.

More specifically, the project examines the actions of the
              Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission (1956-1977), an organization created
              by the state legislature during the Civil Rights Movement to monitor race
              relations and defend against "encroachment."  It uses primary data from the
              files of the commission and interviews with persons familiar with the
              commission, and uses secondary literature on the Civil Rights Movement and
              commissions in other states.  The data from these sources show how the
              commission framed its efforts to legitimate segregation to multiple audiences,
              and faced challenges to the state's system of racial classification.

