Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Three-Dimensional Bed and Flow Structure of
               Pool-Riffle Sequences in the Embarras River
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0101424

Award Number: 0101424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9150               (Estimated)
Investigator: Athol D. Abrahams  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce L. Rhoads b-rhoads@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Alternating shallows and deeps, or riffles and pools, are common features in
              many alluvial rivers.  Pool-riffle structures affect the dynamics of river
              meandering, and they provide morphological and hydraulic diversity for stream
              habitat.  This doctoral dissertation research project will further the
              understanding of the three-dimensional dynamics of pool-riffle sequences.  The
              project will focus on different aspects of pool-riffle form and dynamics
              through a case study in a reach of the Embarras River, a small, low-gradient,
              gravel-bed agricultural stream in east central Illinois.  Among the activities
              to be undertaken are the development of a 3-D form index that defines pools and
              riffles based on parameters the include downstream and cross-stream asymmetry
              of channel morphology and the total vertical difference between riffle crests
              and pool troughs.  The project will explore related sequences of upstream
              riffles and downstream pools and point bars in order to test hypotheses that
              associate these kinds of pools and riffles as important elements that initiate
              meandering.  The project also will include direct comparisons of the patterns
              of fluid motion through a variety of pool-riffle types.  Fluid-flow velocity
              measurements will be used to estimate patterns of near-bed shear stress
              measurements and relate these patterns to sediment transport through
              pool-riffle sequences.  The methods employed in this study will include
              surveying of channel form, measurements of three-dimensional flow structure and
              sediment transport, and textural analysis of bed material.

Results of the
              research will yield basic knowledge on the three-dimensional form and dynamics
              of pools and riffles.  Such knowledge will advance basic theory on stream
              channel form and dynamics.  It also will be important for the development of
              design criteria for stream naturalization, a type of stream management that
              seeks to establish morphologically and hydraulically diverse, dynamically
              stable stream channels that are capable of supporting healthy, biologically
              diverse aquatic ecosystems.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research career.

