Title       : Pattern Formation in Non-equilibrium Systems: Self-organization and
               Stochasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0101793

Award Number: 0101793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Levine hlevine@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0101793
Levine
This award supports theoretical and computational research on
              pattern formation with applications to physical, chemical, and biological
              problems.  The focus of the research includes pattern nucleation,
              self-organized flocking states, and stochasticity in interface dynamics. 
The
              PI aims to apply a combined numerical and analytical approach to the problem of
              pattern nucleation. Pattern nucleation refers to the creation of patterns by
              fluctuation effects in systems exhibiting multistability.  The research effort
              will include applications. Of immediate interest is the spontaneous creation of
              intracellular calcium waves by stochastic channel openings. 
Flocking behavior
              occurs in interacting multiparticle systems away from any simple equilibrium
              state. Self-organized structures arising from flocking have been found in a
              wide range of diverse systems from microorganism colonies to human pedestrian
              traffic.  Continuum equations will be devised for these processes with an aim
              to better understand allowed parameter ranges and instability mechanisms.
              Results from model calculations will be compared to real-world data obtained in
              part through collaboration with leading experts in the fields of animal
              flocking, traffic patterns, and amoeba aggregation. 
The PI will also continue
              his studies of how stochasticity influences interface dynamics. Efforts will
              focus on extending two possibilities, pulse backfiring in excitable systems and
              noise-induced diffusive instabilities. The PI aims to find an analytic approach
              and to find necessary and sufficient conditions for the occurrence of these
              anomalous noise effects. A new effort is planned on an application to noise
              effects during infection spreading. 
This award also supports education
              through research results that are incorporated into a course on pattern
              formation and through the preparation of a textbook on pattern
              formation.
%%%
This award supports theoretical and computational research on
              the physics of non-equilibrium processes, especially in the emergence of
              spatial patterns in extended systems. The research will in part, capitalize on
              tremendous advances in the field over the past decade to make critical and
              nontrivial predictions regarding the behavior of a wide variety of complex
              systems. The work will focus on how fluctuations influence the formation of
              patterns in systems with coexisting dynamical states, on understanding the
              self-organizing properties of interacting self-propelled particles, and on
              better characterizing the conditions under which noise-sensitive interfaces
              occur.
Results of this work will provide a foundation for a wide range of
              specific applications to physical, chemical, and biological systems. The PI
              will focus on the spontaneous creation of intracellular calcium waves by
              stochastic channel openings, animal flocking, traffic patterns, amoeba
              aggregation, and infection spreading.  This award also supports education
              through research results that are incorporated into a course on pattern
              formation and through the preparation of a textbook on pattern
              formation.
***



