Title       : Development of Courses and Recruitment Models for Attracting and Preparing
               Middle Grade Mathematics Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0101822

Award Number: 0101822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen D. King                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1199179            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira J. Papick papicki@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Beem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Reys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Reys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorina Mitrea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Development of Courses and Recruitment Models for Attracting and Preparing
              Middle Grade Mathematics Teachers" is a three-year project that addresses the
              needs of middle grade mathematics teachers through the development and delivery
              of four foundational mathematics courses with accompanying support materials
              and the development and implementation of an aggressive teacher recruitment
              model.  Funded under the Teacher Enhancement guidelines for Mathematics and
              Science Courses for Improving Teacher Qualifications, the project's leadership
              -- a collaborative between mathematics faculty from the College of Arts and
              Science and mathematics education faculty from the College of Education at the
              University of Missouri - Columbia -- develops three-credit courses designed to
              provide middle grade teachers with a strong mathematical foundation and connect
              the mathematics they are learning with the mathematics they will be teaching. 
              Courses focus on algebraic and geometry structures, data analysis and
              probability, and the mathematics of change; and employ standards-based middle
              grade mathematics instructional materials as a springboard to learn mathematics
              in depth.

The courses are designed for teachers choosing a grade-level
              change (primarily elementary), middle/secondary teachers in oversupplied
              disciplines, individuals seeking career changes for entry into teaching, middle
              grade mathematics teachers seeking to upgrade their content knowledge, and
              traditional pre-service middle grade mathematics teachers.   The recruited
              teachers pilot the courses and supplemental materials [companion modules] in
              Summer Institutes and in semester courses offered at off-campus sites.  The
              program of courses provides a core that leads to certification for teaching
              middle school mathematics for participants and others throughout Missouri and
              is informed by the current national recommendations of the CBMS Mathematical
              Education of Teachers Project, Draft Report.

The first year of the project's
              timeline is devoted to the development of the courses and materials, including
              a contractual commitment from a professional publisher for the publication and
              national dissemination of the supplemental materials, and the development of
              recruitment models for identifying and attracting middle school mathematics
              teachers.  The remaining two years are spent on implementing the recruitment
              models, field-testing, revision of materials, and dissemination in Missouri and
              nationally.    

Project evaluation focuses on participants' understanding of
              the fundamental mathematics concepts within each course, their knowledge of
              standards-based middle school mathematics instructional materials and how these
              relate to the mathematical content in the four courses, as well as the
              effectiveness of the courses on changes in teachers' classroom practice. 
              




