Title       : Large Scale Synthesis of High Quality Semiconductor Nanocrystals from Metal
               Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0101178

Award Number: 0101178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaogang Peng xpeng@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division supports this award to
              University of Arkansas to study the basic mechanism and method of nanoparticle
              crystal growth using size- and shape-dependent optical properties of these
              nano-particles. With this award, Professor Xiaogang Peng will develop green
              chemistry-based methods for the large scale synthesis of nano-sized cadmium
              selenide crystals from the less toxic precursor cadmium oxide, and these
              methods will be quite different from the presently used methods with precursor
              dimethyl cadmium, which is toxic, unstable and expensive.  The award will help
              to develop new methods for the large-scale synthesis of semiconductor
              nanocrystals of uniform size and shape for applications in electrooptic
              devices. Both graduate and undergraduate students will greatly benefit from the
              training and research opportunities provided by this award in materials
              chemistry.

With this award, nanoparticle crystal growth will be studied
              using size- and shape-dependent optical properties of these crystals.  
              Nano-sized cadmium selenide crystal will be prepared in large scale using
              cadmium oxide as the precursor.  This green chemistry-based method will be cost
              effective, and used less toxic and much more stable precursor. Both graduate
              and undergraduate students will greatly benefit from the training and research
              opportunities provided by this award in nano-crystal growth and
              characterization. 
