Title       : Focused Research Group: Analysis and Simulation of Magnetic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0101439

Award Number: 0101439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert V. Kohn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew D. Kent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie F. Greengard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Vanden Eijnden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0101439
PI: 			Kohn, Robert
Institution: 		New
              York University 
Program: 		Applied Mathematics 
Program Manager: 	Catherine
              Mavriplis

Title: Focused Research Group: Analysis and Simulation of Magnetic
              Devices

Nanoscale magnetic devices are of critical technological importance.
              This project will advance our understanding of their properties through a
              coordinated program of modeling, analysis, simulation and experiment. Topics to
              be addressed include (a) development of improved numerical methods for the
              simulation of magnetic materials and devices; (b) exploration of the
              micromagnetic "energy landscape" and the role of noise in thermally activated
              switching; and (c) investigation of specific nanoscale effects such as
              configurational anisotropy and geometrically constrained walls. Mathematics has
              much to contribute and much to gain. The study of appropriate limits leads to
              challenging problems of analysis whose solution will shed light on the
              essential physics. The analysis of noise and switching leads to the study of
              the energy landscape and to physically relevant examples of stochastic partial
              differential equations. Modeling coordinated with laboratory experiments will
              refine our understanding of the relevant phenomena. This Focused Research Group
              activity will draw expertise from a multidisciplinary group of mathematicians,
              physicists and computational scientists. The project includes a collaboration
              with IBM and training of postdoctoral scientists and graduate students.
              

Magnetic storage devices lie at the foundation of modern computing. Their
              modeling, simulation, analysis and design raise fundamental questions of
              physics and mathematics, many still unanswered. As device size decreases, the
              relevant science changes: defects, spatial disorder and thermal fluctuations
              become crucial in the nanoscale regime. Mathematics has much to contribute and
              much to gain. The study of appropriate limits leads to challenging problems of
              analysis whose solution will shed light on the essential physics. The analysis
              of noise and switching will be studied in a three-pronged approach: by
              mathematical analysis, numerical modeling and experimental investigation.
              Modeling coordinated with laboratory experiments will refine our understanding
              of the relevant phenomena. This Focused Research Group activity will draw
              expertise from a multidisciplinary group of mathematicians, physicists and
              computational scientists. The project includes a collaboration with IBM and
              training of postdoctoral scientists and graduate students. 


Date: June 26,
              2001

