Title       : GOALI: Multilayered Polymer Hybrid Optoelectronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0101794

Award Number: 0101794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue A. Carter sacarter@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Campbell Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0101794
Carter

Liquid processable solid state semiconductors show promise of
              dramatically changing future
technologies by offering improved and new device
              functionality at significantly lower energy, environmental and processing costs
              than traditionally processed semiconductors. In the class of liquid processable
              materials for optoelectronic applications, polymer-based semiconductors offer
              some of the highest charge carrier recombination and generation efficiencies
              combined with advantages of being highly tunable, flexible, light weight and
              dopable. Nonetheless, significant challenges exist for making high performance
              polymer-base devices due to difficulties in achieving both efficient charge
              injection into the polymer and high current densities with long device
              lifetimes under ambient conditions. Recent work on multilayered and blended
              polymer-based structures that contain charge-transport layers has been
              undertaken to overcome these limitations. While this direction is promising, it
              has also introduced a new challenge, namely how do we understand charge
              injection, transport, generation and recombination in multilayered
              heterostructures of polymer-based
devices?

The objective of this proposal
              is to address this question through systematic experiments and
simulations on
              multicomponent polymer-based light emitting diodes and photovoltaics.
              To
accomplish this objective, they have brought together an interdisciplinary
              team of three scientists from academic, industrial and government labs. Sue
              Carter, a physics professor at the University of California, is an expert in
              electrical and optical characterization of polymer-based optoelectronic
              devices. J. Campbell Scott, a Research Staff Member at IBM Almaden Research
              Center, is an expert in the design, characterization and simulation of
              organic-based light emitting devices. Finally, David Ginley, a principle
              scientist at the National Renewable Energy Laboratories, is an expert in
              photovoltaic technologies and the synthesis of inorganic semiconducting
              nanoparticles. This extensive experience, combined with their demonstrated
              commitment to the education of students and to the advancement of these fields,
              should enable them to achieve their goal to have significant impact on their
              understanding of multilayered polymer-based optoelectronic devices, increasing
              their potential for scientific innovation and technological viability.

