Title       : Nanostructure Technology for Making Photonic Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9632651

Award Number: 9632651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eli Yablonovitch eliy@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632651  Yablonovitch  The analogy between electromagnetic wave propagation in
              multi-dimensional  periodic structures, and electron wave propagation in real
              crystals, has  proven to be a very fruitful one.  Initial efforts were
              motivated by the  prospect, of a "photonic bandgap"; a frequency band in
              3-dimensional  dielectric structures, in which electromagnetic waves are
              forbidden,  irrespective of propagation direction in space. These
              3-dimensionally  periodic dielectric structures are frequently called "photonic
              crystals".  These can be useful in opto-electronics as electromagnetic
              micro-cavities  for so-called "zero-threshold lasers" and single-mode light
              emitting  diodes. Such structures would exhibit inhibited spontaneous emission,
              which  could lower the power requirements and increase reliability,
              particularly  of optical arrays. Alternately, such structures can show enhanced
               spontaneous emission which would allow faster modulation speeds for optical 
              interconnects.    More and more often, manufacturing consists of making small
              things. Much of  today's technology is the consequence of 2-dimensional
              patterning on a  microscopic scale. In this proposal, the emphasis is on the
              technology for  making valuable 3 dimensional nanostructures, namely photonic
              crystals.    Three dimensional nano-fabrication is an extraordinarily
              challenging  undertaking. This project began in September of 1993. After an
              intense  initial period of equipment acquisition, installation, and testing,
              of;  electron beam writers, optical diagnostic probes, chemically assisted ion 
              beam etchers, and other thin film processing apparatus, the first photonic 
              crystals were made in early 1995. At this point in the project, the initial 
              optical evidence for a 3-dimensional photonic bandgap at optical  wavelengths
              has been detected. The appropriate Figure-of-Merit is the  reflectivity within
              the 3-d forbidden gap. The observed shape of the  optical transmission spectrum
              of the photonic crystal is close to  expectations, but thus  far the best
              midgap experimental reflectivity is  only ~80%. While this is already
              sufficient to begin monitoring the effect  of the photonic bandgap on
              spontaneous light emission devices, further  improvements will definitely be
              needed.    Improved reflectivity within the photonic bandgap will demand a
              higher  degree of structural precision in the nanostructure. If funded, the
              work  program would include the following: (a) Multiple ion beam etching, in 
              which 3 ion beam directions fire simultaneously, as opposed to the current 
              system of sequential etching steps, from a single ion beam, interrupted by 
              multiple sample rotations. (b) Optical feedback control of the hole  diameters
              during the chemically assisted ion beam etching. (c) 3-d ion beam  mask
              structures will be built and used. (d) If needed, the 3-d thickness of  the
              photon crystal will be built up by stacking nano-structure layers which  are
              separated by epitaxial liftoff, aligned by surface tension techniques,  and
              then rebonded by wafer fusion procedures. (e) 3-d nano-machining  technology
              will be extended to InP, whose electron/hole surface  recombination properties
              are favorable enough to allow the creation of  tiny, electrically pumped, light
              emitting devices.    This renewal proposal is being submitted in parallel with
              a substantially  identical one by our collaborator Prof. Axel Scherer of
              Caltech. Funding  would allow continuation of the joint UCLA/Caltech effort to
              develop the  technology for making 3-dimensional photonic crystal structures at
              the  scale of optical wavelengths, and to improve the structural precision and 
              midgap reflectivity of these structures. Such refined photonic crystal 
              structures should lend themselves to opto-electronic technology, and they 
              might be generically useful in optical science.      REVISED WORK STATEMENT   
              The overall scope of this NSF proposal will not change, but the amount 
              requested will be diminished to $60K/year respectively (from an original 
              request for $110K/yr.), to allow for th ose functions which will be  supported
              by the Army Research Office through an anticipated MURI contract.  The ARO and
              NSF efforts will divide along the following lines:    Extensive equipment
              development and construction necessary for our  ambitious program will be
              supported through the Army MURI, whereas most of  the training of both graduate
              and undergraduate students to build, use and  maintain this equipment will be
              primarily funded through this NSF grant at  UCLA.    The complex process which
              is necessary for defining and evaluating 3-d  photonic crystals will provide
              our students working on this project with an  excellent opportunity to become
              well acquainted with using and maintaining  a wide repertoire of advanced
              fabrication equipment. We propose that much  of the process development and
              optimization as well as student training  which will lead to the definition of
              advanced 3-d photonic crystals will be  done under the NSF proposal.    On the
              other hand, the device fabrication and construction of the equipment  necessary
              for this effort will be supported by the Army MURI. Excluded from  the NSF
              project will be more near term mission oriented projects, such as  microwave
              photonic crystals, the inclusion of 2-dimensional photonic  crystals as
              end-mirrors on edge-emitting laser diodes, the definition of  deep gratings
              used to form birefringent computer generated holograms, and  the development of
              high-contrast polarizing beam-splitters (with measured TE/TM contrast ratios in
              excess of 300:1).    Thus, the specific tasks performed for the NSF supported
              program will be:    1. The design of a multiple ion beam etching system with
              three ion sources,  2. The development of new three-dimensional masking
              procedures to make       thicker photonic crystals.  3. The development of
              mechanical stacking procedures using epitaxial       liftoff for thick photonic
              crystal fabrication.  4. The design and modeling of new optoelectronic devices
              based on photonic       crystals.  5. The development of altern ative
              lithography techniques over large areas,       such as through electrochemical
              self-assembly.    All of these tasks will be performed with the help of
              graduate and  undergraduate students, who will be trained in microfabrication 
              conventions, optical measurement techniques, and numerical modeling of  optical
              phenomena in photonic crystals. Graduate students will be directly  supported
              by the grant, whereas undergraduates will be exposed to this  state of the art
              equipment through summer programs and senior thesis and  workstudy experience
              in the laboratory.  ***
