Title       : Long-Term Ecological Research in Tallgrass Prairie: The Konza Prairie LTER
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9632851

Award Number: 9632851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3360000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan K. Knapp aknapp@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Briggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632851  Knapp    A  long-term  ecological research program will be  continued 
              and  expanded at the Konza Prairie LTER site in  NE  Kansas.  Konza  Prairie, a
              pristine tallgrass prairie  is,  arguably,  the most intensively studied
              grassland site on earth. The 15  year old, broadly-based research program
              encompasses studies  from  the  population,  community, ecosystem  and 
              landscape  ecology  levels. These studies are linked by  a  theme  that 
              includes   all   the  major  abiotic  and   biotic   factors  influencing this
              ecosystem. Our central hypothesis  is  that  fire,  grazing  and climatic
              variability are  essential  and  responsible  for  the  structure and function 
              of  tallgrass  prairie.   In  contrast  to  many  other  grasslands   where 
              ecological  processes are constrained by a  single  resource  (e.g.,   water), 
              organismic  to  ecosystem  processes   and  dynamics  in tallgrass prairie are
              products of a variety  of  limiting resources (water, light, nitrogen).
              Variability in,  and  switching  among, these primary limiting resources  are 
              caused  by  both  present and historical fire,  grazing  and  climatic 
              regimes.  As  a  result of  this  complexity,  and  because  grazing and fire
              regimes are managed  in  grassland  systems  worldwide, data from the Konza
              Prairie LTER program  have  relevance  not only for understanding this 
              grassland,  but   for  broader  ecological  issues  such  as  stability 
              diversity   questions  and  interactions  between  land-use,  biodiversity  and
               climate  change.  The  proposed  research  includes continuation of long-term
              fire and grazing  studies  as  well as short-term studies focused on key
              processes  and  mechanisms.  Proposed new research includes studies  of  the 
              effect  of fire season, a fire-treatment reversal experiment  in  which 
              watersheds  that have  been  annually  burned  or  unburned  for 20 years will
              have their treatments  reversed,  comparative  studies  of bison vs. cattle  as
               the  dominant  grazers,  and  a  long-term   study  of  how  grazing,  fire, 
              climatic  variability and agriculture affect annual  carbon,  water  and 
              energy  budgets  in  tallgrass  prairie.  A  key  question  addressed by the
              latter study is  whether  or  not  tallgrass prairie soils are a sink or source
              for carbon  and  how  land-use (fire, grazing) and climate affects the carbon 
              budget.
