Title       : Relocation & Compactorization of the Museum of Southwestern Biology (MSB)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9632471

Award Number: 9632471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy K. Lowrey tlowrey@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Gosz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Yates  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632471  Lowrey  This project will fund the purchase of compactor units for the
              research collections of the University of New Mexico's Museum of Southwestern
              Biology. The overall project represents a partnership between the NSF and the
              University of New Mexico, with the University providing funding for renovation
              of collection space and for all necessary rails and flooring for the spacesaver
              units. The compactor system, purchased with NSF funds, will be loaded with
              existing cases. The Museum of Southwestern Biology is a research and teaching
              facility in the University's Department of Biology. It houses important
              collections of vertebrates, arthropods, and plants. This project will 
              alleviate severe overcrowding and safety concerns present in the old facility
              and take advantage of an exceptional opportunity to continue the University's
              efforts to integrate research and teaching in the biological sciences. The
              incorporation of compactor units into the project at this time of
              renovation/construction of the space will additionally provide for future
              collections growth, allow exceptional flexibility for research and teaching,
              and will be extremely cost effective.
