Title       : Algorithms for Global Optimization, Enhanced Sampling and Reaction Pathway
               Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9632236

Award Number: 9632236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Straub   (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Straub   (Principal Investigator former)
              David F. Coker  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Straub is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his work on developing new   algorithms for
              global optimization, enhanced sampling and the   determination of reaction
              pathways.  Two areas of algorithmic development   will be explored.  The first
              area involves the use of generalized   statistics, as opposed to
              Gibbs-Boltzmann statistics, which can be used   to describe highly delocalized
              distributions of configurations for   systems that are strongly localized in
              the standard statistics.  This   technique leads to a higher likelihood of
              finding low energy   configurations.  The second area of research involves an
              optimization   technique known as quantum mechanical annealing, in which the
              value of   Planck's constant is greatly exaggerated causing the system to
              `spread   out` in space and more effectively seek the lowest energy
              configurations   by tunneling through energy barriers that would otherwise be
              hard to   climb over.  This technique employs imaginary-time path integral
              quantum   simulations in a novel way.  Applications include: 1) model protein  
              folding; 2) optimal reaction path determination; and 3) enhanced sampling   of
              molecular configurations for the computation of average thermodynamic  
              properties.  Computer simulations have provided a number of molecular level
              insights   into chemical processes which occur in solution and on surfaces. 
              The   technique is very powerful, but is limited by statistical sampling  
              problems associated with the speed of current supercomputers and the time  
              available to perform such  simulations.  Straub is developing a new   algorithm
              for performing molecular simulations which should be a major   improvement in
              statistical sampling.  If successful, this new algorithm   could provide a
              significant decrease in the amount of computational   resources required to
              obtain meaningful sampling statistics in molecular   simulations.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
