Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a9632472

Award Number: 9632472
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10868687           (Estimated)
Investigator: R. P. H. Chang r-chang@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9162,9163,9177,9178,9251,AMPP,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632472  Chang  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
               Northwestern University supports interactive research in five 
              interdisciplinary groups.  The unifying theme of the research is  the design
              and characterization of structured materials with  unique properties for
              potential technological applications.  One  group investigates electroactive
              and magnetoactive molecular  materials by designing molecular materials for
              specific  electroresponsive or magnetoresponsive properties.  A second  group
              studies narrow bandgap strained-layer semiconductor  materials and focuses on
              the synthesis, stability, and properties  of these materials.  Strain and/or
              ordering is used to tailor  the band structure, and hence the optical
              properties.  This work  has high potential impact on the area of room
              temperature  infrared lasers and improved infrared detectors.  Other 
              applications include optical communications and optical computers  which take
              advantage of the highly non-linear optical constants  of these materials.  A
              third group investigates optically  functional polymers and molecular
              assemblies, bringing to bear a  combination of synthesis, materials
              characterization, and  theoretical approaches on problems of fundamental and
              applied  significance in the area of polymers with optical nonlinearities.  A
              fourth group studies ultrahard coatings with the goal of  stabilizing and/or
              nucleating normally unstable phases,  specifically certain nitrides,
              epitaxially on carefully chosen  substrates.  A fifth group working on
              functional electroceramic  thin films will synthesize and characterize thin
              ceramic films  for advanced dielectric and nonlinear optical applications and 
              will extend the deposition and characterization  techniques to  novel
              transparent conducting oxides.  The MRSEC supports the  development, operation
              and maintenance of shared experimental  facilities for materials research.  It
              provides seed funding for  exploratory research and fosters research
              participation by  unde rgraduates.  The Center supports an educational outreach
               program aimed at pre-college science education through  development of the
              Materials World Modules, and a program  featuring research experiences for
              science teachers.  The Center  also administers an industrial outreach program.
               The Center  currently supports 35 senior investigators, 5 postdoctoral 
              research associates, 7 technicians or other professionals, 34  graduate
              students, and 16 undergraduates.  The MRSEC is directed  by Professor R.P.H.
              Chang.  %%%  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at 
              Northwestern University supports interactive research in five 
              interdisciplinary groups.  The unifying theme of the research is  the design
              and characterization of structured materials with  unique properties for
              potential technological applications.  One  group investigates electroactive
              and magnetoactive molecular  materials.  A second group studies narrow bandgap
              strained-layer  semiconductor materials.  This work has high potential impact
              on  the area of room temperature infrared lasers and improved  infrared
              detectors.  Other applications include optical  communications and optical
              computers which take advantage of the  highly non-linear optical constants of
              these materials.  A third  group investigates optically functional polymers and
              molecular  assemblies, while a fourth group studies ultrahard, specifically 
              certain nitrides.  A fifth group working on functional  electroceramic thin
              films will synthesize and characterize thin  ceramic films for advanced
              dielectric and nonlinear optical  applications.  The MRSEC supports the
              development, operation and  maintenance of shared experimental facilities for
              materials  research.  It provides seed funding for exploratory research and 
              fosters research participation by undergraduates.  The Center  supports an
              educational outreach program aimed at pre-college  science education through
              development of the Materials World  Modules, and a program featuring research
              experie nces for science  teachers.  The Center also administers an industrial
              outreach  program.  The Center currently supports 35 senior investigators,  5
              postdoctoral research associates, 7 technicians or other  professionals, 34
              graduate students, and 16 undergraduates.  The  MRSEC is directed by Professor
              R.P.H. Chang  ***
