Title       : Interrelations Between Bacterial Infection, Inflammation, and Thrombosis on
               Biomedical Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9632568

Award Number: 9632568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Kaler kaler@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart L. Cooper  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632568  Cooper  Clinical infections are one of the greatest problems 
              associated with synthetic implanted devices.  Such  infections account for more
              than 45% of hospital infections,  associated with indwelling catheters and
              surgery for joint  replacement, and bypass operations.  Such infections are 
              also more difficult to treat than conventional infections.  With over 200
              million intravascular devices sold annually,  it is clear that infections
              associated with biomedical  devices pose a huge problem in clinical medicine. 
              Understanding the mechanisms by which the bacteria  responsible for such
              infections adhere to implants and  resist antibiotic treatment is an important
              step in  developine materials that resist bacterial growth, and  improving
              therapy for implant-associated infections.    The use of plastic materials for
              implants is not only  associated with risk of infection, but also risk of clot 
              formation (thrombosis), and inflammation around the site.  Little is known
              about the specific mechanisms that govern  the complex relationships between
              infections, inflammation,  and thrombosis.  Factors that may affect this
              relationship  are the surface chemistry of the device, the proteins that  may
              be absorbed from the blood after implantation, and the  surface chemistry of
              the bacteria and blood cells.    The focus of this research will be to
              investigate the  cellular adhesion and activation events that infection, 
              inflammation, and thrombosis have in common, and to  determine their individual
              effects on the other processes.  Specifically, the influence that protein and
              cellular  components of thrombi (e.g. fibrin and blood platelets) have  in
              mediating bacterial adhesion and colonization on  artificial surfaces will be
              investigated.  The effects of  adherent bacteria on platelet adhesion and
              activation will  also be studied.  Another important factor that will be 
              investigated is the change in the metabolic state of  adherent bacteria on
              thrombi and on implant surfaces.  The  adhesion, activa tion, and accompanying
              shape changes of  white blood cells in the presence of adherent bacteria on 
              chemically modified polyurethanes will be studied.  These  studies will
              primarily be carried out using an automated  viedomicroscopy system that allows
              the direct observation of  individual cells interacting with different surfaces
              over a  period of time.  The study of cell-surface interactions will  be
              carried out on both glass and polyurethane surfaces, as  well as model surfaces
              of self-assembling monolayers.    The information obtained in this work will
              provide a better  understanding of the interrelationship between implanted 
              devices, bacterial infection, inflammation, and thrombosis,  an how each
              process may influence the other.  Detailed  understanding of the mechanisms
              that govern these  relationships will lead to the development of biomaterials 
              that resist microbial adhesion and proliferation as well as  thrombosis. 
              Ultimately, studies such as these are important  in improving patient welfare
              and reducing health care costs.  ***
