Title       : Mechanisms of Disease Response in Termites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1998      
File        : a9632134

Award Number: 9632134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209700             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. A. Traniello jft@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632134  Traniello    Termites  are  among the most abundant and important 
              insects  in  many  ecosystems, owing to their ability to digest cellulose  and 
              recycle  the nutrients that are found in leaf litter,  humus  and  dead  wood. 
               And  because of their wood-eating habits,  termites  have  great economic
              impact as they are responsible for over $600  million  dollars structural
              damage annually in the united  States  alone.   In   spite  of  their  great 
              ecological  and   economic  significance,  the  biology  of termites  is 
              poorly  understood.  There  are  two  features of termite behavior  and 
              ecology  that  appear  to  have been pivotal in their evolutionary  history 
              and  thus  critical to understanding their biology.  First,  they  are  social,
               forming colonies of potentially millions of individuals.  Second,  they  nest 
              in  soil  and  decaying  wood.   Their  nest  environments  are  rich in
              microbes such as fungi  and  bacteria,  some  of  which may be agents of
              disease and mortality.   Indeed,  termites  appear to be highly susceptible to
              many pathogens.   We  believe that these two elements of termite biology -
              social  life  and  disease susceptibility - may be linked.  Research  into  the
               ecology  of  disease,  along with research on  the  evolution  of 
              physiological and biochemical mechanisms that allow  termites  to  resist 
              infection at both the individual and colony  level,  will  provide important
              insights into termite social evolution.   As  a  consequence  of this research
              we will understand more  about  the  nature  of termite pathogens, their
              transmission within a  colony  and the ways termites cope with disease.  This
              will in turn allow  us to identify the natural vulnerabilities of termites that
              might  be  exploited  to  control them and thus limit their  destructive 
              potential.   Moreover,  studying termite  pathogens  and  disease  resistance  
              may   result   in   the   development   of    novel,  environmentally safe
              methods of termite control, as well  as  the   isolation  and  chemical
              characterization of natural  antibiotics  that could have medicinal value.
