Title       : The Higher Level Phylogeny of the Trichoptera (Insecta)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9632879

Award Number: 9632879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John R. Gold                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl M. Kjer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack W. Sites  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Weller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph W. Holzenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632879  KJER  This study involves a molecular phylogenetic analysis of higher
              level (suborder and family) relationships among members of the caddisflies
              (Insecta: Trichoptera) based on sequence data from both the mitochondrial and
              nuclear genomes.  Knowledge of the phylogeny and evolution of this group of
              aquatic insects is of interest to freshwater ecologists, behavioral biologists,
              biodiversity advocates (Trichoptera larvae are classic water quality
              indicators), and historical biogeographers.  In particular, the evolution of
              case and retreat making behavior of the immatures has been the center of
              spirited debate.  Three competing hypotheses have emerged for the evolution of
              these traits that differ in their presumed character state homologies and
              transformation series (TS).  The molecular phylogeny provided by this
              investigation will be used to test the alternate TS, using character mapping;
              preliminary results suggest that putative homologies of some behaviors will
              need to be reassessed. This research will also address methodological issues
              such as weighting schemes, Transition-transversion bias, and how to incorporate
              secondary structure concerns in rRNA analysis; these methodological concerns
              are of broad interest to the systematic community.   This award will help
              support training of graduate students in modern methods of molecular systematic
              analysis and enhance our knowledge of this important element of insect
              biodiversity.  Caddisflies are important elements of fresh water ecosystems and
              their species composition in streams has been used to assess and monitor water
              quality.
