Title       : Photodissociation Dynamics of Small Molecules: Collisionless and Collisional
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9632519

Award Number: 9632519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanna Reisler REISLER@USC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the  
              Chemistry Division, Reisler will examine fundamental state-to-state   processes
              in unimolecular and bimolecular interactions, particularly   systems undergoing
              unimolecular decomposition.  The ultimate goal is to   understand how to
              manipulate and direct chemical reactivity.  The   decomposition of the
              prototype molecule HNCO will be examined using   sequential excitation and
              imaging techniques.  When dissociation is too   rapid to compete effectively
              with internal vibrational energy   redistribution (IVR), signatures in NCO, NH,
              and CO product state   distributions (PSDs) will reveal the presence of
              dynamical biases.    Experiments are also proposed which are aimed at inducing
              selectivity and   examining control of reactivity by several kinds of potential
              energy   surfaces (PESs).  Collisional studies will be extended to systems that
                involve two pathways, especially where spin-forbidden pathways are   induced
              by collisions.  Several sophisticated experimental techniques   will be used,
              such as multiple resonance excitation and crossed pulsed   molecular beams. 
              Theoretical work will continue with Prof. Reinhard   Schinke from Goettingen.  
              In this project Prof. Reisler will study the influence of the stretching   and
              bending motions of a molecule on the final outcome of the   light-initiated
              dissociation of the molecule into fragments.  The issues   explored in this
              study include the identity of products formed and the   final distribution of
              the various forms of internal energy into the   fragment particles.  Such
              fundamental examinations of the dynamics of   chemical bond breaking have
              applications in many areas, such as an   understanding of atmospheric chemistry
              and combustion processes.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
