Title       : STTR PHASE I: High Faraday Rotation Optical Waveguides for Application in
               Optical Circulators for Telecommunications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9632281

Award Number: 9632281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Roark jroark@nomadics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nomadics Incorporated
	      1024 S. Innovation Way
	      Stillwater, OK  74074    405/372-9535

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9632281  Roark   This STTR Phase I project will demonstrate a novel
              approach for the fabrication of highly efficient Faraday-active optical
              waveguide structures.  Faraday-active waveguides are presently of great
              interest as their development is the critical enabling technology associated
              with the demonstration of all-fiber optical circulators.  Such devices, which
              may be characterized as multiport nonreciprocal polarization rotators, provide
              a means by which the telecommunications rate may be immediately doubled on the
              existing optical fiber carrier infrastructure.  Successful implementation will
              lead to full-duplex operation over "long haul" fiber carriers. The suggested
              circulator approach is passive, and does not therefore require external
              clocking controls.  Separation of the signals is based only upon propagation
              direction; no additional losses are imposed on transmitted signals, as in the
              case of conventional directional couplers. The investigators propose the use of
              advanced thin film techniques in the development of optical fiber segments. 
              These processes have been previously shown to promote the introduction of
              photonically-active dopant species at dopant levels which are orders of
              magnitude greater than may be produced by conventional means.  The proposed
              technology will replace conventional bulk optics technologies, as waveguide
              structures with dramatically improved figures of merit will be developed
              characterized during the initial Phase 1 period.  The Phase 1 program also
              includes analysis of integrated permanent magnet structures, and a design
              assessment for optical circulator prototype development.   The development of
              high Verdet constant materials offers the potential for achieving optical
              elements which double the throughput of fiber communications links. In
              addition, numerous other commercial uses exist for these materials.      ***
