Title       : Automatic Modeling using Chemical Plant Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9632992

Award Number: 9632992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle H. Ungar ungar@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren D. Seider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Ungar & Seider - 9632992    Process design engineers spend much of
              their time developing and refining process models.  Such models are typically
              built using graphical editors to assemble model fragments (for individual units
              or processes from code and equation libraries) into simulators.  In addition,
              extensive historical plant data is also available.  Process models often fail
              to accurately predict this plant data, due to inaccurate parameters in the
              model, incorrect model equations and structure, or faults, disturbances, or
              inaccurate measurements.  The PIOs plan to address two related questions: (a)
              how to use available data effectively to improve process models, and (b) how to
              use data and models to detect and diagnose abnormalities in plant operation. 
              The goal is to build intelligent simulators which will aid in understanding and
              improving models based on measured data.    This project is to develop methods
              for automating the process of preparing simulations, using chemical process
              simulators like ASPEN PLUS and SPEEDUP, and interpreting their results.  Its
              long-range goal is to develop techniques for the automatic generation,
              modification, and interpretation of dynamic simulations and to apply them to
              data reconciliation, fault diagnosis, plant and controller design, and operator
              training.  In this work, the PIOs plan to concentrate on an initial stage of
              the project: the development of a designerOs aid that can prepare a simulation
              model, compare the results of a simulation with plant data and guide the
              process of improving the model.  This involves the development of methodologies
              for (1) the detection of changes and outliers, (2) the representation of
              information describing the model fragments, (3) the initialization of dynamic
              models, (4) the selection of model fragments, and (5) the generation of
              explanations.  Historical data, from operating plants, as well as reference
              models, will be obtained from the CIM/21 system.
