Title       : Effects of Predators on Resource Heterogeneity: A Behavioral Trophic Cascade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a9632427

Award Number: 9632427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214797             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angus R. McIntosh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632427  McIntosh  This research will improve understanding of the influence of
              predators on stream communities.  Predators often change the foraging behavior
              of their prey, because prey avoid dangerous situations.  In Rocky Mountain
              streams trout feed on aquatic insects, such as mayfly larvae.  In trout
              streams, mayflies avoid trout predation by foraging and moving mainly at night,
              when these visual predators are unable to see them.  Thus, avoidance of trout
              restricts the amount of time that mayflies can spend foraging.  Large predatory
              stoneflies also feed on mayflies and confrontations with stoneflies also
              disrupt mayfly foraging.  Thus, both trout and stoneflies reduce the amount of
              food that mayflies are able to consume.  Since mayflies eat algae, this
              reduction in grazing may also affect the distribution and abundance of algae
              when predators are present.  Through observations and experiments conducted in
              natural streams and in stream-side channels, this research will measure the
              effects of trout and stoneflies on mayfly and algal distribution and abundance.
               It will also determine whether trout and stoneflies affect how mayflies
              respond to patchy distributions of their algal resources, and whether trout
              change the distribution of algae by modifying mayfly or stonefly behavior. 
              Finally, data from these experiments will be used in a simulation model to
              predict how prey movement under different predator regimes affects algal
              patches over time.      This work builds on a long-term data base from 20 years
              of research in Colorado streams.  It will provide a more detailed understanding
              of how trout, aquatic insects, and algae function in balanced communities of
              pristine systems.  This information will be useful in preserving the biotic
              integrity of those systems, and restoring the biotic integrity of more
              disturbed streams.
