Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Hydrogen Bonds and Related Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9632515

Award Number: 9632515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Bevan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Lucchese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the  
              Chemistry Division, Bevan and Lucchese perform an experimental and  
              theoretical study of hydrogen-bonded and related proton-donor-proton   acceptor
              dimer moleculess.  Vibrational- and rotational-state-resolved   infrared
              spectroscopy will be combined with theoretical modeling to   investigate the
              nature of the interactions including geometries displaced   from those occupied
              by the ground state.  Complexes of homologous series   of hydrogen halides and
              isoelectronic proton donors will be examined to   gain a quantitative
              understanding of the hydrogen bond and related   interactions in systems
              spanning Group VII elements.  Two absorption   spectrometers, one an FTIR
              instrument and the other an infrared diode   laser spectrometer, both with
              supersonic slit-jet sample sources, will be   used to study small (HX)n
              clusters and rare-gas-HX dimers.  The range of   applicability of the
              Buckingham-Fowler (B-F)   electrostatic-plus-hard-sphere interaction model will
              be considered.  Hydrogen bonds are not really chemical bonds such as exist in
              molecules,   but rather they are weaker attractions between the hydrogen atoms
              of one   molecule and other atoms in a neighboring, or even in the same,
              molecule.    These interactions strongly affect such phenomena as the boiling
              point   of water, the melting point of ice, and the structure of strands of DNA
                and have an impact in such wide-ranging disciplines as biochemistry,  
              chemistry, genetics, and advanced materials technology.  The results from  
              these studies will help us understand better the nature of hydrogen   bonds.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
