Title       : Ballistic Electron Emission Microscopy and Spectroscopy of Magnetic Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9632780

Award Number: 9632780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip N. First first@physics.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9632780 
              First    The goal of this project is to understand spin-dependent electron 
              transmission and scattering in metallic multilayers  composed  of  alternating 
              magnetic and nonmagnetic materials. The  experiments  use  successive  magnetic
              layers as "polarizer"  and  "analyzer",  with  an  external  magnetic  field 
              controlling  their  relative  orientation.  Using  a  cryogenic scanning
              tunneling  microscope,  different  spectroscopies detect either  the  ballistic
               electron  current transmitted through the polarizer/analyzer pairs, or  the 
              field-dependent density of states in the  multilayer.  These  are  among the
              first detailed studies of spin-dependent scattering  in  metals  and at
              subsurface interfaces for electron energies within  +5  electron  volt  of the
              Fermi energy. They address  issues  of  importance  for  understanding  both 
              the  oscillatory   exchange  coupling  and the giant magnetoresistance ratios
              that  have  been  observed in magnetic multilayers.    %%%  This project
              addresses issues of importance for understanding the  properties  of "magnetic
              multilayers". These are thin films  with  alternating  magnetic and nonmagnetic
              layers, each typically  two  nanometer  thick.  Because  these man-made 
              materials  exhibit  a  "giant"   magnetoresistance  ratio,  they  have  
              already   found  applications  in ultrasmall and sensitive magnetic field 
              sensors  (in  computer disk drives, for instance). Still, the  fundamental 
              basis  for the observed magnetic effects is not fully understood.  These 
              experiments use the spectroscopic capabilities of  a  low-  temperature 
              scanning tunneling microscope to derive  information  about  the  properties 
              of magnetic multilayers  on  a  nanometer  length scale.  ***
