Title       : A Workshop: Management Guidelines and Computerization Standards for Invertebrate
               Paleontology, the Smithsonian Institution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9632403

Award Number: 9632403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35536              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren D. Allmon wda1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nigel C. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas S. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott H. Lidgard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paleontological Res Inst
	      1259 Trumansburg Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632403  Allmon   Invertebrate paleontological collections are among the largest
              of US systematics collections and provide most of the empirical evidence for
              the history of life on earth. In order to fully utilize these collections, the
              invertebrate paleontological community needs to adopt a set of comprehensive
              guidelines for standards and prioritization in collections management,
              including curation, conservation, accession, deaccession, inventory and
              disposition of orphaned and endangered collections, risk management,
              collections access, the role of amateur collectors, and the relative value of
              different types of collections. In all these areas, the priorities of
              collection improvement and growth must be balanced against available resources
              as well as legal and ethical responsibilities. This proposal seeks funds to
              support an invertebrate paleontology workshop, the goals of which are 1) to
              discriminate problems and key issues related to collection curation and propose
              guidelines for their resolution, 2) to encourage and facilitate computerization
              of US collections, and 3) develop a common data model and set of common data
              standards for computerized record capture and management. The workshop will be
              held June 6-15, 1996 in association with the North American Paleontological
              Convention at the Smithsonian Institution.   This workshop clearly addresses an
              important issue regarding data storage, computerization and management for both
              pure and applied research. The results of the workshop will be published in an
              edited volume.
