Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center: The Mesoscale Interface
               Mapping Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9632556

Award Number: 9632556
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3056258            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent L. Adams   (Principal Investigator former)
              Gregory S. Rohrer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9177,9178,9251,AMPP,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632556  Adams  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
               Carnegie Mellon University supports research on the study of  crystalline
              interfaces at a mesoscopic scale.  The effort  concentrates on grain and
              subgrain boundaries in two-component  polycrystals and is complimentary to
              investigations at the atomic  and continuum scales.  The seminal concept of the
              project is that  a bridge can be constructed between the character of grain 
              boundaries and certain of their intrinsic properties.  This  bridge will
              encompass the very large space of all physically  distinctive grain boundaries,
              known as fundamental zone.  The  mission is to construct mappings using
              automated microscopy which  link the intrinsic materials properties of
              individual grain  boundaries to their character and chemistry over the entire 
              fundamental zone.  The mesoscale of interest lies approximately  between 100
              microns and 100 nanometer.  The anticipated progress  is likely to accelerate
              the world-wide effort towards a unified  structure-properties theory, linking
              structure-properties  relations from the atomic scale upwards to the continuum
              scale.  The MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of 
              shared experimental facilities for materials research.  It  fosters research
              participation by undergraduates and pre-college  students, and is developing
              strong industrial relationships.  The  Center currently  supports 8 senior
              investigators, 3 postdoctoral  research associates, 8 graduate students, and 4
              undergraduates.  The MRSEC is directed by Professor Brent L. Adams.  %%%  The
              Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at  Carnegie Mellon
              University supports research on the study of  crystalline interfaces at a
              microscopic scale, also known as  mesoscale.  The seminal concept of the
              project is that a bridge  can be constructed between the character of grain
              boundaries and  certain of their intrinsic properties.  The anticipated
              progress  is likely to accelerate the world-wide  effort towards a unified 
              structure-properties theory, linking structure-properties  relations from the
              atomic scale upwards to the continuum scale.  The MRSEC supports the
              development, operation and maintenance of  shared experimental facilities for
              materials research.  It  fosters research participation by undergraduates and
              pre-college  students, and is developing strong industrial relationships.  The 
              Center currently  supports 8 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral  research
              associates, 8 graduate students, and 4 undergraduates.  The MRSEC is directed
              by Professor Brent L. Adams.  ***
