Title       : Mesoscale Structures and Dynamics of Mid-Latitude Cyclones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9632580

Award Number: 9632580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $906919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter V. Hobbs phobbs@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Locatelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632580  Hobbs       Cyclones in middle latitudes affect large regions of the
              world.   Consequently, improvements in understanding and forecasting of weather
               associated with middle-latitude cyclones has been one of the major goals of
              20th  century meteorology.  Although very significant advances have been made
              in  the basic understanding and ability to forecast extratropical cyclones on
              the  large (synoptic) scale, progress in forecasting local precipitation and
              severe  weather associated with these systems has been much slower. This is
              attributed  to insufficient understanding of processes and phenomena on the
              convective  scale (~0.1-10 km) and mesoscale (~10-1000 km).       For the past
              twenty years or so, the cloud physics research group at the  University of
              Washington has studied extratropical cyclones, with emphasis on  the
              microphysics and mesoscale aspects of precipitation.  These studies led to a 
              classification and study of rainbands on the west coast of the United States,
              and  studies of cyclones on the US east coast and in the central US.  The
              latter two  studies led to a proposal for a new conceptual model for cyclones
              that are  generated in the lee of the Rocky Mountains, as well as to the
              identification of  two large-scale rainbands that can produce severe weather in
              the central United  States.  The present research is an extension of these
              studies.       Three main areas of research will be pursued.  The first is to
              carry out  further evaluations of the new conceptual model for cyclones in the
              central  United States in order to improve its observational and theoretical
              foundation,  and to increase its utility as a weather forecasting aid.  The
              second task is to  investigate the mechanisms responsible for the formation of
              narrow cold frontal  rainbands, which are a ubiquitous feature of extratropical
              cyclones and can  produce severe local weather.  The formation of wide
              cold-frontal rainbands,  another common feature of cyclones, will also be
              investigated. These studies will  be  carried out through detailed analyses of
              special data sets collected in three  already completed field projects, and
              through numerical modeling studies of  these cases using an advanced mesoscale
              model.  ***
