Title       : The Carbon Dioxide Concentrating Mechanism of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9632087

Award Number: 9632087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Moroney btmoro@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 1312,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632087  Moroney  Unicellular algae, including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, have
              the capacity to concentrate carbon dioxide internally, allowing these organisms
              to grow photoautotrophically at very low external carbon dioxide
              concentrations.  This carbon dioxide concentrating mechanism is inducible; it
              is present only in cells that have been grown with limiting carbon dioxide
              conditions.  Dr. Moroney has shown that cells with the carbon dioxide
              concentrating mechanism have the low carbon dioxide-inducible polypeptide,
              LIP-36, present in the chloroplast envelope.  He also has identified six genes
              that are specifically induced by growth on low carbon dioxide.  Two of these
              genes, 1113 ans 215, encode putative transmembrane proteins.  Recently he has
              obtained the gene encoding LIP-36 and has identified a gene encoding an
              internal carbonic anhydrase.    In this award, Dr. Moroney will study the
              carbon dioxide concentrating mechanism in C. reinhardtii by using three
              approaches.  In the first approach he will continue to characterize some of the
              genes and proteins identified.  The second approach will be to measure
              inorganic carbon transport using chloroplast envelope vesicles in collaboration
              with Dr. Richard E. McCarty, Johns Hopkins University.  The third approach will
              be to use cellular fractionation and immunolocalization to localize rubisco and
              the newly discovered carbonic anhydrase within the chloroplast of C.
              reinhardtii.  The characterization of the proteins of this transport system
              will increase our understanding of the low carbon dioxide adjustment in algae
              and the role of the chloroplast in this photosynthetic adaptation.  Algal
              photosynthesis contributes a major portion of the earth's energy cycle. 
              Studies of its underlying mechanisms will contribute to our understanding of
              global change.
