Title       : Morphological and Phylogenetic Diversification in the Tamarins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9632163

Award Number: 9632163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126674             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Cheverud cheverud@thalamus.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The major objective of the proposed research is to develop an understanding of
              the evolutionary  origins of morphological differences among tamarin species
              (genus Saguinus).  Tamarins are a  highly diverse group of New World Monkeys
              inhabiting Amazonia and the north coast of South  America into Panama.  They
              display a wide range of cranial morphologies.  Using previously  gathered
              information on patterns of inheritance of skull form and the phylogenetic
              relationships  among the species, the researchers will test a series of
              hypotheses concerning the evolutionary  origin of morphological differences in
              this group.  The studies will serve as a model for  analyzing morphological
              diversity in primate radiations.  First, they will test the hypothesis that 
              cranial variability arose by random evolutionary processes, such as genetic
              drift or randomly  varying natural selection.  If this hypothesis is not
              rejected, it is possible that the diversity  observed did not arise by special
              adaptation to specific environments.  Next they will use a  well-resolved
              phylogenetic tree to create a series of phylogenetically-independent contrasts 
              among sister groups.  They will describe each of these contrasts using a
              two-group discriminant  function standardized with an estimate of the
              within-species genetic covariance matrix.  Each of  these discriminant
              functions represents the pattern of differences in natural selection required
              to  produce the observed morphological differences between related groups of
              tamarins.  The results  will be interpreted using the principles of functional
              morphology.  Specific a priori hypotheses,  such as selection on overall size
              as a source of evolutionary morphological divergence, will also  be tested.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
