Title       : STTR PHASE I: Wavelength Conversion Devices for All-OpticalNetworking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9632144

Award Number: 9632144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry R. McAdams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan E. Willner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Optivision Incorporated
	      3450 Hillview Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    415/855-0200

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9632144  McAdams    This Phase I STTR project will develop an integrated
              all-optical wavelength converter for use in all-optical switches and other
              applications.  The effort will leverage Optivision's extensive experience
              gained from building and deploying optical crossbar switches based on
              semiconductor optical amplifiers and the University of Southern California's
              cutting edge research in all-optical wavelength converters.  Recently,
              wavelength conversion has been demonstrated with semiconductor optical
              amplifiers based on cross gain compression, cross phase modulation, or four
              wave mixing.  The effort will begin by developing a set of switch requirements
              based on interaction with all-optical test beds and high end users, then
              evaluating the various wavelength conversion techniques against these
              requirements. To demonstrate the feasibility of the approach, Optivision, Inc.
              will perform both detailed modeling of the expected performance and a
              proof-of-concept experiment.  Optivision will also investigate the complexity
              and tradeoffs of fabricating integrated all-optical wavelength converters.  The
              Phase II effort will involve the fabrication, laboratory evaluation, and
              deployment into a test bed of integrated all-optical wavelength converters.   
              Network capacity is expected to grow more than an order of magnitude by the
              year 2000.  To support this explosive growth new networking technologies are
              required.  All-optical wavelength conversion and switching are two functions
              that have been identified as key building blocks for future high capacity
              networks. Integrated all-optical switching wavelength converters will be
              required in high capacity wavelength division multiplexed networks such as
              future cable television, television, and data transmission systems.    ***
