Title       : Processing, Structure and Property Interrelationships for Laminated Matrix
               Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9632823

Award Number: 9632823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $619972             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Jack Lackey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jianmin Qu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhonglin L. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher S. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9632823  Lackey    The objective of the proposed research is to study the 
              interrelationships between the processing, structure, and  properties of a new
              class of ceramic matrix composites.  These new composites consist of a
              reinforcement phase plus a  matrix composed of alternate thin layers of two
              different  materials.  Layered structures are known to enhance  mechanical
              toughness, and thus, their use as the matrix,  along with the reinforcement
              phase, should enhance the  toughness of the overall composite.  The 3 year
              project  consists of composite processing, characterization, and  mechanics
              modeling.  The process-structure-property  interrelationships for several
              laminated matrix composite  systems will be studied. Fibers of interest are
              carbon, SiC,  and Al2O3. Matrix materials will be selected from carbon,  SiC,
              Si3N4, Al2O3, mullite, B13C2, Nb, and Re.  Based on the  results from the first
              two years, a preferred system will be  selected for detailed study and
              optimization in the third  year. We propose to identify the layer thicknesses
              and  material properties (thermal expansion, elastic modulus, and  strength)
              required to optimize the mechanical performance,  particularly fracture
              toughness and strength, of this new  class of composites.  %%%  The objective
              of the proposed research is to study the  interrelationships between the
              processing, structure, and  properties of a new class of ceramic matrix
              composites.  These new composites consist of a reinforcement phase plus a 
              matrix composed of alternate thin layers of two different  materials.  Layered
              structures are known to enhance  mechanical toughness, and thus, their use as
              the matrix,  along with the reinforcement phase, should enhance the  toughness
              of the overall composite.  Improvement of the  properties of ceramic matrix
              composites will have a large  impact on many commercial and defense systems. 
              ***
