Title       : MPWG: Family Tools and Technology (FT2) Leadership Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9632274

Award Number: 9632274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene S. Chasek chasek@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Rutgers Consortium for Educational Equity, an affiliate of the  Rutgers
              Center for Mathematics, Science and Computer Education  (CMSCE) and the
              designated New Jersey Family Math and Family  Science training site, has
              developed Family Tools & Technology  (FT2), an after-school program targeting
              girls and their parents.  They collaborate in problem-solving activities (using
              tools and  building models) that illustrate the importance of science, 
              engineering and mathematics in the world beyond the classroom.   This project
              supports the development and assessment of a cost-  effective, pedagogically
              sound, replicable training model,  including a leadership component that will
              be piloted in NJ prior  to national dissemination.  The effort was inspired by
              Project  2061, Science for All Americans, The AAUW Report:  How Schools 
              Shortchange Girls, the NCTM Standards, and the USDOE's Goals 200.   FT2 was
              created:  to increase the number of girls who are excited  about science and
              technology; to encourage their continuing  interest; to stimulate parents to
              become advocates for their  daughters' endeavors in science and technology; and
              to train  teachers to promote girls' continued participation and confidence  in
              a critical period in their educational development (pre-  adolescence).    The
              first phase of this project (1995-96), focused on a year-long  assessment
              funded by NSF to evaluate the effectiveness of the 14  FT2 activities and
              accompanying materials and strategies.  It  looked at the program's impact on
              reducing the gender gap in terms  of girls' experiences and aspirations in 12
              elementary schools with  approximately 240 families, 70% of which had
              participating  daughters.  It included an 11-day training model in which
              teachers  were trained in FT2 techniques, to equip them to present and 
              facilitate these activities in two series of six after school  sessions for
              girls and their families.  Based on the positive  results of the field-testing
              and assessment, the second phase of  the project  will be refined and
              streamlined into a cost-effective,  pedagogically sound, five-day training that
              can be easily  disseminated and replicated.  A leadership component will
              prepare  experienced FT2 teachers to train others to conduct the program.  
              This revised model will be piloted and assessed, as well as  institutionalized,
              in selected NJ schools during 1996-97 in  preparation for national
              dissemination.
