Title       : Experimental and Analytical Investigation of Hybrid/ Composite Structural Walls
               - Steel Frame Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a9632457

Award Number: 9632457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Wallace   (Principal Investigator current)
              Firas I. Sheikh-Ibrahim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The use of reinforced concrete or composite core walls and steel gravity or
              moment frames offers an economical alternative to RC wall/core and concrete
              frame systems. Successful performance of these systems depends on the adequate
              performance of walls/cores, steel frames, and frame-core connections. 
              Fundamental issues related to cyclic performance of composite walls/cores have
              yet to be addressed.  A coordinated research program, combining experimental
              and analytical studies is formulated to investigate the performance of
              composite wall - hybrid systems.  The primary objectives of this project are
              to: (1) conduct and document experimental studies of composite walls, (2)
              investigate force transfer mechanisms between concrete and encased steel
              sections under cyclic tension and compression, (3) evaluate the experimental
              results with respect to wall strength stiffness, and ductility, (4) assess
              existing code requirements and (5) provide essential data so that complete
              building systems can be investigated analytically to assess the economics of
              using hybrid/composite systems.  Five approximately 1/3-scale composite walls
              and approximately ten, large-scale isolated boundary columns will be tested.  A
              prototype structure will be used to derive general parameters of the test
              specimens and to relate experimental data to overall structural response.  In
              addition, cyclic load tests of isolated boundary columns will be done to
              provide detailed data on force transfer mechanisms and confinement
              requirements.  General analytical studies of specimen behavior will be
              performed to evaluate the ability of simplified code equations to predict the
              strength and stiffness of the composite walls.  Modeling techniques appropriate
              for analytical studies of complete structural systems will also be
              investigated.  This is an award under the 2nd year Initiative (NSF 94-154) on
              `Composite and Hybrid Structures.`                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
