Title       : Near Field Diffractive Optical Elements with Multifunctionality and
               Programmability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9632874

Award Number: 9632874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Fainman fainman@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632874  Fainman  The coming decade will see a revolution in computing and
              communications technology. Existing telecommunication switching networks are
              inadequate for the emerging integrated services digital network which will use
              the tremendous point-to-point bandwidth of optical fiber. New technologies are
              necessary to provide ultra-high bandwidth switching capability to keep pace
              with the rapid advances in data transmission rates. The current trend in
              developing high performance computing and communication systems is towards
              increasing parallelism in addition to speed.  Free space optical technology,
              being inherently three-dimensional, is attractive for interconnecting these
              highly parallel systems. Conventional diffractive optical elements (DOEs) use a
              phase profile to deflect and shape an incident optical wavefront. These
              elements are  beginning to be incorporated as low cost beam splitters and
              aberration correctors in previously all-refractive optical products. The second
              generation of DOEs are elements that discriminate among the incident light by
              polarization or wavelength. Our group has done pioneering research into these
              optical elements, having fabricated the first planar DOE which reconstruct a
              different pattern depending on the incident polarization, and another which
              vanishes at a specified wavelength. With these elements packaging size and cost
              of complex optical and optoelectronic systems can be significantly reduced.
              Here, we propose to begin an investigation of the third generation of DOE to
              produce electrically programmable response as well as continue the
              investigation of novel DOE devices with multifunctionality in polarization and
              color. These DOEs are useful for construction of transparent switching fabrics
              allowing the routing of data between input  and output ports at bandwidths
              independent of the switching speed of the individual switching  element. In
              addition, such programmable DOEs will play an important role for packaging of 
              manufacturable optoelectronic systems be cause they combine the functionality
              of several  optical components with built-in relative alignment. Such elements
              can serve as active alignment  components for packaging large scale
              optoelectronic systems. Programmable DOEs that allow fast,  efficient,
              high-resolution, random-access optical beam steering and dynamic focusing are
              required by  numerous optoelectronic system applications including 2-D and 3-D
              displays, 3-D  optical memories, programmable optical interconnects, optical
              routers, and 3-D optical imaging.    The goal of this proposal is to conduct
              basic research towards development of DOEs with multifunctionality and DOEs
              with programmability for construction of transparent switching fabric and for
              packaging of  manufacturable optoelectronic systems. The proposed approach is
              based on developing near-field diffractive optical devices that utilize
              subwavelength nanostructures to create artificial dielectrics with optical
              properties that enable multifunctionality and electrical programmability.
              Furthermore, by employing the computer generated hologram design approaches, an
              array of such near-field optical devices can be used to create DOEs that
              possess electrical programmability of their far field spatial impulse response.
              The fabrication of these elements will leverage from the advances in
              microelectronics technology using E-beam lithography, photolithography, ion
              beam etching, ion implantation, etc. The specific objectives of this proposal
              include rigorous modeling, design, fabrication and testing of near-field
              diffractive optical devices that utilize composite passive and electrooptic
              subwavelength nanostructures to create artificial dielectrics with
              multifunctionality and electrical programmability. Our ultimate objective is to
              construct an array of such devices to realize DOEs with electrically
              programmable far field impulse response.  ***
