Title       : Activation of Phospholipase A2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9632095

Award Number: 9632095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney L. Biltonen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9632095  Biltonen  The long term objective of this proposal is to provide a
              comprehensive framework within which to formulate a precise definition of
              phospholipase A2 activation in thermodynamic, kinetic, and structural terms. 
              The proposed work will focus on developing an understanding of the putative
              structural changes leading to full activation.  This work will include
              definition of the enzyme-substrate interaction locus and putative dimer
              interfacial region and the evaluation of specific sites of interaction in
              thermodynamic, kinetic and structural terms.  An important aspect of the
              proposed work will be thermodynamic characterization of protein-protein
              interactions and calcium binding in aqueous solution and on the membrane
              surface.  Recent work has suggested that domain formation on the lipid surface
              could lead to protein clustering which may be related to activation.  Whether
              this potential clustering is related to protein dimerization is still an open
              question, however, and will be pursued.  Such characterization is necessary to
              design and interpret kinetic experiments aimed at defining the temporal
              sequence of events of the activation process.  Finally, a structural
              description of these enzyme systems will be provided by multidimension nuclear
              magnetic resonance studies.   Specifically, changes in the dynamics and
              structure of the enzyme upon binding to lipid surfaces will be investigated. 
              This project will focus on the properties of two naturally occurring enzymes,
              phospholipase A2 from porcine pancreas and the monomeric form from the water
              moccasin.  Particular attention will be given to the latter enzyme since it has
              been expressed in E. coli and specific mutations can be engineered.  %%%  A
              detailed investigation of the structural and energetic changes associated with
              the binding to and activation of the enzyme phospholipase A2 on lipid membranes
              will be undertaken.  Specific questions to be addressed include what protein
              sites are involved in the interaction, does protein-protein  interaction play a
              role in activation and what structural changes in the enzyme occur upon
              binding.  A variety of spectroscopic and calorimetric techniques will be used. 
              In addition protein engineering will be used to produce interesting variants of
              the wild type enzyme.  This information will prove  useful in developing an
              understanding of the functioning and regulation of this enzyme specifically and
              the nature of catalysis on membrane surfaces, generally.  ***
