Title       : Theoretical Studies of the Circular Dichroism of Peptides and Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9632124

Award Number: 9632124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Hirst jhirst@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9632124  Hirst  This research will provide the theoretical underpinning for the
              calculation of the circular dichroism (CD) of a protein given its structure. 
              CD is fundamentally an electronic molecular property, and so the first
              component of the work involves the application of state-of-the-art quantum
              chemistry methods to characterize the various chromophoric groups in proteins. 
              Once these groups have been modeled, the semi-empirical matrix method for
              calculating the CD of proteins will be used.  Dr. Hirst will use the developed
              methods to investigate the influences on the CD of helices.  In collaboration
              with Professor Jeffery Kelly at Texas A & M he will investigate the CD of
              (-sheet peptidomimetics.  CD calculations and MD simulations (from Professor
              Charles Brooks at The Scripps Research Institute) will be used to model the
              time-evolution of CD during protein folding.  %%%  Circular dichroism (CD)
              spectroscopy is a widely used probe of protein structure from early experiments
              to determine the handedness of (-helices to recent picosecond time-resolved CD
              measurements of the dissociation of carbonmonoxide from myoglobin.  CD is
              routinely employed to study the structure, the thermodynamics and the kinetics
              of protein folding.  Much of the theoretical basis of the CD of proteins has
              been established, but the relationship between CD and the detailed structure of
              proteins has yet to be fully understood.  The results of this research, the
              development of theoretical methods to calculate the circular dichroism spectra
              of peptides and proteins from simulations, will provide the connection between
              the atomic-detailed structure of proteins and their CD.  ***
