Title       : Non-Linear Transport and Spatial Organization Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1998  
File        : a9632059

Award Number: 9632059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney Redner redner@sid.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9632059  Redner  Theoretical studies will be done on non-linear transport 
              processes and related collective properties in heterogeneous  media.  Two
              general topics will be considered, including the  dynamics of inelastic gases
              and filtration processes.  A  primary goal will be to develop new models and
              new  qualitative methods to account for basic phenomena.  The  steady response
              of an inelastic gas in small temperature and  concentration gradients will be
              used to help develop basic  insights into the transient cooling and underlying 
              clustering phenomenon.  Investigations will be done on basic  aspects of
              filtration in which small suspended particles in  a fluid are removed by
              passing the suspension through a  porous matrix.  These removed particles
              gradually plug the  porous medium giving rise to feedback between transport and
               filtration efficiency.  New models will be developed to  describe this
              non-steady response analytically and to  understand the underlying percolation
              problem induced by the  plugging network.    Investigations will also be done
              to understand coarsening  processes and related kinetic phenomena in simple
              models of  competitive and adaptive behavior.  The "vicious  civilization"
              model appears to account for some aspects of  the time development and relative
              strengths of real  civilizations.  A transition between a "fair" and a 
              "superpower-dominated" world is identified and studies will  be made to
              quantify the essential phenomena associated with  this transition.  Similarly,
              studies of "adaptive" voter  models will be done.  In these models new types of
               transition rate rules are introduced to mimic several basic  elements of human
              behavior.  The long-time properties of  these systems will be investigated with
              particular emphasis  on the statistics of opinion changes.  %%%  This research
              involves theoretical studies of statistical  models which describe transport
              phenomena, such as the flow  of liquids, through filters and th eevolution of
              spatial  organization, such as p attern formation in fluids.  The  results will
              be of wide interest to the mathematics,  statistical mechanics and materials
              and processing  communities.  ***
