Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9632716

Award Number: 9632716
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11026560           (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony K. Cheetham cheetham@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Pincus  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9163,9177,9178,9181,9251,AMPP,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632716  Cheetham  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
              at the University of  California Santa Barbara supports research in the area of
              complex materials in four  interdisciplinary groups. One group investigating
              complex fluids is focused on the creation  and control of biomolecular
              materials. The emphasis is on biomolecular materials whose  microstructure can
              be controlled for possible applications to the development of heat-proof 
              proteins, artificial tissue, novel drug delivery systems, and biogels. A second
              group  investigating solution synthesis of inorganics at molecular and atomic
              interfaces seeks to  understand basic mechanisms of these processes and to
              explore the synthesis of new  materials with applications to electro-optics,
              catalysis, and biotechnology. Heterogeneous  polymeric structures are
              investigated by a third group. These structures include  heterogeneous block
              copolymers for potential biomedical applications and network blends for 
              polymer light-emitting electrochemical cells. Strongly non-equilibri  um
              phenomena in complex materials are investigated by a fourth group that has a
              strong  theoretical component focused on issues of practical importance in the
              materials area with  a common theme of nonlinearity. Planned studies include
              fundamental mechanisms of friction,  dynamics of fracture, including both
              conventional fracture and seismic events, the  structural evolution of thin
              films, and phase transitions in reacting polymers. The MRSEC  supports the
              development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental facilities for 
              materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory research and
              emerging areas,  and fosters research participation by undergraduates. The
              MRSEC has strong industrial links  and an educational outreach program. The
              educational program includes the Science  Partnership for School Innovation and
              an internship program involving instructors and  students from a local city
              college. The Center currently supports 30 senior  investigators,  10
              postdoctoral research associates, 5 technicians or other professionals, 35
              graduate  students, and 25 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor
              Anthony K. Cheetham.  %%%  The Materials Research Science and Engineering
              Center (PARSEC) at the University of  California Santa Barbara supports
              research in the area of complex materials in four  interdisciplinary groups.
              One group investigating complex fluids is focused on the creation  and control
              of biomolecular materials whose microstructure can be controlled for possible 
              applications to the development of heat-proof proteins, artificial tissue, and
              novel drug  delivery systems. A second group investigating synthesis of
              inorganics at molecular and  atomic interfaces seeks to understand basic
              mechanisms of these processes and to explore  the synthesis of new materials
              with applications to electro-optics, catalysis, and  biotechnology.
              Heterogeneous polymeric structures are investigated by a third groupwith 
              potential biomedical applications and polymer light-emitting electrochemical
              cells.  Strongly non-equilibrium phenomena in complex materials are
              investigated by a fourth group  that has a strong theoretical component focused
              on issues of practical importance in the  materials area. Planned studies
              include fundamental mechanisms of friction, dynamics of  fracture, including
              both conventional fracture and seismic events, the structural evolution  of
              thin films, and phase transitions in reacting polymers. The MRSEC supports the 
              development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental facilities for
              materials  research. It provides seed funding for exploratory research and
              emerging areas, and fosters  research participation by undergraduates. The
              MRSEC has strong industrial links and an  educational outreach program. The
              educational program includes the Science Partnership for  School Innovation and
              an internship program involving instructors and students from a local  city
              college The Center currently supports 30 s enior investigators, 10 postdoctoral
               research associates, 5 technicians or other professionals, 35 graduate
              students, and 25  undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor Anthony K.
              Cheetham.  ***  _
