Title       : The Mio-Pliocene of the Middle Awash Valley, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9632389

Award Number: 9632389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim D. White timwhite@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Multidisciplinary research in the Middle Awash, Ethiopia, is revealing important
              new  dimensions of human origins and evolution.  This funding supports
              paleontologists, geologists,  and geochronologists.  These project scientists
              are coordinating their efforts to reconstruct  environments and to document
              physical, biological, and technological change in Africa over the  last six
              million years.  Data on topics as diverse as global climatic change (revealed
              by  connections with adjacent deep-sea drill cores from the Arabian Sea and
              Gulf of Aden), the  paleohabitats of the earliest hominids (revealed by
              isotopic studies, fossil pollen, and  micromammals), and the geological
              evolution of the Horn of Africa (revealed by stratigraphic  and
              geochronological work on the volcanic rocks interbedded with the fossiliferous
              sediments)  will be generated by the project.    Research targets include the
              oldest hominid-bearing sediments in Africa, at Aramis, Sagantole,  and
              Kuseralee Dora.  The team will excavate sediments of the Central Awash Complex
              in an  effort to recover human ancestor remains from between volcanic rocks
              dated to 4.4 and 5.2 myr.  Reconnaissance of the western margin of the study
              area has revealed even older sediments.  A  major effort will be made to date
              these rocks radiometrically, and to extract faunal remains from  them,
              including even older hominid fossils that should approach, and possibly
              predate, the  human/ape divergence.    The research project has established
              that the Miocene and Pliocene sediments of the Middle  Awash are the most
              important in the world for revealing the earliest stages of the human career.  
               The hominid fossils already recovered there are over twice as old as those
              from the bottom of  Olduvai Gorge, and over a million years older than Lucy. 
              The proposed three years of research  will gather comprehensive paleontological
              data sets for these areas from precisely controlled  spatial, temporal, and
              environmental contexts.  This research will open new windows on the  deep past.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
