Title       : WORKSHOP: Biologically Inspired Autonomous Systems Workshop,to be Held March
               3-5, l996, in Durham, NC.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1996      
File        : a9632660

Award Number: 9632660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8170               (Estimated)
Investigator: Erol Gelenbe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632660  Gelenbe       After a forty to fifty year cycle, the dramatic evolution
              of  this technology is enabling a return to the fundamental  biological
              paradigms which inspired the early intellectual of  information technology such
              as John von Neumann, Stephen Kleene  and Marvin Minsky.  As an example,
              artificial neural networks  resulted from the early models of McCulloch and
              Pitts concerning  biological neurons.  Their mathematical theory was developed
              by  engineers, mathematicians and physicists, and a very broad  variety of
              significant applications have resulted from this work.   Now psychologists have
              adopted them as mechanistic models of  human and animal thought processes, and
              are contributing to the  theory of how these models simulate and elucidate
              learning.   Similarly, concepts from genetics are modifying the manner in 
              which computer algorithms are being developed, while algorithmic  and
              information theoretic concepts (and neural networks) have  become tools for
              research in genetics.       The purpose of this workshop is to broaden and
              pursue this  long-term and fruitful interaction of Engineering with the Life 
              and Human Sciences, by investigation the processes which provide  Systems, both
              Artificial and Natural, with Autonomous and  Adaptive Behavior.  The workshop
              will call upon prominent  researchers who study examples of autonomous behavior
              such as the  food chain, food ingestion, and animal psychology.  The workshop 
              will also call upon researchers who take a Systems Engineering or 
              Mathematical/Physical science approach to artificial autonomous  behavior such
              as self-organizing hardware, genetic algorithms,  neural networks, approximate
              reasoning and robotics.  The  encounter between these two lines of thought in
              the presence of  high-quality and energetic audience - as well as a number of 
              industrially relevant "real" problems areas-will lead to a better 
              understanding of the state of the art, to new modeling efforts,  and to the
              exchange of paradigms between these two impor tant  areas.  Participation of
              young faculty members and post-docs, as  well as women and minorities will be
              emphasized.    ***
