Title       : Long-Term Studies of Disturbances as They Affect Ecological Processes in
               Landscapes of the Southern Appalachians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a9632854

Award Number: 9632854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000086            (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Vose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore L. Gragson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632854  Coleman  This research will continue investigations on the extent and
              complexity of natural and human-caused disturbances, and how they interact with
              ecological processes along environmental gradients in the landscape. This work
              builds upon extensive long-term studies of landscape processes in the southern
              Appalachians and spans four levels of resolution (plot, watershed, landscape
              and region) in the Little Tennessee and French Broad River basins. Individual
              and interacting effects of disturbance and environmental heterogeneity on
              populations, communities, and ecological processes forms the unifying theme of
              this proposed LTER research. The research team will focus on three areas of
              inquiry: (1) characterization of disturbance and environmental heterogeneity in
              the southern Appalachians, (2) effects of disturbance and environmental
              heterogeneity on populations and communities, and (3) effects of disturbance
              and environmental heterogeneity on biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem
              processes.    The project builds on extensive understanding of disturbances
              occurring with the Coweeta basin and continues to characterize environmental
              heterogeneity, maintaining continuity in the 60+ year record for some
              variables. As the focus expands to the southern Appalachian region, historical
              fire regime and socio-economic drivers of land-use change will also be
              considered. The effects of disturbance and environmental heterogeneity on plant
              and animal populations will be assessed at a range of scales and key questions
              will be addressed on the effects of resource variability on terrestrial and
              aquatic biodiversity. Using a combination of new studies and continued
              long-term measurements, investigators will examine the role of environmental
              heterogeneity and disturbance in regulating ecosystem pools and processes in
              streams, riparian zones, and forests. This research approach utilizes an
              integrated program of long-term field measurements, experiments and modeling.
