Title       : Modular Optical Interconnect Assemblies for Backplane and Switching Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1998     
File        : a9632981

Award Number: 9632981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond K. Kostuk kostuk@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632981  Kostuk  The increasing demands on interconnects for network switching
              and  multiprocessor backplanes is forcing consideration of advanced electrical 
              and nonelectrical solutions, such as optical interconnects. Electrical 
              backplanes have been demonstrated at data rates of 500 MHz for 64 bit wide 
              buses with point-to-point connections over distances of 0.5 m (i.e. Cray 
              T-90). Optics can increase the performance of such systems by providing  higher
              bandwidths over long transmission distances, and support  architectures
              requiring fanout and fanin. Another important performance  consideration is
              system cost. The Cray electrical backplane is expensive  because it requires
              non-conventional electronic switching elements and  packaging methods. If
              optics is to prove useful, the cost of its devices  and packaging must be lower
              than electrical alternatives.    Many research groups have concentrated on
              developing optical interconnect  architectures and optoelectronic devices.
              However, micro optic interconnect  systems and cost reducing fabrication
              methods are not very well developed.  The purpose of this proposal is to
              advance the state of micro optic system  development by implementing optical
              interconnect modules for two important  interconnect applications: 1) backplane
              networks, and 2) multistage  switching systems. Both systems utilize free-space
              micro diffractive optic  components to increase routing functionality over
              short connection  distances while maintaining acceptable alignment tolerances.
              The free-space  optics module for the backplane application provides an
              efficient parallel  interface between vertical cavity surface emitting laser
              (VCSEL) arrays and  a long distance fiber distribution network. This allows the
              backplane to  extend from the intra machine to inter machine levels for
              parallel  processing tasks. The optics modules for multistage switching systems
              are  suitable for interfacing to both VCSEL and CMOS-SEED modulator smart pixel
               array systems. The proposed free-space op tics modules reduce the complexity 
              of earlier optical system designs by eliminating the requirement for 
              polarization optics and increases the optical transfer efficiency. This  should
              increase the bandwidth at which these systems can operate.    In addition to
              designing and fabricating these optical interface modules we  are planning to
              work with Donnelly Corporation to apply their injection  molding techniques to
              replicate the optical components and packaging  mounts. This should further
              reduce the cost of implementing these systems.  A collaboration with the
              University of Colorado is also planned to  incorporate our optics module for
              the multistage switching system in their  intelligent backplane architecture. 
              ***
