Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Prehispanic Change in the Mesitas Community: Documenting
               the Development of a Chiefdom's Central Place in San Agustin, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9632597

Award Number: 9632597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7350               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Victor Gonzalez will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork and
              analysis of materials collected at the site of Mesitas, located in the San
              Agustin region of Columbia. This area is archaeological famous because of the
              ornate prehistoric tombs and monumental stone carvings which it contains.
              However relatively little was known about the societies which produced these
              works. In recent years Dr. Drennan has conducted large scale archaeological
              surveys and excavations around San Agustin and as a result of this work the
              dates of these constructions are now known. Drennan's work has also produced an
              anomalous result. While the tombs and monuments are indicative of a
              hierarchically organized stratified society, preliminary work at living sites
              does not disclose the material culture differences which are the likely
              correlates of such social organization. Instead is indicates a high degree of
              egalitarianism. In his research Mr. Gonzalez will examine this question
              further. Mesitas is the largest site in the San Agustin region and it spans the
              time period both prior to and during the construction period. Work already
              conducted at the site indicates the presence of numerous and widely scattered
              family dwellings. Mr. Gonzalez will carry out a series of shovel probes in a
              systematic program that will encompass the core of the settlement
              concentration. It will document the sizes and internal arrangements of all the
              households spread through an area of some 150 hectares. It will also yield a
              sample of artifacts from each household and thus permit a detailed study of
              inter-household variation. Analysis of the changes in size and spatial
              relations of the households, together with comparison of their artifact
              assemblages will document how relationships between these units changed as the
              community grew larger and as the complex of monumental sculpture and burial
              mounds was created within it.  This research is important for several reasons.
              It will examine an unusual case which does not conform to standard
              archaeological expectations about how social complexity develops. It will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in the training of a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
