Title       : STTR PHASE I: Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth on Plasic for
               Low-Voltage Electroluminescent Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9632164

Award Number: 9632164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley M. Vernon svernon@spirecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spire Corporation
	      One Patriots Park
	      Bedford, MA  017302396    617/275-6000

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***   9632164   Vernon     This Phase I STTR project will develop thin film
              electroluminescent displays on plastic substrates. The zinc gallate (ZnGa204)
              phosphor host will be grown by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)
              at ~425 C on a high-temperature Kapton substrate. Luminescent centers will be
              introduced by ion implantation, and a pulsedlaser anneal of the phosphor
              without damaging the substrate. Phase I will demonstrate that oxide phosphors
              can be deposited by MOCVD at temperatures compatible with Kapton, a plastic
              usable up to ~450 C. Because Kapton, and other polyimide materials, are not
              optically clear, structures having light emission from the top (nonsubstrate)
              side will be developed. Substrate temperature will be controlled by water
              cooling during ion implantation of luminescence centers. Dopant activation and
              crystal enhancement will be by pulsed ultraviolet (UV) laser annealing, so as
              not to degrade the plastic substrate. Development of the proper UV anneal,
              using an excimer laser, will be conducted at the University of Florida. Glass
              substrates will be included as experimental controls. Spire will compare the
              quality of MOCVD-grown ZnGa204 films on plastic and glass substrates by x-ray
              diffraction and electron microscopy, and photoluminescence and
              cathodoluminescence tests will be performed on annealed ZnGa2O4 films. The
              University of Florida will then fabricate and test electroluminescent devices
              on both glass and plastic substrates. Phase II will include optimization of
              phosphor growth, luminescence-center implantation, and laser annealing on
              plastic substrates. Low-temperature MOCVD of high-dielectric ceramic films will
              be developed to achieve lower voltage operation and higher luminescent
              efficiency. Spire's MOCVD oxide reactor is set up to deposit phosphor as well
              as high-dielectric materials, and Spire will also attempt to improve
              electroluminescent efficiency and lower fabrication costs by rapid deposition
              of multilayer dielectric-phosphor-dielectric stacks in the  same reactor.  
              This research will result in the capability to fabricate flat-panel EL displays
              on plastic substrates for rugged, bright, lightweight, handheld information
              terminals to provide better graphical communication to personnel in demanding
              environments.    ***
