Title       : Analytical and Materials Applications of Redox-dependent Hydrogen Bonding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9632149

Award Number: 9632149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane K. Smith dsmith@sciences.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Research Planning Grant project is concerned with the chemistry of   redox
              dependent hydrogen bonding.  As such, there are potential   applications in
              materials chemistry and in analytical chemistry.  The   work will be carried
              out by Dr. Diane K. Smith and her students at San   Diego State University. 
              The project is supported by the Analytical and   Surface Chemistry Program and
              the Special Projects Office in the   Chemistry Division.  Since hydrogen bonds
              have substantial electrostatic   character, the change in charge produced by a
              redox reaction can   substantially affect the strength of a hydrogen bond
              involving an atom at   the charge site  The goals of this research are to
              identify   donor-acceptor pairs which fit this description, and to exploit the 
               findings in a number of ways including new approaches to derivitization  
              reactions on electrode surfaces, the use of electrocrystallization for   self
              assembly on electrode surfaces, and control of the liquid crystal   film
              character of a surface film.  Among the aims of these investigations   are
              sensor development, control of supramolecular structure, and redox   controlled
              filtration systems.   This research seeks ways to control the strength of
              hydrogen bonding by   manipulating the charge on one of the atoms involved in
              the hydrogen   bond.  The PI will use oxidation-reduction reactions to
              accomplish the   change in charge.  By focusing on chemistry at surfaces, it
              may be   possible to develop devices and materials whose properties can be
              rapidly   changed  by simple changes in oxidation state.  This would lead to a 
               number of possible applications in analytical and materials chemistry.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
