Title       : MPWG: The WISER Research Program to Retain First Year Women in Science and
               Engineering Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9632186

Award Number: 9632186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22579              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Wynn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Devon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to conduct a multi-phased  evaluation of an
              experimental,multi-disciplinary coordinated  program (WISER) that pairs
              first-year female students with faculty  in research environments.  First-year
              students are mentored and  given duties and instruction in an on-going research
              project over  two semesters.  The program is united through its common
              objectives  and a common recruitment process that leads to freely chosen, 
              interdisciplinary parings.  Faculty and staff at Penn State will  construct an
              evaluation instrument which will allow them to refine  the program to better
              retain or support three groups of  participants:  WISER interns themselves,
              graduate students who  supervise them, and faculty who have accepted first year
              students  into their research labs and who provide essential training, 
              mentoring and role modeling.    The project will demonstrate how this program
              can be disseminated  to two-year institutions that are crucial in the SEM
              pipeline for  women.  A two-year urban campus on Penn State at Abington-Ogontz 
              will begin a WISER program to test the model.  They will use the 
              faculty-student matching which is a key attribute of this program.  
              Participating at both institutions are faculty and graduate  students from the
              colleges of earth and mineral sciences,  engineering, agricultural sciences and
              health science, a majority  of whom are female.  Based on the results of the
              evaluation, the  proposers will present the WISER program (modified by the
              result of  the evaluation) to 400 affiliated colleges and universities that 
              form the 52 NASA Space Grant Consortia in every state, the District  of
              Columbia, and Puerto Rico.  The final goal is to impact  communities by
              sponsoring WISERs to present descriptions of their  experiences with research
              in the sciences and engineering to the K-  12 students at their former middle
              or high schools.
