Title       : Resonance and Electronically Non-Adiabatic Effects in State-To-State Reaction
               Dynamics Using Massively Parallel Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1997      
File        : a9632816

Award Number: 9632816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aron Kuppermann Aron@Caltech.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               In this project Professor Kuppermann of the California Institute of  
              Technology is being supported by the Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division.  The project involves the   study of
              electronic non-adiabatic effects in state-to-state chemical   reaction
              dynamics.  The primary reaction used is the hydrogen exchange   reaction
              between H + H2 and various isotopic variants.   Other reactions   considered
              include the reaction of F + H2, as well as O + H2.  Various   ways of treating
              and incorporating multiple electronic surfaces and   non-adiabatic effects will
              be investigated.  Considerable use is being   made of massively parallel
              supercomputers.   Special attention is being   placed on the role of the
              `geometric phase` in influencing the reaction   probabilities for such
              reactions.    Elementary bimolecular chemical reactions are the basic steps of
              complex   technologically important chemical systems, such as combustion
              processes,   atmospheric chemistry, chemical lasers, and plasma reactors. 
              These   systems may involve many steps whose reagents are very frequently  
              short-lived and in many instances cannot be isolated experimentally.    
              Studying their cross sections and rates theoretically constitutes in such  
              cases the best, if not the only, available approach.  Such studies also  
              elucidate their molecular level details and lead to a fundamental  
              understanding of how they occur.   The theoretical description of very   simple
              gas-phase chemical reactions such as  those between a hydrogen   atom and a
              hydrogen molecule, and oxygen atom and hydrogen molecule are   being advanced
              in this computational study which makes use of massively   parallel computers. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
