Title       : Chemical Vapor Deposition of Early Transition Metal and Metal Nitride Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9632719

Award Number: 9632719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Hampden-Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Toivo T. Kodas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9632719  Hampden-Smith/Kodas  U. New Mexico  This Small Grant for Exploratory
              Research is made in the Office of Special Projects of the Chemistry Division in
              support of the collaborative research of Drs. Mark Hampden-Smith and Toivo
              Kodas at the University of New Mexico. The goal of the research is the
              development of a general strategy for the Chemical Vapor Deposition of early
              transition metal and metal nitride films for largely microelectronic
              applications.  The generality of the approach will be determined over a range
              of metals, metal alloys  and binary and ternary nitrides which can be formed. A
              range of reductants will be evaluated experimentally, assisted by thermodynamic
              calculations. Films will be deposited under UHV conditions and analyzed by SIMS
              for purity, SEM for thickness and microstructure, XRD for phase identification
              and four point resistivity probe for morphology and purity.    The ability to
              deposit high purity Group IV-VI metals and metal nitrides under mild conditions
              is of great potential significance for microelectronic applications. These
              materials are currently used as adhesion layers and diffusion barriers in
              integrated circuits and are deposited by high temperature methods such as
              sputtering or plasma deposition. A low temperature deposition method will
              provide films of purity and conformality which cannot be achieved by thermal
              methods.
