Title       : RC/Composite Wall - Steel Frame Hybrid Buildings:Connectionsand System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9632496

Award Number: 9632496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bahram M. Shahrooz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Structural systems consisting of reinforced concrete  walls/cores and concrete
              gravity frames are a very common  structural system for moderate rise
              construction in regions  of high seismic risk. Use of reinforced concrete or 
              composite core walls and a steel gravity or moment frame  offers an economical
              alternative to RC wall/core and  concrete frame systems. Limited studies have
              been conducted  to examine bearing force transfer mechanism between steel  and
              concrete. However, fundamental issues related to cyclic  performance of
              composite walls/cores (those with steel  boundary columns) and frame-core
              connections are yet to be  addressed. An integrated experimental and analytical
              program  will be carried out to investigate the performance of  systems with
              walls/cores (conventionally reinforced or with  steel boundary elements) and
              steel gravity or moment frames.  The primary objectives of this project are to:
              (1) conduct  experimental studies of steel beam/floor system-to-core 
              connections, (2) develop analytical modeling techniques for  such connections,
              (3) incorporate these models into widely  used inelastic structural analysis
              computer programs, (4)  provide tools to investigate analytically complete
              building  systems to assess the economics of using hybrid/composite  systems,
              and (5) develop design guidelines. The research  will revolve around a
              prototype structure which will be used  to derive the test specimens, and to
              relate experimental  data to overall structural response. The proposed research
               involves experimental testing of seven 1/3 -scale wall-to  steel boundary
              columns (which may be a small erection column  or a larger one), (2) amount of
              transverse reinforcement  around the connection region, (3) contribution of
              composite  metal decks to the stiffness and strength of the  connections,
              particularly `shear-only` connections, and (4)  the influence of beam axial
              load (tension or compression due  to composite metal deck diaphragm action) on
              the performance  of shear and moment connections. General analytical studies 
              of specimen behavior will be conducted to evaluate the  ability of simplified
              code equations to predict the strength  of the subassemblages. Detailed
              analytical studies will also  be conducted by using simplified mechanical
              models  constructed based on equilibrium and compatibility  requirements, and
              finite element models. These studies will  assist in understanding observed
              specimen behavior, as well  as to study additional specimen configurations not 
              considered in the experimental phase of the research.  Specific recommendations
              for connection design will be  developed.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
