Title       : Modeling Anthropogenic Desiccation of the Aral Sea: A Unique Test of the
               Predictive Capabilities of a Regional Earth System Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9632304

Award Number: 9632304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa C. Sloan lcsloan@earthsci.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1303,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   ATM-9632304  Sloan, Lisa C.  University of California, Santa Cruz 
              Title: Modeling Anthropogenic Desiccation of the Aral Sea: A Unique Test of the
               Predictive Capabilities of a Regional Earth System Model    The utility of
              global and regional earth system models (ESMs) for investigating  causes of
              past climate change, and predicting impacts of future human activities, 
              depends on how accurately changes driven by specific perturbations are
              predicted.   This accuracy is controlled primarily by how well feedbacks are
              simulated.  The  accuracy of ESM-predicted changes is unknown, because previous
              model validation  has been limited to assessing how well present conditions are
              reproduced or  comparing paleoclimate model results with sparse and potentially
              ambiguous proxy  data.  In order to conduct a more thorough evaluation of ESM
              performance, model-  predicted and observed changes resulting from known
              perturbations over historical  timescales will be compared.    In this study,
              anthropogenic desiccation of the Aral Sea will be used as a test  of the
              predictive accuracy of a regional ESM (the RegCM2 and lake model  associated
              with the National Center for Atmospheric Research) that includes an 
              interactively coupled atmosphere and lake. Desiccation of the Aral Sea since 
              1960, resulting from diversion of water for intensive irrigation in the 
              surrounding basin, has been extensive enough to produce a regional climatic 
              response.  Desiccation of this magnitude should also produce a model response. 
               Importantly. meteorological and hydrologic observations that span the interval
               of desiccation are available so the actual changes can be quantified.  The 
              predictive capabilities of the model will be tested by comparing
              model-simulated  changes with observed changes that have occurred between 1960
              and 1995.    The work consists of three components.  First, observations will
              be used to  quantify regional climate and lake hydrologic changes that are
              likely due to Aral  Sea desiccation.  These obser ved changes will be used to
              (i) test model  predictions, (ii) directly measure how the presence of the Aral
              Sea alters  regional climate, (iii) directly measure how lake-level variations
              have impacted  the Aral Sea's hydrology, and (iv) quantify regional-scale human
              impacts.   Second, the interactively coupled Reg CM2-lake model's strengths and
              weaknesses  in predicting changes will be assessed, by comparing simulated and
              observed  desiccation-induced regional climate and lake hydrologic changes.  In
              order to  gain a more thorough understanding of the causes for the coupled
              model's  successes and failures, the predictive accuracy of independent
              (non-interactive)  versions of RegCM2 and the lake model, driven by
              meteorological or hydrologic  observations, will also be evaluated.  Third, the
              regional climate effects  generated by the Aral for seas of different surface
              area, depth and salinity will  be calculated.  This will allow: (i)
              quantification of lake-atmosphere  interactions and feedbacks associated with
              lake-level variations; (ii) prediction  of future climate changes driven by
              further anthropogenic Arals Sea desiccation;  and (iii) assessment of how much
              of the model predicted change between pre-  desiccation and -present and
              present intervals was due to large-scale  meteorological variability. 
              Predictions of future climate changes resulting from  additional desiccation
              will be prepared and evaluated in terms of the model's  strengths and
              weaknesses as determined.  This research is important because it  seeks to test
              how well coupled regional climate lake models predict the impact  of human
              activities on a large shallow terminal lake and how that feedbacks on  the
              regional and global climate.
