Title       : Conference on Biochemical Engineering (Biochemical Engineering X) to be held May
               18-23, 1997 in Kananaskis, Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1997  
File        : a9632996

Award Number: 9632996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-Shou Hu   (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Swartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9632996  Hu  The objective of this conference is to bring together academic, 
              government, and industrial researchers representative of the  comprehensive
              spectrum of research areas that comprise the state  of the art in Biochemical
              Engineering.  This conference will  emphasize efforts to expand the
              intellectual and industrial scope  of biotechnology and to expand the
              contributions which  biochemical engineers can make to such growth.  Three
              opening  lectures will cover important aspects in this field.  These  include:
              (a) the biotechnology industry in the past half century  and what biochemicals
              engineers have contributed to advance this  industry, (b) the academic
              experimental research in the United  States, including food technology, biomass
              and biofuels, cell  culture, protein folding and bioanalytical instrumentation,
              and  (c) mathematical modeling in biochemical engineering, including 
              unstructured models, segregated models, cybernetic models,  metabolic flux
              analysis, and pattern recognition.  Technical  sessions will include: (1)
              bioenergy, chemical and renewable  resources (2) environmental issues and waste
              reduction (3)  metabolic engineering and quantitative physiology (4)
              biochemical  engineering in the medical industry, (5) biomaterials, 
              miniaturization and automation (6) bioprocess development and  manufacturing,
              (7) unit operations and scale up, and (8)  frontiers in bioprocessing.  This
              conference will provide and  important service to the research community in
              this area and  provide the opportunity to potentially impact future research 
              directions in a significant manner.  Information generated at  this conference
              will be useful for planning purposes for the  Biotechnology and Biochemical
              Engineering Programs in the BES  Division.  ***
