Title       : High-Performance Composite Infrastructural Systems UtilizingAdvanced
               Cementitious Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2001    
File        : a9632443

Award Number: 9632443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219648             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neven Krstulovic-Opara   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Zia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shuaib H. Ahmad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Until the present, major progress has been made in the field of high-performance
              materials, while comparatively little has been done in the development of
              advanced infrastructural systems.  The goal of this research project is to
              develop innovative, partially-cast-in-place High-Performance Composite Frame
              Systems (HPCFSs) by selectively using high-performance materials, including:
              (1) continuous fiber-mat High Performance Fiber Reinforced Concretes (HPFRCs)
              called Slurry Infiltrated Mat Concrete (SIMCON), (2) discontinuous fiber HPFRCs
              called slurry Infiltrated Fiber Concrete (SIFCON), and (3) High Strength -
              Lightweight Aggregate Fiber Reinforced Concrete (HS-LWA FRC).  The  research
              will focus on the development of high-performance composite (A) column members,
              (B) beam members, and (C) beam-column sub-assemblages consisting of both
              experimental and analytical components.  Behavior under (a) service loads and
              (b) service loads combined with laterally applied reversed-cyclic loading will
              be investigated.  Partially cast-in-place HPCFS will be created by developing
              novel, stay-in-place formwork elements made by encasing steel members (e.g.,
              light steel shapes and/or steel tubes) into HPFRCs.  The stay-in-place formwork
              will also act as surface reinforcement, thus replacing conventional reinforcing
              bars.  The `core` of the member will be cast-in-place using HS-LWA FRC.  These
              developments are expected to lead to:  (1) simpler, faster and more
              cost-effective construction, (2) improved structural performance, (3) reduction
              in element size and weight leading to the reduction in dead load, earthquake
              induced loading and an increase in usable floor space, and (4) improved
              durability of the structure.  This is a project supported under the second-year
              program of research initiative on `Composite and Hybrid Structures`, NSF
              94-154.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
