Title       : Seismic Design and Behavior of Composite RCS Frames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9632502

Award Number: 9632502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory G. Deierlein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this research is to develop and synthesize information
              on the design, construction and inelastic behavior of composite frame buildings
              that will lead to their broader acceptance and utilization in the U.S.,
              particularly in seismic regions.  In spite of some notable applications for
              tall buildings, wider use of composite RCS frame construction is hindered by
              the lack of comprehensive design criteria and construction methodologies. 
              Widespread use of composite RCS frames in the U.S. will require development of
              construction schemes that may differ from those previously used for high-rise
              construction.  The research has three interrelated composites:    Prototype
              Composite System Designs:  Several prototype buildings will be designed using
              available information (connection test data and design guidelines) from the US
              and Japan.  The goal of this exercise will be to develop innovative designs
              using precast  and/or prefabricated composite subassemblies that facilitate
              construction and provide required toughness and difficulty for seismic
              applications.  Inelastic Seismic Behavior and Response:  The seismic behavior
              of the prototype building designs will be evaluated and compared to
              conventional steel and reinforced concrete systems through detailed inelastic
              static and transient structural analyses.  These studies will include
              parametric studies of building response to assess and improve seismic design
              criteria in existing specifications for earthquake response modification
              factors, inelastic drift and stability limits, ductility demands, etc.  Design
              Criteria for Composite Frames and Connections:  A critical review of existing
              design provisions in the U.S. and Japan will be conducted to see where
              improvements can be made based on the latest research data related to composite
              RCS frames and connections.  This will include development of a state-of-the
              art report to summarize extensive test data, design criteria, and construction
              practice for RCS frames in Japan, much of which is only written in Japanese and
              is currently inaccessible to U.S. engineers and researchers.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
