Title       : U.S. GLOBEC: Broad-Scale Patterns of the Distribution of Zooplankton and Nekton
               in Relation to Micro- to Coarse-Scale Physical Structure in the Georges Bank
               Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9632319

Award Number: 9632319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Wiebe pwiebe@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy K. Stanton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                As part of the U.S. GLOBEC NW Atlantic/Georges Bank study, Dr. Wiebe and
              collaborators will determine the broad-scale distribution of zooplankton and
              nekton populations on Georges Bank using a towed body equipped with multiple
              frequency acoustical, bio-optical, and physical sensor systems.  The  primary
              focus is on making high-resolution measurements of volume backscattering and
              target strength of plankton and nekton throughout the Georges Bank region,
              complemented with optical and physical data, to provide a multi-dimensional
              base of estimates of the spatial distribution of biomass and size frequency of
              acoustical targets which span the size range of the target species (cod,
              haddock, Calanus, and Pseudocalanus) and their predators.  The multi-frequency,
              multi-beam system will provide high spatial resolution estimates of volume
              backscattering and target strength.  The bio-optical system will provide high
              resolution video images of the plankton which will be used to determine the
              relative composition and size distribution of the taxa along the tracklines in
              the immediate vicinity of the towed body.  These data together with theoretical
              models will be used to interpret the acoustical data in terms of meaningful
              biological properties, such as biomass and size distribution.  The physical
              sensors will provide the information about fine to coarse-scale physical
              structure of the Bank environment and also the micro-structure relevant to
              predator-prey interactions. The acoustic measurements can be directly related
              to the data generated by the optical and net collections of plankton and
              nekton.  The acoustical spatial maps and time-series will also provide
              essential linkage between the physical oceanographic conditions on the Bank and
              the biological distributions of the species as determined from the net
              collections at the stations distributed throughout the Georges Bank region.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
