Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Estimation in Mixture Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9632745

Award Number: 9632745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Olga Cordero-Brana   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Jernigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Mixtures distributions have been used extensively as models in  situations
              where data are viewed as arising from a population  that is comprised of
              several subpopulations mixed in varying  proportions.  In this context, model
              identification can be  thought of as obtaining estimates for the unknown
              parameters  which in the most general situation will include the number of 
              components, $k$, the mixing proportions and the parameters from  the component
              distributions.    The purpose of the proposed grant is to enable the Principal 
              Investigator to extend her previous work on minimum distance  estimation for
              mixture models and to become more familiar with  the existing research on model
              selection in the context of  mixture models.    The research will focus on two
              areas. First, it will extend the  work of the PI on minimum Hellinger distance
              estimation  for univariate mixture models to the multivariate case. This will 
              involve investigating and deriving an appropriate multivariate  density
              estimator for mixture models as well as considering the  computational aspects
              of it.  The advantage of this method is  that it produces estimates that are
              both efficient and robust to  the presence of data contamination unlike maximum
              likelihood  methods.    Second, the PI will consider the case when the number
              of  components is unknown.  In this case one can obtain estimates for  the
              other parameters for a reasonable range of $k$'s and then  choose from among
              those models using a model selection criterion.  Investigation of the use of
              existing criteria in this situation  as well as application of a new criterion
              using Bayesian  Restoration Minimization method for computing posterior 
              distributions will be considered.
