Title       : Use of Mutants to Study Biogenesis and Functions of the Reaction Center Proteins
               of Photosystem I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9632162

Award Number: 9632162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Himadri B. Pakrasi pakrasi@biology2.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9632162  Pakrasi  This proposal is focused on the study of the multisubunit
              protein complex Photosystem I (PSI). Localized in the thylakoid membranes of
              cyanobacteria, algae and plants, PSI is an integral component of the
              photosynthetic electron transport chain, and mediates transmembrane electron
              transfer from plastocyanin or cytochrome c6 to low potential acceptors such as
              ferredoxin. PSI is a large pigment-protein with eleven polypeptide components.
              In addition, cofactors such as quinones, iron sulfur centers, carotenoids and
              nearly 100 chlorophylls are present in this protein complex. The PSI complex
              from cyanobacteria has been crystallized and its structure is currently known
              at a resolution of 4.5 A. The long range goal of this project is to understand,
              in molecular terms, the biogenesis and function of PSI. The experimental
              organism is Synechocystis 6803, a unicellular, naturally transformable
              cyanobacterium, that offers a versatile genetic system to study this protein
              complex. The PI's lab has recently identified BtpA, a novel protein in
              Synechocystis 6803, that is not a structural component of PSI, but regulates
              the assembly of its catalytically active core complex. The specific aims of
              this project are: (1) To determine the cellular location of the BtpA protein.
              (2) To elucidate the function of BtpA by isolating and analyzing suppressor
              mutants that restore the assembly of the PSI core complex in btpA mutants. (3)
              To investigate whether BtpA is a membrane-bound molecular chaperone. (4) To
              examine whether BtpA acts as a translational activator protein. (5) To
              elucidate the basis for temperature sensitivity of a BtpA mutant in the
              assembly of PSI.  %%%  By harvesting solar radiation, the PSI complex provides
              half of the energy for biomass production in our world. Most, if not all, of
              the structural proteins as well as the redox components of PSI have been
              identified. The current challenge is to understand the mechanisms that control
              the stoichiometric assembly and function of this membra ne protein complex.
              During this project, tools of genetics, biochemistry and biophysics will be
              combined to pursue this challenge. Understanding the biogenesis and function of
              this supramolecular complex will also make important contributions to the
              general knowledge about such large protein complexes in other biological
              membranes.  ***
