Title       : (ESH) Collaborative Research: Late Quaternary Climatic and Glacial History of
               Africa from Cosmogenic Surface Exposure Dating of Glacial and Lake Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a9632367

Award Number: 9632367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry W. Swanson tswanson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9632367  Swanson    Reconstruction of the timing and extent of past glaciers
              and closed-basin lakes is critical for understanding regional and global
              climatic changes during the Quaternary.  Such data are critically needed in the
              tropics, and equatorial Africa in particular, because of considerable
              discrepancy between paleoclimates deduced from terrestrial records and those
              calculated using general circulation models.  Development of high quality
              terrestrial paleoclimatic data bases is one of the primary research needs in
              paleoclimatology.  The proposed research contributes to fulfilling these needs
              by providing accurately dated, quantitative climatic proxy data for
              climatically sensitive locations in the equatorial and subequatorial Africa.   
              Glacial deposits have been recognized and mapped in alpine regions of
              subtropical northwestern (the High Atlas) and tropical east-central Africa
              (Kenya and Kilimanjaro, among others).  At these locations, multiple moraine
              systems record past glacier extent and provide an important proxy of previous
              climatic fluctuations.  Very few of these landforms have been numerically dated
              because of lack of datable material associated with glacial deposits. 
              Consequently, local chronologies have been based mainly on stratigraphic
              relationships between landforms and comparative relative weathering studies.   
              We propose to use cosmogenic isotope dating methods (36Cl,10Be,      26Al,14C,
              21Ne and 3He) to establish chronology of glaciations in Africa for the past
              100,000 years or more.  We also plan to use cosmogenic nuclides to date
              paleolake shorelines from accessible locations where strand lines are well
              preserved and have appropriate surfaces to date.  High resolution glacial and
              lake-level chronologies from these sensitive locations should provide important
              data relevant to understanding the factors controlling late Quaternary climates
              in equatorial and subtropical regions of Africa.    The final goal of the
              proposed project is to synthesize the geochronological  information obtained
              from the above sources into a coherent paleoclimatic record and to place this
              regional reconstruction in the context of global climate change in the late
              Quaternary.  Our geological and paleoclimatic data collected in Africa will
              contribute to the construction of the global database of Pleistocene
              glaciations based on cosmogenic dating terrestrial deposits.  The results will
              be valuable for researchers in the areas of Quaternary geology, geomorphology,
              glaciology, geochemistry, paleoclimatology, atmospheric sciences and hydrology.
                    ??
