Title       : Mechatronic Design and Control of Media Handling Mechanisms for Printing Engines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9632828

Award Number: 9632828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masayoshi Tomizuka tomizuka@euler.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Horowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this GOALI research project is to study  fundamental principles
              for using advanced sensor, actuation  and decision making methodologies in the
              design of media  handling system for the next generation of copiers and 
              printers. Many problems in copiers and printers are due to  malfunctions in the
              media handling system. These include  paper jams, machine shut downs due to
              impending paper jams  (soft shutdown), smearing, damage to original documents,
              and  poor compilation. Current media handling systems are based  upon open-loop
              control systems and rely on the robustness of  the system's mechanical design.
              The use of sensors is  limited to the detection of failures and are only used
              to  trigger a machine shutdown. This joint research project  between the
              industry (Xerox) and the university (U C  Berkeley) addresses the issues
              concerned with media handling  in printers and copiers. The research utilizes
              and makes  advances in: mechatronics, discrete event and hybrid dynamic 
              systems, identification and adaptive control, intelligent  and reconfigurable
              control systems, fault detection and  failure recovery, and integrated
              mechanical design and  control. The result from this research will be deployed
              in  future copiers and printers. The elimination of jams in  media handling
              system will improve productivity by reducing  time lost in production. The
              current yearly lost production  due to time lost is valued at $ 0. 7 Billion.
              The ability to  handle paper of very wide lattitude serves to reduce cost of 
              paper manufacturing and encourages the use of the more  economical recycled
              paper. Finally, this research is of  critical importance for American
              industries to maintain a  position of technical leadership in the extreme
              competitive  photocopier and printer markets.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
