Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Geometry, Analysis and Topology: Research,
               Technology, Industry and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1996    
File        : a9632028

Award Number: 9632028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Stiller stiller@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon T. Pitts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold P. Boas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emil J. Straube  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rekha R. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Huai-Dong Cao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paulo Lima-Filho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The group in Geometry, Analysis, and Topology (GAT) at Texas A&M University is
              an interdisciplinary group of mathematical researchers in the areas of
              Algebraic Geometry, Algebraic Topology, Differential Geometry, Geometric
              Analysis, and Several Complex Variables.  In addition to basic research, this
              group is engaged in the development of innovative programs linking traditional
              areas in pure mathematics to cross-disciplinary research, industry, technology,
              and education. The Group Infrastructure Grant (GIG) will provide the funding to
              build a research infrastructure that will nurture both fundamental mathematical
              research and its application in cross-disciplinary science and engineering, in
              industrial mathematics, and in education and training.  The group's current and
              recent interdisciplinary initiatives include applications in chemistry,
              robotics, visualization, geometric modeling, computational geometry, operations
              research, computer-aided design, symbolic computation, image understanding,
              discrete optimization, integer programming, database indexing, and scientific
              computation.  In addition, a successful industrial mathematics program is being
              developed through joint research and cooperative ventures.  Educational and
              training initiatives are being developed utilizing the World Wide Web,
              industrial and cross-disciplinary co-ops, mathematical technology courses (TeX,
              Maple/Mathematica, and WWW) aimed at secondary school instructors, Maple
              supported undergraduate instruction, and a vigorous program of scientific
              seminars and conferences.   All of these efforts will be strengthened under the
              Group Infrastructure Grant, affording the GAT group the opportunity to enhance
              its scientific programs and expand its outreach activities.
