Title       : Kinetics and Mechanisms: Oxidation Mechanisms of Some Selected Sulfur Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9632592

Award Number: 9632592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuben H. Simoyi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Reuben Simoyi, Department of Chemistry, West Virginia University, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division for studies of the oxidation mechanisms of sulfur  
              compounds. Dr. Simoyi will study the kinetics and mechanisms of oxidation   of
              selected sulfur compounds including thioureas, sulfinic acids,   sulfonic
              acids, sulfide, and dimethyl sulfide.  Oxidation of biologically   relevant
              sulfur containing compounds including taurine, cysteine,   isethionic acid,
              methionine and glutathione will also be investigated.    The ultimate goal is a
              more complete description of chemical oscillators   involving sulfur compounds,
              and an understanding of the pattern formation   and symmetry-breaking
              bifurcations of these compounds.  Techniques such   as stopped and continuous
              flow methods, relaxation spectra, turbidimetry,   EPR and NMR will be utilized.
              These systems are relevant to an   understanding of sulfur abatement procedures
              in environmental pollution,   and the amino acid studies may provide
              fundamental insights into their   physiological importance.  Sulfur is a unique
              element in the periodic table because it can occur in   widely varying
              oxidation states (from -2 to +6), and it is thus quite   reactive with metals,
              nonmetals and with organic compounds. These   characteristics contribute to the
              environmental concerns associated with   oxides of sulfur, which themselves are
              major atmospheric pollutants which   can cause acid rain.  The detailed
              reactivity of these and other sulfur   compounds, especially those with
              environmental and biological   significance, is not well understood.  This
              project will help to   elucidate the unusual reactivity patterns observed for
              these sulfur   compounds, and will thus contribute to a broader understanding
              of their   role in these important areas.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
