Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center: Polymersat Engineered
               Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2001   
File        : a9632525

Award Number: 9632525
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3039188            (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam Rafailovich miriam.rafailovich@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9177,9178,9181,9251,AMPP,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632525  Rafailovich  This Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
              (MRSEC) at  the University of New York at Stony Brook supports research in  the
              area of polymer thin films at engineered interfaces. The  MRSEC is a
              collaborative activity between researchers at a number  of institutions in the
              New York metropolitan area, including  Brookhaven National Laboratory,
              Polytechnic University, Queens  College, Lehman College, and two industrial
              research and  development centers.  The research is carried out in one 
              interdisciplinary research group.  The focus of the Center is the  design of
              polymer thin film properties through precise control of  interfacial structure.
               A central goal of the Center is to  address technological problems related to
              polymer thin films, and  to develop cutting-edge enabling technologies that
              take existing  polymeric systems and markedly improve their properties. The 
              MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of  shared
              experimental facilities for materials research.  It  provides seed funding for
              exploratory  research  and emerging  areas, and fosters research participation
              by undergraduates. The  MRSEC has strong industrial links and an educational
              outreach  program from the pre-college to the graduate level. The Center 
              currently  supports 12 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral  research
              associates, 10 graduate students, and 6 undergraduates.  The MRSEC is directed
              by Professor Miriam Rafailovich.  %%%  This Materials Research Science and
              Engineering Center (MRSEC) at  the University of New York at Stony Brook
              supports research in  the area of polymer thin films at engineered interfaces.
              The  MRSEC is a collaborative activity between researchers at a number  of
              institutions in the New York metropolitan area, including  Brookhaven National
              Laboratory, Polytechnic University, Queens  College, Lehman College, and two
              industrial research and  development centers.  The research is carried out in
              one  interdisciplinary research group.  The focus of t he Center is the  design
              of polymer thin film properties through precise control of  interfacial
              structure.  A central goal of the Center is to  address technological problems
              related to polymer thin films, and  to develop cutting-edge enabling
              technologies that take existing  polymeric systems and markedly improve their
              properties. The  MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of 
              shared experimental facilities for materials research.  It  provides seed
              funding for exploratory  research  and emerging  areas, and fosters research
              participation by undergraduates. The  MRSEC has strong industrial links and an
              educational outreach  program from the pre-college to the graduate level. The
              Center  currently  supports 12 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral  research
              associates, 10 graduate students, and 6 undergraduates.  The MRSEC is directed
              by Professor Miriam Rafailovich.  ***
