Title       : MPWG: Apprenticeship Program for Women in Science as Applied to Public Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9632086

Award Number: 9632086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94737              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary W. Gray mgray@american.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nina M. Roscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Little has been done to learn why many bright, well-prepared young women do not
              see the fields  as people-oriented.  Their vision of a scientist is as an
              isolated and remote researcher, dealing  with concepts rather than with people.
                 This project is designed to alter this narrow view of science and
              mathematics.  The goal is to  present these areas, not only as exciting,
              fundamental research that alters the way in which we  see the world, but as
              essential knowledge on which to base policy decisions affecting the way we 
              live.  To present scientists as doing interdisciplinary research that has
              easily identified policy  impact, and to show that they do not work in
              isolation, will help, recast the image of science and  attract more women to
              its disciplines.    The format of the program includes a seminar course on
              topics in science that are fundamental to  certain policy areas (e.g., the
              environment, law, education, criminal justice, informatics.  It will  be
              followed by a two-months summer research apprenticeship, working with scientist
              who are  focusing on policy areas, and with those engaged in the formulation of
              science policy-on campus  and in government agencies an nonprofit research
              institutes in the Washington area.  Participants   would be recruited primarily
              from first year women students who have taken Advanced  Placement calculus in
              high school  but who have not indicated that they intend to major in 
              mathematics or science.
