Title       : Seismic Behavior and Design of High Performance Concrete- Filled Steel Tube
               Columns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9632911

Award Number: 9632911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209988             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Ricles jmr5@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Le-Wu Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Sause  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              One efficient means of composite construction is that which utilizes high
              performance concrete filled steel tube (CFT) columns. The filling of the tube
              increases the stiffness and strength and overcomes potential local instability
              of high strength steel tube. The tube confines the high strength concrete,
              increasing its ductility. The combined system has the attributes of high
              performance structural steel (speed of construction, strength, long-span
              capability, lightweight) and high performance concrete (stiffness, damping,
              economy), while using the tube as formwork. It is imperative in seismic
              resistant design that the members be properly  proportioned and the structural
              system be well balanced. Currently there is a lack of knowledge of the seismic
              behavior of CFT columns. Rational guidelines for the seismic design of CFT
              composite construction are needed particularly when high performance concrete
              and high performance steel are used. This research focuses on basic behavior of
              CFT members with application to moment resisting and braced frames. The
              objectives are to: (1) study the load-deformation response of non-circular CFT
              columns  composed of high strength concrete and steel under combined gravity
              and lateral seismic loading; (2) develop and calibrate a analytical models and
              computational methods based on experimental results for predicting the response
              of CFT columns under  seismic loading conditions; and (3) develop design
              guidelines and recommendations for CFT columns constructed of high strength
              materials. The investigator will involve pursuing analytical and large-scale
              experimental investigations. Short CFT columns will be first studied, in which
              the effects of various design parameters on a member's  force-deformation and
              moment-curvature-thrust relationship will be investigated. The results from the
              experimental studies will be utilizes to develop and calibrate various
              analytical models for predicting the response of a CFT to combined axial and
              flexural loading. These models will include design-oriented strength prediction
              equations and fiber-based formulations for capacity and overall
              force-deformation response prediction. The second part of the project will
              investigate the behavior of long CFT columns subjected to combined axial and
              lateral cyclic loading, considering the effects of the design parameters. Using
              the models a parametric study will be conducted to expand the experimental data
              base. The results will be used to formulate the design guidelines. The
              knowledge acquired and design guidelines developed will lead to the practical
              and reliable design of this form of construction as well as develop the use of
              high strength concrete and steel materials in seismic resistant design. This
              project also involves close collaboration with Japanese and Germany
              Universities which will enhance the quality of research. This is a project
              supported under the second-year program of NSF initiative
              `U.S.-Japan-Cooperative Research on Composite and Hybrid Structures,` NSF
              94-154.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
