Title       : The Effects of Gender Stratification Among Adults on Medical Treatment Choices
               for Boys and Girls, A Case Study on Minia, Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9632340

Award Number: 9632340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Hill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn M. Yount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constance A. Nathanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the effects of gender stratification in Egypt upon medical
              treatment of boys and girls.  Mortality of children in Egypt has declined
              rapidly in recent years, but a female disadvantage in post-neonatal and early
              childhood mortality persists, probably the result of the differential amount
              and type of medical care that boys and girls receive.  Previous research has
              identified women's status as an important determinant of demographic outcomes
              and gender differentials in medical treatment; however, the conceptualization
              and measurement of women's status vary widely.  This study adapts a bargaining
              approach to explain the probability that boys and girls receive medical
              treatment at the onset of an illness episode.  Bargaining theory, based on the
              assumption that men and women within a household have different gender
              preferences, posits that the inability of adult women to implement their
              preferences prevents sick daughters from receiving equitable medical treatment.
              Of interest in this study are the intra-household and community-level aspects
              of gender stratification that determine a woman's realized autonomy (actual
              mobility and decision-making authority), gender preferences (long-term and
              short-term costs and benefits of sons and daughters), and beliefs regarding the
              health risks of boys and girls. The objectives of this study are, therefore: 
              1) to identify the extent to which a gender bias in the allocation of medical
              care to boys and girls exists, 2) to measure exogenous aspects of gender
              stratification among adults within the household and community, 3) to examine
              the ways in which gender stratification among adults influences treatment
              choices for sick boys and girls, and 4) to assess the degree to which child
              survival interventions can offset unequal allocations of medical care to boys
              and girls.     Data sources will include: 1) in-depth interviews and case
              histories of child illness episodes collected over seven months from men and
              women in a random sample of two rural vi llages and two urban neighborhoods in
              Minia, Egypt, 2) a population-based survey, and 3) community-level data sources
              such as area maps of the distribution of health facilities.  Indices of women's
              autonomy, gender preferences, and health beliefs will be developed from the
              responses to survey questions.  Ordinary least squares regression will be used
              to assess the effects of the exogenous intra-household and community-level
              indicators on the intermediate indices.  Logit regression based on maximum
              likelihood will be used to assess the effects of service availability on
              treatment choices of parents in the presence of the other determinants.  The
              potential endogeneity of the intermediate dimensions of women's autonomy,
              gender preferences, and health beliefs will be tested.  Evidence of endogeneity
              will require the use of instrumental variables and two stage regression to
              derive unbiased estimates of coefficients in the final model.  Because
              treatment outcomes of children in the same household and community are likely
              to be correlated, generalized estimation techniques will be used to correct for
              correlated errors and group-wise heteroskedasticity.  The direct and indirect
              effects of selected underlying individual-level and community-level variables
              on the outcome will be assessed using path analysis.     Clarification of the
              mechanisms by which gender inequality is transferred from one generation to the
              next will enhance the development of policies that benefit adult women and
              young girls directly.  The results of this study will also clarify the degree
              to which public health interventions can be tailored to diminish persistent
              inequalities in health care provision to children.
