Title       : Molecular Structure and Dynamics Beyond the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9632862

Award Number: 9632862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124462             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Grant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program is supporting Edward R. Grant   of
              Purdue University to continue his research on state-to-state   photoionization
              and the dynamics of intramolecular relaxation in highly   excited states of
              small molecules.  Systems to be studied include a set   of fundamentally
              important oxy-hydrocarbon and metal-centered free   radicals, relevant as
              intermediates in air pollution, combustion and   electronic materials
              processing.  Multiresonant excitation techniques   will be used to make
              high-resolution spectroscopic measurements of   resonant lineshapes and
              positions for final states coupled to ionization   and dissociation continua. 
              These observations will lay an experimental   foundation for collaborative
              theoretical work, designed to achieve a   fundamental understanding of the
              interaction between core-vibrational and   extravalent-electronic degrees of
              freedom, and to determine the source of   mode selectivity in the vibrational
              autoionization of polyatomic   molecules.  Photoselection and specialized
              detection methods will also be   used to study rovibrational structure in the
              electronic ground states of   cations and precursor free-radicals: 
              zero-kinetic-energy threshold   photoionization measurements will establish
              vibrational-rotational level   spectra of closed-shell oxy-hydrocarbon cations,
              characterizing potential   energy surfaces and anharmonic coupling from
              zero-points to thresholds   for intramolecular proton transfer.  Similar
              measurements on Group III   hydride cations will follow progressions of
              vibrational resonances up to   and beyond thresholds for diatomic hydrogen
              elimination.    Vibration-rotation spectra obtained by state-to-state
              photoionization -   bleaching methods will address outstanding issues of
              structure and   symmetry in free-radical ground states.    The detailed
              dynamics of energy transfer between electronic and   internuclear degrees of
              freedom has significant practical consequences.    In nature, for example,
              photosynthesis begins with selective   intramolecular energy migration,
              followed by charge separation and   electron transfer.  In an extension of his
              previous research effort,   Grant will now include studies on main-group free
              radical systems, chosen   for their relevance to thermochemical issues in
              combustion, atmospheric   chemistry and electronic materials processing.    As
              an example, the   group III radical hydrides mentioned above are important
              intermediates in   the metallization and p-doping of silicon devices by
              chemical vapor   deposition.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
