Title       : Collaborative Research: Dimethylsulfide Metabolism in Relation to Carbon Cycling
               Pathways in Sphagnum-Dominated Wetlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1998      
File        : a9632421

Award Number: 9632421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137218             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald P. Kiene Rkiene@disl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632421  Kiene  Northern Sphagnum-dominated wetlands are complex, nutrient-poor
              ecosystems that are major sources of atmospheric methane and store tremendous
              quantities of organic carbon. These systems can emit unusually large amounts of
              dimethylsulfide (DMS) into the atmosphere, and this efflux is often greater
              than emissions from marine habitats that contain much more sulfur. Ongoing
              studies revealed that rapid fluxes of DMS occur in oligotrophic areas of
              wetlands rather that in more nutrient-rich sites. This peculiarity may to be
              due to the fact that the methanogenic demethylation of DMS does not occur in
              oligotrophic peats, while it does in minerotrophic ones and in neutral lake
              sediment. The present study will investigate the production, consumption and
              emission of DMS in wetlands of varying trophic status to elucidate the role of
              terminal decomposi~ processes in controlling DMS release.  Several hypotheses
              will be tested:   1) DMS emissions are most rapid in oligotrophic
              (ombrotrophic) regions of wetlands, and this phenomenon is ubiquitous   2) DMS
              emissions (and accumulation) are faster in oligotrophic regions because DMS is
              not decomposed by methanogenic bacteria  3) Chemical conditions (i.e., pH,
              mineral content) are responsible for the lack of DMS consumption in
              oligotrophic peats   4) Methylotrophic methanogens are sparse in oligotrophic
              areas   5) Methylated sulfides are produced in all anoxic freshwater systems 
              The project will combine (1) field experiments measuring emissions of reduced
              gases and distribution of pertinent chemical species along trophic gradients
              within a wetland, and in separate wetlands of different trophic status; (2)
              field manipulations in which wetland plots will be amended with selected
              nutrients and/or trace elements; (3) laboratory experiments to investigate
              pathways of organic matter transformations and relationships with trace gas
              production; (4) investigations of the relative distribution and abundance of
              selected microorganisms using molecular biotechno logy techniques.  The results
              will elucidate important aspects of bacterial metabolic pathways for the
              production and consumption of methylated S compounds in wetlands, and
              freshwaters in general. Since DMS transformations are conducted primarily by
              microorganisms situated at the important terminal end of decomposition, these
              data will provide insights into what controls decomposition in sites that tend
              to accumulate large quantities of organic matter, and how methanogenesis,
              acetogenesis, anaerobic metabolism, and methylation and demethylation activity
              vary in response to changes in trophic status. The results will have broad
              applicability to freshwater ecosystems in general.
