Title       : Education for Global Change: Latin American Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1997     
File        : a9632717

Award Number: 9632717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Stoltman joseph.stoltman@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632717  Stoltman  In order to extend the International Scientific Union's
              (ICSU)  Education in Global Change Project into Latin America, this  workshop
              has been proposed to bring together scientists from Latin  America to identify
              topics or sections of "Science for  understanding tomorrow's world:  Global
              Change;" (student  activities and teachers' guide for courses in biology,
              chemistry,  earth sciences, physics and general studies) that may be redesigned
               into a Latin American context.  Using data and research reports  from their
              regions, participants of this workshop, two from each  Inter-American Institute
              for Global Change Research (IAI) member  country, and IAI non-member countries
              (funded from other sources),  will develop local context extensions of
              activities in "Global  Change."    The workshop will provide participants with
              necessary background  information about "Global Change;" will devote three days
              to  supplement units in Global Change for use by teaches/students of  Latin
              America; and will conclude with a day to finalize the  supplements to the Latin
              American version of "Global Change."  This workshop will contribute to ICSU's
              Education in Global Change  Project by providing a final Spanish language
              version of "Global  Change" which will include a series of vignettes that will
              have  been developed during the workshop.  %%%  This workshop will provide an
              excellent opportunity for educators  in Latin America to convene in order to
              evaluate their global  change educational resources needs and to incorporate
              these needs  into a version of "Global Change," specifically for Latin America.
                Additionally, this workshop contributes to the IAI scientific goal  of
              increasing capacity building in the Americas.  This workshop is  being
              co-cponsored ICSU, Pro-Clim, the Organization for American  States (OAS), and
              the United States National Science Foundation  (NSF) on behalf of IAI.  The IAI
              is a U.S. initiative to stimulate  cooperative research on global change issues
              among the scientific   institutions of the Americas.  The National Science
              Foundation is  the U.S. Government agency designated by the White House to
              carry  out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
