Title       : Wave Propagation, Localization and Imaging in Random Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9632789

Award Number: 9632789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Azriel Z. Genack genack@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander A. Lisyansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9632789 
              Genack    This  condensed  matter physics project involves theoretical  and 
              complementary  microwave  and  optical  investigations  of   wave  propagation 
              in random structures. The essentials  of  mesoscopic  physics   are   explored 
              by  exploiting  the   analogy   between  electromagnetic    propagation   and  
              electronic    conductance.  Statistical distributions and correlations in the
              local field and  in  global quantities such as the transmission and conductance
              in  translucent, diffusing and localizing samples will be studied and 
              characterized.  The  dimensionless  conductance  is  changed   by  varying the
              scattering medium and its length and diameter and  by  tuning  through  the
              mobility edge in periodic metallic  networks  filled   with random mixture of
              scatterers. Universal aspects  of  wave  dynamic are revealed in the statistics
              of the phase of  the  transmitted field. The possibilities of acousto-optic
              imaging use  diffuse  light  and  the nature and  applications  of  lasing  in 
              random systems will be investigates.  %%%  Classical  wave propagation is the
              means by which  we  probe  our  environment  and  communicate  with  one 
              another.  The  proposal  explores   the  fundamental  statistic  of  light  and
               microwave  propagation in collections of samples with statiscally equivalent 
              disorder. It will establish the connection between the statistics  of  the
              local fields and the total transmitt3ed radiation and the  optic  conductance.
              This will improve our understanding  of  wave  propagation   and  of  giant 
              fluctuation  in  transmission   and  conductance  which occur in the transition
              from  a  situation  in  which waves can propagate to one in which transport is
              inhibited.  It is thus a useful model of electronic transport in microcircuit 
              which  are  of  increasing importance in modern electronics.  The 
              possibilities of acousto-optic imaging using diffuse light  as  a  noninvasive 
              mammography   modality  will  be  investigated.   The  characteristics and
              applications of lasing in random systems will  also be explored.  ***
