Title       : Dynamics of a Native Iris-Herbivore Association: Effects of Salinity, Herbivory,
               and Genetic Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9632302

Award Number: 9632302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael R. Willig                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl H. Hasenstein hasenstein@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Mopper  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the interaction between different types of plant
              stress in a population of native iris growing under a range of salinity
              conditions and herbivory.  Both salinity and herbivory can be important sources
              of plant stress, and both can induce the production of abscisic acid (ABA) and
              jasmonic acid (JA).  Variation in the production of  these hormones among
              individual plants appears to be genetically influenced.  The magnitude of the
              stress induction response can directly affect plant growth and reproduction as
              well as resistance to herbivore attack.  This project combines field
              experiments with laboratory analyses to 1) examine the relationship between
              phytohormone induction and iris and herbivore performance, 2) quantify gene
              flow and genetic structure in the iris and herbivore populations, and 3)
              determine if iris and iris herbivores are locally adapted to their
              microenvironment.    Both ABA and JA are growth regulators that influence plant
              tolerance to environmental and herbivore-mediated stress.  Thus the results of
              this project have important economic implications. This study will be the first
              to determine the concentrations and fluctuations of stress-induced ABA and JA
              in a natural plant population, and can therefore advance our general
              understanding of the role played by phytohormones in plant stress tolerance. 
              Plant resistance to pests and pathogens is both genetically and environmentally
              based.  By quantifying salinity stress and determining the genetic structure of
              the plant and herbivore populations, this study can determine what plant
              genotypes are associated with tolerance and susceptibility to salinity and
              herbivory stress, as well as the herbivore genotypes associated with virulence.
               This information can then be applied to managed systems in which stress
              tolerance is an important component.
