Title       : Cell Division in a Filamentous, Sporulating Bacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9632468

Award Number: 9632468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen E. Kendrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kendrick  9632468  Cell division is an essential property of all organisms.  To
              reproduce, each cell must divide to generate viable daughter cells.  Bacterial
              cell division is a logical system to use to study fundamental molecular events
              involved in the temporal and spatial regulation of cellular reproductive
              mechanisms.  The recent discovery of bacterial counterparts of eucaryotic cell
              cycle machinery points to the immense value of the analysis of bacterial cell
              division as a paradigm of cell cycle events in higher organisms.  To deposit
              new peptidoglycan at the correct time in the cell cycle and at the correct
              location, a unicellular bacterium must be able to monitor the completion of DNA
              replication and the segregation of the newly replicated DNA, locate the center
              of the cell, and initiate the centripetal growth of new cell wall and
              cytoplasmic membrane.  Because binary fission is the only means by which most
              bacteria reproduce, many of the genes required for cell division are essential
              and thus cannot be readily dissected by mutation analysis.  Unlike other
              bacteria, Streptomyces is unique in its growth as branched, filamentous,
              multinucleoidal cells that, in response to nutrient limitation, undergo
              multiple septation events to form chains of uninucleoidal spores.  As a
              reproductive process, sporulation of streptomycetes offers an exceptional
              opportunity to investigate proteins required for division of unicellular
              bacteria for four reasons.  First, the septa formed during Streptomyces
              sporulation closely resemble the cell division septa of unicellular bacteria. 
              Second, sporulation is a non-essential process in streptomycetes, so proteins
              involved in sporulation are not expected a priori to participate also in
              vegetative growth.  Third, the viability of an ftsZ null mutant Streptomyces
              indicates that at least one of the genes required for cell division in other
              bacteria is not essential for vegetative growth of Streptomyces.  There are
              likely to be other such genes.  Fourth, the abundant se ptation that is
              required only for streptomycete sporulation implicates regulatory processes
              that ensure the absence of these septa during growth and the correct timing of
              synthesis and placement of these septa during differentiation.  Some of these
              regulatory factors may be homologues of proteins that control cell division in
              unicellular bacteria.  To continue the analysis of cell division in Steptomyces
              griseus, we will use random and site-directed mutagenesis and promoter-probe
              studies to identify cis-active sites required for developmental regulation of
              ftsZ.  Because some bald mutants of S. griseus undergo premature septation and
              spore wall synthesis, we anticipate that these mutants are defective in an
              important regulatory system that governs the timing of key events of
              sporulation.  We will therefore identify the gene that is defective in these
              mutants by using standard complementation techniques.  The analysis of cell
              division in Streptomyces will reveal valuable information not only about the
              roles of cell division genes that have been identified in other bacteria, but
              also about the determinants of cell shape, the nature of branch formation
              during hyphal growth and at the onset of sporulation,and the molecular details
              of a reproductive differentiation process.  New genes involved in cell division
              are also likely to emerge from the characterization of sporulation in
              Streptomyces because of the non-essential nature of these genes.  Moreover,
              since streptomycete sporulation is a consequence of nutrient limitation, these
              studies will contribute to our understanding of developmental responses to
              environmental stress.
