Title       : "Arabidopsis Genome Sequencing Using Random Shotgun Sequencing of BAC Clones"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9632085

Award Number: 9632085
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2609098            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Craig Venter jcventer@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1131      ARABIDOPSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9632085    The long term goal of this project is to determine the total  DNA
              sequence of the Arabidopsis thaliana genome.  For the  next three years, the
              specific goal of this project is to  produce at least 8.5 Mb of finished
              sequences of DNA using a  two-pronged, BAC-based strategy for generating
              megabase  quantity of high quality genome sequence data.  One focus of  the
              strategy will be to perform single-pass sequencing from  the ends of BAC clones
              from a well-constructed genomic  library of Arabidopsis. The second focus will
              be on the  complete sequencing of BAC clones using a random shotgun  approach. 
              When each BAC has been completely sequenced and  assembled, the BAC contig
              sequence will be compared to the  database of BAC end sequences.  A BAC or BACs
              which have  minimal sequence overlap with the completed BAC will then be 
              selected for the next round of shotgun library construction  and sequencing. 
              By repeating this sequence/search process  after the completion of each BAC, a
              sequence-based map of  the minimal tiling path of Arabidopsis BACs will be 
              generated for the genome without requiring  a separate BAC  mapping effort. 
              The finished sequence data will be released  on TIGR's web site and in GenBank
              three months from the time  when work begins on the sequencing of each selected
              BAC.  Clones will be freely available through the Arabidopsis  Biological
              Resource Center at Ohio State.    This award is one of the three awarded by the
              triagency  (Department of Energy, National Science Foundation, and US 
              Department of Agriculture) Arabidopsis thaliana genome  research program.  The
              activity of this project will be  coordinated with the other groups engaged in
              large scale  sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome.  The results will 
              contribute to determining the overall strategy for the  completion of the
              sequence of the entire Arabidopsis genome.  More importantly, the information
              and data produced will be  useful to the general research community and will
              contribute  to rapid advances in pl ant biology.
