Title       : Laser Spectroscopy of New Fullerene and Metallofullerene Optical Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1998  
File        : a9632993

Award Number: 9632993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346872             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wright wright@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9632993          Wright      This research is concerned with
              understanding the relationship between the different kinds of  fullerenes,
              their nonlinear properties, and their electronic structure. The proposed work
              will  involve creating examples of the new derivatives and materials that can
              be probed to  understand how the interaction with other moieties changes the
              electronic and optical  properties. It is clear that the neutral fullerenes do
              not have interesting nonlinearities and that  the most interesting members of
              the fullerene and fullerene derivatives family are the charged  ions, charge
              transfer complexes, and the endohedral metallofullerenes. The proposed research
               will continue to have two important parts: synthesis, purification,
              preparation, and  characterization of new fullerene-based materials and
              measurement of the novel optical  properties of these materials. The heart of
              the optical measurements will concentrate on using  the capabilities of
              multi-resonant four wave mixing spectroscopy to identify the states that are 
              responsible for the nonlinearities, to probe the transitions and coupling
              between electronic  states, and to determine the character and usefulness of
              the new states that are caused by  having endohedral metals or external
              moieties that allow charge transfer transitions.  %%%  There is great interest
              in the optical properties of materials that are based on fullerenes and 
              metallofullerenes because of their stability, nonlinear properties, charge
              transfer  characteristics and the ability to manipulate their properties
              through changes in the valence  state, the size of the cage, the number and
              type of endohedral ions. the derivatization, and  the linking with other
              fullerenes. The possible materials include charge transfer salts,  nano-scale
              surface structures and films, zeolytes, and polymeric materials. Development of
               new optical materials requires an understanding of how changes in the nature
              of the fullerene  affect the material's optical and electr on transfer
              properties. Work during a prior grant  period has made it clear that the
              neutral fullerenes will not be the magic nonlinear material  that will make the
              field of photonics competitive. Their nonlinearities are much smaller than  the
              workers in the field had hoped for and measured. Nevertheless, the
              nonlinearities of the  anions are substantial and they may be improved
              considerably by the ideas presented here  and by forming derivatives that
              accentuate the polarizability.  The fullerenes are also unusual  and intriguing
              materials because of the ability to engineer their electronic structures by 
              manipulating the number of carbons in the cage, the valence state, the
              endohedral metal ion  and by forming fullerene derivatives. In addition to
              their promise for nonlinear materials, the  normal electronic and charge
              transfer states of fullerenes are central to many interesting  potential uses
              including photorefractive, photoconductive, photovoltaic, hole burning storage,
               and laser materials. The program during this grant period will focus on the
              electronic  structures characteristic of the different valence states of the
              charged fullerenes and the  endohedral metallofullerenes.
