Title       : Long-Term Ecological Research on the Antarctic Marine Ecosystem: An
               Ice-Dominated Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9632763

Award Number: 9632763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4260000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond C. Smith ray@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin M. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Langdon B. Quetin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1302,9178,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632763  Smith  This proposal continues, for a second six year period, the 
              Palmer  Long-Term Ecological Research program which focuses on the  marine
              ecosystem in the western Antarctic Peninsula region.    A central tenet of this
              research is that the annual advance  and retreat of sea ice is a major physical
              determinant of  spatial and temporal changes in the structure and function  of
              the Antarctic marine ecosystem, from total annual primary  production to
              breeding success in seabirds.  We are  currently evaluating a number of
              testable hypotheses linking  sea ice to:       the timing and magnitude of
              seasonal primary    production,       the dynamics of the microbial loop and
              particle  sedimentation,       krill abundance, distribution, and recruitment,
              and       the breeding success and survival of apex predators.    The overall
              objectives are to:  (1) document the interannual variability of annual sea ice 
              and the corresponding physics, chemistry, optics, primary  production and the
              life-history parameters of secondary  producers and apex predators within the
              area,  (2) create a legacy of critical data for understanding  ecological
              phenomena and processes within the Antarctic  marine ecosystem,  (3) identify
              the processes that cause variation in physical  forcing and the subsequent
              biological response among the  representative trophic levels,  (4) construct
              models that link ecosystem processes to  environmental variables, which
              simulate spatial/temporal  ecosystem relationships, and employ such models to
              predict  and validate ice-ecosystem dynamics.    Since 1991 the program has
              included spatial sampling during  annual and seasonal cruises in portions of
              our regional grid  in the region and temporal sampling from spring through fall
               (October to March) in the area adjacent to Palmer Station.  The program was
              designed to sample at multiple spatial  scales within one regional scale grid,
              permitting repeated  sampling on both seasonal and annual time scales, thus 
              addressing both short and long -term ecological phenomena, as  well as
              providing a basis for specific mechanistic studies.  To date, there have been
              seven regional cruises and two  additional cruises emphasizing microbial
              dynamics (Tables 1  and 2).  Core variables routinely sampled and monitored
              from  shipboard during annual cruises.    Documentation and data storage are
              organized through an  electronic hub at the Institute for Computational Earth 
              System Science at the University of California at Santa  Barbara which also
              serves as a data archive as needed.  There are on-line definitions of core
              data, datasets and  metadata, organized to facilitate rapid information
              exchange  and  on-line data documentation.  This multidisciplinary project, 
              sited in a climatically sensitive region, has the potential  to detect, against
              a background of natural variability, long  term trends in the Antarctic
              ecosystem.
