Title       : Seismic Behavior of Composite Moment Resisting Frame Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9632442

Award Number: 9632442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Bracci j-bracci@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter P. Moore  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research project studies the applicability of composite moment resisting
              frame systems made of composite Steel Reinforced Concrete (SRC) columns and
              steel beams for zones of moderate-to-high seismic risk.  The seismic design
              philosophy for composite moment resisting frame systems is based on developing
              a desirable beam-sidesway mechanism, where ductile steel beam flexural hinging
              develops throughout the building and hinging develops at the first story
              column-foundation interfaces.  The research tasks include:  (a) experimental
              subassemblage testing to evaluate various reinforcing details for composite SRC
              columns and beam-column joint regions that provide efficient energy dissipation
              capacity and deformation capability during seismic loading scenarios.  The
              response behavior of the subassemblages will be investigated for continuous
              steel beams through the joint with and without floor slab interaction by headed
              shear studs (b) experimental subassemblage testing to evaluate various
              reinforcing details to ensure sufficient strength and deformation capability at
              the critical first story SRC column-concrete foundation interface, and (c)
              analytical studies using the well-established nonlinear analysis program IDARC
              to model the response behavior using data from previous subassemblage testing
              and this research study.  Parametric studies will be performed to identify
              important hysteretic properties in the composite subassemblages and expanded to
              evaluate the response behavior of complete composite moment resisting frame
              systems during earthquake excitations.  The applicability of the results to
              develop design guidelines and reinforcing detail requirements for composite
              moment resisting frame systems during earthquake excitations.  The
              applicability of the results to develop design guidelines and reinforcing
              detail requirements for composite moment resisting frame structural systems
              made of composite SRC columns and steel beams for zones of moderate-to-high
              seismic risk will be evaluated.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
