Title       : Epitaxial Growth of Gallium Arsenide Nitride Heterostructures from the Vapor
               Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9632166

Award Number: 9632166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Pearsall Pearsall@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9632166 Pearsall  This multidisciplinary research project addresses basic
              materials synthesis and processing research on the epitaxial deposition of a
              compound semiconductor mixed crystal system, GaAsN, having intrinsic strong
              immiscibility.  A novel approach based on conditions far from equilibrium
              involving atomic layer growth techniques demonstrated by the PIs in earlier
              research will be pursued; detailed structural, optical and electrical
              characterization will be an integral part of the project. The proposal
              addresses two controversial topics, the realization of GaAsN alloys, and the
              heteroepitaxial growth of such low defect density III-V alloy films on silicon
              substrates, and strives for greater understanding and experimental
              demonstration of progress in both areas in a phased approach. %%% The project
              combines fundamental materials chemistry/solid state physics and materials
              processing studies with advanced characterization tools and analysis methods to
              address forefront issues in a topical area of high scientific value and
              potential technological benefits.  The research will contribute basic materials
              science knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of advanced
              compound semiconductor materials and structures appropriate for device
              assessments.  The knowledge and understanding gained from this research project
              is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of
              advanced microelectronic and photonic devices by providing a fundamental
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and
              materials processing routes.  An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***
