Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Support for the 45th Annual Gordon Research Conference on
               Statistics in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering; August 25-30, 1996; Oxford,
               England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9632955

Award Number: 9632955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle H. Ungar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632955  Ungar        The Gordon Research Conference on Statistics in Chemistry
              and Chemical   Engineering has met annually since 1951.  It provides an
              important and   highly stimulating opportunity for the exchange of new ideas
              among   researchers and workers in statistics, chemistry and chemical  
              engineering.  In order to further the exchange of ideas, the 1996   Conference
              will, for the first time, be held outside the US, in Oxford   (UK).  This will
              bring US scientists in contact with the leading   scientists in the fields of
              statistics, chemistry and chemical   engineering in Europe.  The 1996
              Conference will work along two lines.   On the one hand, outstanding
              statisticians present novel and   up-to-date topics relevant for chemists and
              chemical engineers and on   the other hand, outstanding chemists and chemical
              engineers present   real-life problems and proposed solutions.  This approach
              maximizes   the interaction between the different groups: chemists and chemical
                engineers learn new statistical methods and statisticians hear about  
              complex real-life problems.   %%%   The Gordol Research Conference on
              Statistics in Chemistry and Chemical   Engineering lies on the interface
              between statistics, chemistry and   chemical engineering.  Hence, the
              conference attracts a broad spectrum   of participants.  The resulting
              cross-fertilization of ideas from   different areas of science and engineering
              significantly benefits all   participants.  Research statisticians are exposed
              to real problems in   chemistry and chemical engineering; applied chemists and
              statisticians   learn first hand about new statistical research which they can
              use in   their everyday work; and research chemists and chemical engineers can 
               discuss their statistical ideas with eminent statisticians.   Statistical
              methodology, as covered in this conference, provides   important quantitative
              tools in numerous fields of research, including   meeting national goals for
              improved competitiveness in the chemical   industries via  enhanced product
              quality and productivity, and   recognition and avoidance of environmental
              hazards.  This conference   will allow open presentation and discussion of
              recent research on the   frontiers of statistics and its relevance for all
              areas of chemistry   and chemical engineering. ***
