Title       : Global Optimization and Parallel Processing of Nonlinear Problems in Engineering
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9632316

Award Number: 9632316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin W. Wah b-wah@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 2891,9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop an efficient nonlinear optimization 
              method - NOVEL: Nonlinear Optimization Via External Lead - and the supporting 
              hardware/software to solve large-scale nonlinear optimization problems in 
              operations research, digital signal processing, and neural-network learning.
              Such  a method will allow many important application problems in these areas to
              be  solved better as well as faster than existing methods. The method first 
              transforms nonlinear constrained optimization problems using Lagrange
              multipliers  into unconstrained optimization problems. This transformation
              allows both  constrained and unconstrained problems to be solved in a unified
              framework. The  key idea of the method is to use a user-defined trace to pull a
              search out of a  local optimum (a local saddle point in constrained
              optimization and a local  minimum in unconstrained optimization) without having
              to restart it from a new  starting point. The proposed method has a good
              balance between global search and  local search. In global search, NOVEL relies
              on two counteracting forces: local  gradient information that drives the search
              to a local optimum, and a  deterministic trace that leads the search out of a
              local optimum once it gets  there. The effect of the trace on the search
              trajectory is expressed in terms of  the distance between the current position
              of the trajectory and that of the  trace. Good starting points identified in
              the global-search phase are then  searched more extensively using pure local
              searches. The proposed research  consists of four aspects: refinement of the
              NOVEL method, parallel processing,  extension to mixed-nonlinear optimization
              problems, and applications of the  methods developed to solve problems in
              operations research, digital signal  processing, and neural-network learning.
