Title       : (ESH) Late Glacial-Holocene Climate Records of Midwestern United States from the
               Stable Isotope Ratio of Lake Organic Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9632034

Award Number: 9632034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150796             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. V. Krishnamurthy r.v.krishnamurthy@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9632034  Krishnamurthy    Except where historical data exist, proxy recorders
              provide the only functional means for retrieval of paleoenvironmental
              information  The rapid sedimentation rates in lakes provide the potential to
              obtain continuous fine resolution records of environmental change on a regional
              scale.  While some proxies, such as pollen, have been used successfully for a
              long time, others such as stable isotope ratios in inorganic carbonates are  in
              a developmental stage.  More proxies need to be developed because no single one
              can tell the entire story.  This project will explore the potential of  13C,
              C/N and, especially, the D/H ratio of extractable organic matter in lake
              sediments from the Midwestern United States in the extraction of late
              glacial-Holocene climates of the region.  In a pilot study using these proxies
              in the acid-resistant organic fraction extracted from   Austin Lake (Kalamazoo,
              MI), it was shown that SW Michigan       experienced a mid-Holocene warming
              (MHW) 8-3 kyrs BP.  D/H provided the most dramatic evidence.  This apparently
              is the first time D/H in organic matter in lake sediments has been measured for
              paleoclimate information.    The strategy employed in this proposal is to make
              use of previously studied and archived cores obtained using mostly NSF funding
              (UMN, USGS, Bradford Institute of Oceanography) and to compare the results with
              records established by pollen studies.  In addition,, some new sites that are
              currently being studied for palynology at the University of Minnesota will be
              studied for an integrated study using isotopic and pollen techniques:  two with
              contrasting hydrologic settings in Kalamazoo, and two western Michigan sites. 
              One of the western Michigan sites has already been cored by the UMN (separate
              NSF funding) in summer 1995.  These latter sites are actively depositing
              carbonates and are deep enough to be laminated.  Chronologies of the sediments,
              when not already established, will be by 14C and 210Pb techniques.    The
              choice of arch ived cores from the Midwestern US insures (1) that minimal
              efforts and expenditure will be involved in field operations, (2) that
              advantage is taken of previous NSF funding for sample collection, and (3) that
              isotope techniques can be compared directly against the pollen-based
              documentation of the climate history of the region.  This study will (1) test
              the preliminary findings that the D/H ratio of lake organic matter is a useful
              proxy of climate, and (2) provide a multi-proxy based continental, late
              Glacial-Holocene climatic history of the Midwestern United States.       ??
