Title       : Efficacy of a Neural Interface for Potential Use in Limb Prosthetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9632962

Award Number: 9632962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327143             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Wells   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Zanakis  (Principal Investigator former)
              John L. Ricci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York Institute of Tech
	      Wheatley Road
	      Old Westbury, NY  11568    516/686-7516

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zanakis  9632962  One of the major technological problems in the use of 
              advanced limb prosthetics is the inability of the user to  control the
              prosthesis in a manner which can mimic normal  function.  When nerves are
              severed or disrupted, control  over the limb is lost, even though the
              information for  control may still be present in the portions of the nerves 
              that were spared from damage or amputation.  If that  information can be used
              to operate the prosthesis, then  better control of the artificial limb can be
              achieved.  The  proposed research examines the effectiveness of components 
              designed to interface the peripheral nervous system with the  electronic
              hardware of the prosthetics.  The work will be  performed utilizing a
              multi-electrode cable (MEC) device  which uses muscle cells grown upon it in
              order to attract  the nerves to regenerate toward the MEC.  The interface will 
              be able to detect signals from the nerves, decode the nerve  impulses, and
              therefore control a prosthesis.  The first  part of the study will test this
              technology in rodents, to  determine if cut nerves can be attracted to the MEC,
              and if  the MEC can then decode signals from the nerve, particularly  for long
              periods of time.  Certain components of the rodent  experiments have already
              been performed successfully, and a  major goal of this study is to combine the
              many techniques  and determine if the entire system performs as a unit.  The 
              results of this experiment are crucial to the refinement and  increased utility
              of human limb prosthetics.
