Title       : Implementation of a Molecular Biology Computation Resource Server
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9632130

Award Number: 9632130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Davison davison@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  A variety of new initiatives in computational structural  and molecular
              biology, along with the Human Genome Project,  have brought computation and
              computer-based information  systems to the forefront of medicine, genetics an 
              biotechnology.  However the majority of publicly accessible  computational
              tools are underutilized because they are  complex and difficult to access.  The
              mission of this  project is to create a publicly accessible, centralized, 
              directory for molecular biological software and data. The  project will further
              develop the "Yellow Pages of Molecular  Biology Software" server and make it
              available on the  Internet via the World Wide Web.  The prototype of the 
              system, developed with a planning grant, is accessible via  the URL
              http://www.bchs.uh.edu/Server.      The Bio-Access Guide to the Internet Yellow
              Pages, or  "Yellow BAGI", will let the users look for software by  operating
              system, keyword, author, or site. Each index is  cross-indexed to another, and
              one can download the selected  software (from any site indexed) by clicking on
              the name of  the program of interest. In the prototype we have indexed  two
              sites, ftp.bio.indiana.edu and ftp.bchs.uh.edu.     In this project we will
              collaborate with the (somewhat  similar) European Bioinformatics Institute's
              Biocatalog  project. We will divide areas of responsibility and share  data on
              a daily basis between the two projects. Our  automatic Netnews and FTP site
              surveys will complement their  journal screening. We will also provide a
              replacement for  Pedro's Biomolecular Research Tools Web pages, which have  not
              been updated in recent times.     The primary focus of our work will be to
              implement the  Yellow BAGI project and develop a trial relational schema  for
              the BAGI data bank. We will also incorporate lessons  from the Biocatalog
              project, which has different strengths  and weaknesses from this work. Using
              other sources of  information such as journals not covered by Biocatalog staff 
              scanning we will add information t o BAGI and the Biocatalog.     The final
              goal of this project will be to determine  scalability of the data collection
              mechanisms we have  developed. Most importantly, we will measure the biological
               community's interest and feedback on the project, to decide  whether to
              proceed into a maintenance phase.
