Title       : Interactive Nano-Visualization for Science and Engineering Education (IN-VSEE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a9632740

Award Number: 9632740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2229746            (Estimated)
Investigator: B L. Ramakrishna Bramakrishna@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ben M. Huey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Birk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio A. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anshuman Razdan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Roberson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent B. Pizziconi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Glaunsinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632740  Ramakrishna    The integration of nano-science and technology concepts
              into upper -division high school and lower-division college curricula will
              require innovative educational approaches that will help students understand
              the structures and properties of matter on a scale below 100 nanometers, i.e.,
              the nanoscale. This Interactive nano-Visualization in Science and Engineering
              Education (IN-VSEE) project will create a consortium of university and industry
              scientists, community college and high school science faculty and museum
              educators with a common vision of creating an interactive World Wide Web (WWW)
              site to develop a new educational thrust based on remote operation of advanced
              microscopes and nanofabrication tools coupled to powerful surface
              characterization methods. The centerpiece of this project is the revolutionary
              scanning probe microscope (SPM), which has evolved rapidly into a relatively
              simple,, yet powerful, technique capable of imaging and manipulating materials
              at resolutions down to the atomic scale. The proposed emphasis on SPM will
              allow students and teachers nationwide to operate and learn about
              nanotechnology using this Nobel-prize-winning technique. The key objective of
              IN-VSEE is to bring the exciting world of nanotechnology into the classroom to
              help inspire today's students to become tomorrow's scientists and engineers.   
              IN-VSEE is a unique initiative that enables a science or engineering class
              ("operator") to select and investigate materials over the WWW. Using a
              "fishbowl" format, other classes ("observers") will be able to observe the
              operator class conducting and experiment. Operator classes will remote-control
              the SPM from their classroom with the SPM images broadcast over WWW in
              real-time. The observers will actively participate by communicating with the
              operator class via WWW-Chat or video conferencing. IN-VSEE will have a chain
              reaction effect by creating dialogue and being shared over WWW with other
              classrooms. This same approach will serve as a model  for the national use of
              other instruments beside the SPM.  ***
