Title       : Cell and Molecular Biology of High Capacity Calcium Sequestration in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9632027

Award Number: 9632027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent R. Franceschi vfrances@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9632027  Franceschi     Calcium (Ca) is involved in the control of many
              physiological processes in plants, and therefore regulation of Ca activity is
              critical to normal plant growth, development and productivity.  Ca is taken up
              in the root and transported along with water.  The water evaporates from the
              surfaces of the plant, and over time large amounts of Ca can accumulate in
              various organs, which necessitates high capacity Ca sequestration systems.  Ca
              oxalate formation in plants has evolved as a high capacity mechanism for
              removing Ca when it is present at levels that can no longer be controlled by
              the lower capacity mechanisms common to all cells.  This idea is supported by
              observations that most plant families produce Ca oxalate crystals, that this
              product can account for up to 85% of the dry weight of some plant species, and
              that 90% of the Ca in plants can be in this form.  The goal of this project is
              to elucidate features of cells called Ca oxalate crystal idioblasts, which are
              responsible for large scale Ca accumulation. Crystal idioblasts are
              structurally and biochemically specialized for Ca accumulation and Ca oxalate
              crystal formation.  Four proteins have been identified that play key roles in
              crystal formation in crystal idioblasts.  These are: "matrix protein," a unique
              vacuolar Ca binding protein; calreticulin, a high capacity Ca binding protein
              of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER); an ER Ca ATPase (ERCA) which acts as a Ca
              pump; and oxalate oxidase, which is involved in release of Ca from crystals
              when free Ca availability becomes limited.  In addition, ultrastructural
              examination shows that crystal idioblasts have abundant ER and Golgi bodies. 
              The aim of the proposed research is to characterize the structure, function and
              control of developmental expression of these proteins, and thus to gain a
              better understanding of how they regulate Ca levels in plant tissues and cells.
               The specific objectives are to: 1, complete the analysis of cDNAs for matrix
              protein, calreticulin, ERCA an d oxalate oxidase, and produce antibodies to the
              proteins isolated from a bacterial expression system; 2, purify matrix protein
              from an expression system and examine its physical-chemical properties in
              vitro; 3, characterize the temporal and spatial regulations of the proteins and
              their mRNA transcripts during changing Ca nutrition; 4, determine the pattern
              of expression of the proteins and their transcripts at the subcellular level
              from crystal idioblast initiation through maturation; and 5, characterize the
              formation and modification of the ER and Golgi systems during idioblast
              development.  Molecular biological techniques will be used to accomplish all or
              parts of the first 3 objectives. Biochemical techniques, Western and Northern
              blotting, and high resolution in situ hybridization visualization and
              immunocytochemistry by the light and electron microscopy will be used for
              objectives 3 and 4.  Objective 5 will be completed using laser scanning
              confocal and standard transmission electron microscopy.    %%%  A better
              understanding of the mechanism of Ca oxalate crystal formation is imperative to
              our understanding of Ca regulation in plants, as well as for the potential
              manipulation of this process, or selected features of it, by biochemical or
              molecular genetic means.  This project will significantly enhance our
              understanding of Ca oxalate crystal formation specifically, and will provide
              important new information on mechanisms of Ca regulation in plants in general. 
              Furthermore, it should be kept in mind that plants are not the only living
              organisms that manufacture mineral crystalline structures based on calcium
              salts; for example, the exquisitely precisely-sculpted spicules and mineralized
              exoskeletons (e.g., oyster shells) of invertebrates, and the bones and teeth of
              vertebrates, are also examples of this general process of biomineralization.  
              The Ca oxalate crystals of plant crystal idioblasts represent a relatively
              simple model system for biomineralization, and it is anticipated that the 
              results of this project will provide important new insights into the general
              area of biomineralization which will be useful not only to biologists
              interested in how nature manufactures mineralized materials, but also to
              materials scientists and engineers who are interested in either harnessing or
              mimicking natural processes to create novel and useful ceramic structural
              materials.  ***
