Title       : A Genetic Approach to Ordered Sequencing of Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9632082

Award Number: 9632082
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4185000            (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Richard McCombie mccombie@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert A. Martienssen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1131      ARABIDOPSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9632082    This award supports a consortium of three laboratories  located at
              Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Washington  University at St. Louis and the
              Applied Biosystems in forest  City, California.  It supports the group's effort
              to produce  at least 7 Mb of finished sequences of DNA from chromosome 4  and
              5.  The sequencing strategy uses a combination of  shotgun and more ordered
              approaches.  This group makes  maximal use of softwares and technologies
              developed for the  C. elegans genome sequencing project for sequencing and 
              finishing large contiguous DNA pieces.  All sequences will  be deposited in
              GenBank upon completion of each BAC clones.  Unfinished sequence data will be
              made available on a WWW  site very rapidly.  Clones and other materials will be
              made  available through the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center  at Ohio
              State.    This award is one of the three awarded by the triagency  (Department
              of Energy, National Science Foundation, and US  Department of Agriculture)
              Arabidopsis thaliana genome  research program.  The activity of this consortium
              will be  coordinated with the other groups engaged in large scale  sequencing
              of the Arabidopsis genome.  The results will  contribute to determining the
              overall strategy for the  completion of the sequence of the entire Arabidopsis
              genome.  More importantly, the information and data produced will be  useful to
              the general research community and will contribute  to rapid advances in plant
              biology.
