Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on Nanostructured Materials
               and Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9632527

Award Number: 9632527
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9170000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Kuech Kuech@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9177,9178,9251,AMPP,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632527  Kuech  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) on
               Nanostructured Materials and Interfaces at the University of  Wisconsin,
              Madison supports research in three interdisciplinary  groups focusing on film
              growth by chemical vapor deposition,  grain boundaries and current percolation
              in high-temperature  superconductors, and nanostructured magnetic oxides.  The
              first  group investigates the fundamental mechanisms underlying film  growth by
              chemical vapor deposition, with a focus on the growth  of Si and Ge and their
              alloys.  The second group focuses on the  role that grain boundaries and the
              electronic structure play in  determining the critical current density of
              polycrystalline high  temperature superconductors.  The third group addresses
              the  fabrication, characterization, and understanding of the  properties of
              perovskite-like magnetic oxides with potential  device applications.  The MRSEC
              supports shared experimental  facilities for materials research, exploratory
              research through  seed funding, and collaborations with industry and with other
               universities.  Educational outreach programs include development  of
              instructional materials for high school science teachers and  outreach visits
              to local schools.  The Center supports 15 senior  investigators, 8 postdoctoral
              research associates, 16 graduate  students, 7 technicians or other
              professionals, and 10  undergraduates.  The MRSEC is directed by Professor T.
              F. Kuech.  %%%  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
              on  Nanostructured Materials and Interfaces at the University of  Wisconsin,
              Madison supports research in three interdisciplinary  groups.  The first group
              investigates the fundamental mechanisms  underlying the growth of semiconductor
              films with focus on the  growth of the technologically important materials
              silicon and  germanium and their alloys.  The second group focuses on the role 
              structural defects play in determining the critical current  density of
              polycrystalline high-temp erature superconductors.  The  third group addresses
              the fabrication, characterization, and  understanding of the properties of
              magnetic oxides with potential  device applications.  The MRSEC supports shared
              experimental  facilities for materials research, exploratory research through 
              seed funding, and collaborations with industry and with other  universities. 
              Educational outreach programs include development  of instructional materials
              for high school science teachers and  outreach visits to local schools.  The
              Center supports 15 senior  investigators, 8 postdoctoral research associates,
              16 graduate  students, 7 technicians or other professionals, and 10 
              undergraduates.  The MRSEC is directed by Professor T. F. Kuech.  ***
