Title       : MRCE: Renewal Proposal for Center for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a9632844

Award Number: 9632844
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3912481            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred Z. Msezane amsezane@ctsps.cau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9632844  Clark Atlanta University    A renewal proposal has been submitted
              on behalf of the Center  for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems (CTSPS) at
              Clark  Atlanta University (CAU).  During its first 4 plus years of  existence,
              CTSPS has become a regional resource center  surpassing all of its objectives:
              prosecution of forefront,  basic and applied, research; production of
              significant numbers  of peer reviewed publications; presentation of research 
              results at national and international conferences; creation of  a sophisticated
              research computing facility, including the  most powerful CRAY platform in
              Georgia; acquisition of $6.2  million dollars in non-NSF federal funding;
              formation of  academic/corporate research-educational partnerships support  of
              research faculty from the Atlanta University Center (AUC);  hiring of key
              researchers to coordinate and stimulate new  interdisciplinary interactions;
              creation of a vital visiting  scientists program; support for important local,
              national, and  international conferences; production of significant numbers  of
              Ph.D. bound minority students; creation of a Mobile  Physics/Mathematics
              Demonstration Unit; and promotion of  technology transfer in important areas
              such as infrared sensor  technology, and image processing (to name a few). 
              These  accomplishments have catapulted CAU s research capacity into  a
              nationally competitive research center of excellence.  CTSPS  has become a
              paradigm for quality, cost-effective, research  and research training in the
              physical and mathematical  sciences, within the AUC.  It has positioned CAU s
              physics  department to become one of the outstanding computational  physics
              programs in the nation.  Efficient use of NSF funded  resources has allowed
              CTSPS to leverage non-NSF support for  expensive items (i.e. powerful
              computers, etc.), all dedicated  to solving important problems in diverse
              areas.  The  establishment of a world class research center, within an HBCU 
              environment, continues to positively impact the  student body,  attracting many
              CAU/AUC students from all SEM disciplines.   Accordingly, CTSPS is a genuine
              national resource whose  continued funding would insure the consolidation and
              growth of  a vital and nationally important research enterprise (in the 
              context of a newly created HCU institution) contributing to  the nation s
              technological readiness, and serving as a vital  professional role model to the
              underrepresented minorities in  the sciences, engineering, and mathematics.
