Title       : Circuits and Systems for Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9632698

Award Number: 9632698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan N. Willson willson@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A major research area, one evolving out of the principal investigator's
              long-term  work in nonlinear circuit theory, is the development of a rigorous
              stability  theory for the operating points of dc transistor circuits.  A
              complete solution  (necessary and sufficient conditions for dc operating point
              stability in  nonlinear circuits) seems almost within grasp, and this research
              project seeks  to obtain it.  Research on low-power circuits encompasses the
              design of new low-  power clock buffers, schemes for implementing circuits to
              achieve charge recovery  on a databus and the investigation of techniques for
              the design of low-power  practical circuits such as Viterbi decoders for CDMA
              digital cellular  applications.    Another project concerns the development of
              new techniques for multiplierless  digital filter design, including the design
              of novel multiplierless adaptive  filters.  Work will continue on new
              techniques for IIR filter pipelining, a topic  that shows great promise in
              providing more economical structures (in terms of  lower power-dissipation and
              IC-area requirements) for DSP systems.  In addition,  research will continue in
              the area of video compression, where a technique for  rate-distortion
              optimization is being developed.  Finally, recent circuit design  experience
              has made evident the need for advances in logic simulation.  The  principal
              investigator's research has already produced several simple ways to  improve
              simulation efficiency and it is expected that major improvements will be 
              forthcoming through further vigorous pursuit of this project
