Title       : Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of Highly Reactive Species Containing
               Electron-Deficient Main Group Atoms, and the Synthesis of Novel Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9632897

Award Number: 9632897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter P. Gaspar Gaspar@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With funding from the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division,  
              Professor Peter P. Gaspar of Washington University (St. Louis) will study  
              highly reactive species containing electron-deficient main group atoms.    This
              is a renewal of Award CHE-9108130.  Recent past work led to   discovery of ways
              to make the novel electron deficient carbene analogs,   phosphinidenes (RP),
              representing formally monovalent phosphorus, and   Gaspar's group has been
              involved in silylene chemistry for many years.   This project  will involve
              attempts to generate highly reactive species   with electron deficiency on
              diverse atoms: silylenes, germylenes,   stannylenes, borylenes, and
              aluminylidenes.  The project will extend the   mechanistic ideas of organic
              chemistry to the prediction and   rationalization of bond-making and
              bond-breaking processes across the   periodic table. Other new species such as
              germenes and phosphinidene   chalcogenides will provide mechanistic insight
              and, potentially,   synthetic utility.  Organic chemistry has a rich history of
              detailed study of highly reactive   species, which are intermediates in many
              chemical reactions, and of using   such studies to predict new and useful
              chemistry.  This project will   examine a series of related highly energetic
              and reactive species   involving atoms not traditionally considered part of the
              organic   chemist's repertoire.  It will use the rationales of organic
              chemistry to   extend our understanding of details of chemical behavior into
              many other   regions of the periodic table.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
