Title       : Mathematical Sciecnes: Graduate School Application Process Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1996     
File        : a9632772

Award Number: 9632772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92952              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Y. Velez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SACNAS
	      333 Front Street, Suite 104
	      Santa Cruz, CA  95060    831/459-0170

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project incorporates a one and one-half day Graduate School  Application
              and Process Workshop into the National Conference of  the Society for
              Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in  Science (SACNAS).  This
              project is tied to the goals of the  Society, one of which is to increase the
              number of Chicano,  Latino and Native American students pursuing advanced
              degrees in  science, mathematics, and engineering fields.  This new dimension 
              to the National SACNAS Conference will directly impact the  entrance of
              Chicano, Latino and Native American students into  graduate programs in
              science, mathematics, and engineering  fields.    The Goal of the Program: To
              increase the number of Chicano,  Latino and Native American students gaining
              entrance to graduate  programs.  Faculty and graduate student advisors will
              assist  undergraduate students in developing a well written statement of 
              purpose leading to a complete graduate school application.  The  hope is that
              every senior student who attends this workshop to  leaving having completed
              both a graduate school application and a  funding agency application.    The
              Rationale for Pursuing this New Direction: A significant  number of students
              who attend SACNAS conferences and others who  could be attracted to these
              conferences are not aggressive in  pursuing graduate opportunities.  Some
              simply never apply to  graduate schools while others who may apply, but are
              denied  admission, choose to give up on seeking admission to a graduate 
              program.    Program Format: The workshop will contain workshops, panel 
              discussions, scientific symposia, small group discussions and  faculty advising
              sessions.  Funding agency representatives and  graduate program recruiters will
              be on hand to discuss  opportunities with the students and will be available to
              provide  information on their respective institution's programs.  All of  the
              workshop's programs, discussions, and social sessions are  deigned to encourage
              a national support network of people  interested in en couraging Chicano,
              Latino and Native American  students to have a greater participation in
              science, mathematics,  and engineering fields.  This workshop will bring
              together a  group of highly talented undergraduates and offer them the 
              personal attention and advice necessary to complete an excellent  graduate
              school application.
