Title       : Making Sense of Complex Phenomena through Building Object- based Parallel Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9632612

Award Number: 9632612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uri Wilensky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632612  Wilensky    The content area of the project is learning about
              "complexity".  Complexity is the study of systems in which phenomena  exhibit
              complex behavior , the growth of a snowflake crystal, theperimeter pattern of a
              maple leaf, the dynamics of the Dow Jones or of a fourth grade classroom. These
              are all systems which can be modeled as composed of many distributed but
              interacting parts. They all exhibit non-linear or emergent qualities which
              place them beyond the scope of current K-12 mathematics curricula.    The
              project goal is to make complexity accessible to students through the use of
              object-based parallel modeling languages (OBPML). Students build models of
              complex mathematical and scientific phenomena from  "scratch" as well as
              exending models they are given from a library of "extensible models".   
              Through these activities, the researchers seek:    * To understand how learners
              make sense of complex phenomena when engaged in building object-based parallel
              models  * To design  computational tools and activities  that foster learner's
              in a) building models of complex phenomena and b) building intuitive
              conceptions of complexity  * To investigate the ways in which learners engaged
              in this kind of modeling change their beliefs about and attitudes towards the
              mathematical and scientific enterprises  * To investigate patterns in the kinds
              of symbolization developed by learners engaged in object-based parallel
              modeling.    OBPMLs afford a probabilistic and statistical approach to
              modeling. One outcome of  the project is a strengthened and broadened role for
              probability and statistics in the mathematics and science curricula, combining
              it with computational techniques such as Monte Carlo simulations - thus
              developing a new subject area perhaps better called stochastics. In this
              respect and others, we expect to develop new mathematical content areas -
              content areas which live in an object-based parallel medium.  ***
