Title       : Dynamics of Mediated Electrochemical Synthesis in Microemulsions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9632391

Award Number: 9632391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Rusling James.rusling@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9632391    The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental
              understanding of how surface dynamics on electrodes and kinetics in
              microemulsions influence control of reactivity in mediated electrochemical
              syntheses.  Electrochemical studies are used to relate surfactant and reactant 
              adsorption-desorption dynamics on electrode surf aces to catalytic reaction
              rates.  The mediated reactions include carbon-carbon coupling, cyclizations,
              and olefin production. Catalytic efficiencies of mediators in the bulk fluid
              using bare carbon electrodes will be compared with those of new catalytic
              electrodes designed specifically to achieve high reaction rates in
              microemulsions.  Macrocyclic metal complexes that catalyze reactions by 
              efficient inner sphere pathways, such as vitamin B12 and Cobalt-, iron-, and
              nickel-porphyrins, are used as mediators.  Layer-by-layer electrode coating
              strategies based on polymeric silicon-oxygen-carbon linkages to carbon
              electrodes are compared with a previously developed polymer deposition method. 
              Electroanalytical methods are used to compare reaction rates in microemulsions
              and homogeneous organic solvents and catalytic electrodes.  Synthetic
              electrolyses in a stirred batch electrochemical reactor with product analysis
              are used to assess the practical utility of the systems, and to optimize yields
              and reactant conversion rates.  Compositions of microemulsions and properties
              of catalytic coatings are tuned for best reaction rates and yields for key
              reactions.  Surface dynamics of  reactants and surfactants on electrodes are
              measured by  time-resolved flow voltammetry on bare and catalytic electrodes. 
              Methods and theory developed earlier are employed.  Molecular interactions
              between  co-adsorbates will be assessed via Frumkin interaction parameters
              obtained from wave voltammetry.  As possible limiting factors for the rates of
              mediated reactions, reactant and surfactant exit and entry rates are estimated
              for the new catalytic films using electroactive probes.   Correlations between
              rates of all surface dynamic events and rates of mediated synthetic reactions
              are sought.     The objective of this  work is to provide fundamental guidance
              for the future design of efficient mediated electrochemical synthetic processes
              in relatively inexpensive, low toxicity, water-based fluid media.  Mediated
              electrochemical addition reactions are major targets because these
              atom-economical processes can be utilized to prepare chemicals of many classes,
              including lactones, pheromones, prostaglandins, C-glycosides, optically active
              olefins and alcohols, and cyclic molecules.  New catalytic surfaces design
              specifically for microemulsions combined with kinetic control by fluid
              composition may provide a basis for future cost-effective, environmentally
              benign processes for the synthesis of  high value chemicals.
