Title       : Learning Science by Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9632695

Award Number: 9632695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasmin B. Kafai kafai@gseis.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632695  Kafai    Future workplaces require that schools prepare students to
              become  technologically fluent and informationally and scientifically 
              literate. The new National Science Standard (1995) demand that  students know
              not only the facts but also how to reason  scientifically. The growing infusion
              of information technologies  into the home and work place demands that students
              know not only  how to access and retrieve information on the Internet, but also
               how to use it discriminantly in their learning. Technologically  competent
              students know not only the facts but also how to express  their knowledge and
              ideas with these tools. These are challenging  tasks for schools and teachers
              which need to be addressed beginning  at an early age when students' attitudes
              about science and  technology are still open and project-based activities are
              easier  to integrate into the curriculum.    The proposed research addresses
              these challenges by developing an  integrative year-long curriculum consisting
              of a rich fabric of  instructional techniques materials, and technology use in 
              elementary school science.  Learning Science by Design builds on  young
              students' informal science knowledge and asks them to  program, i.e., design,
              interactive multimedia resources to teach  science concepts in either physics
              (magnetism/electricity) or life  sciences (ocean habitats) to younger students.
              Students'  programming process provides the driving force for their science 
              investigations, Internet information searching, and design of  instructional
              interventions. This approach uses proogramming as a  tool for students'
              knowledge reformulation and personal expression  by engaging them in key
              scientific practices: fostering information  inquiry, constructing
              representations and visualizations of  scientific processes, explaining and
              defending ideas, and managing  of  their projects.    Two questions will be
              addressed in the proposed research: (1) What  is the efficacy of such a
              comprehensive learning environment for  y oung students? (2) What kind of skill
              and  knowledge transfer can  we observe? Research will be conducted in several
              public elementary  classrooms in implementing the year-long curriculum that
              comprises  two distinct design experiences, thus facilitating the assessment 
              of transfer of programming, project and information management  skills, and
              science knowledge. The evaluation is divided into three  phases: Phase I builds
              the model case and assessment tools, Phase  II conducts the experimental and
              comparative assessment, and Phase  III examines the applicability of the model
              to different school  sites and classrooms.    The principles that I am
              developing in my research will also be  directly applied to my teaching
              activities. My teaching plan  emphasizes the integration of education and
              information studies and  will create a set of courses that provide both
              graduate and  undergraduate students with an introduction and experience of the
               new information and learning media, their theoretical  underpinnings, and
              meaningful applications in formal and informal  educational settings.    The
              findings of the proposed research will be disseminated to  resarchers and to
              teachers. I anticipate that the approach provides  a model for implementations
              of advanced technologies in elementary  school classrooms, also applicable to
              other grades and school  levels. Furthermore, the proposed integration of
              information and  education fields will lead to an improved understanding of 
              educational theory and practice and the disign of future learning  and
              information technologies.  ***
