Title       : Electrothermal Vaporization Introduction for ICP-MS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1998   
File        : a9632454

Award Number: 9632454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372171             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Holcombe holcombe@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project under the direction of Chemistry Professor James A. Holcombe   of
              the University of Texas, Austin, is supported by the Analytical and   Surface
              Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry.  The research   concerns the
              introduction of solid samples and microsamples into the   inductively coupled
              plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS).  Electrothermal   vaporization (ETV) will be
              developed as the method of sample   introduction.  A set of fundamental studies
              will be done to provide an   understanding of how material is transported to
              the ICP and the   parameters influencing the process.  Included in the work are
              studies of   the influence of carrier particle size on the efficiency of
              analyte   transport and the impact on transport of the nature of the type of  
              association of analyte with carrier.  A second aspect of the sample  
              transportation investigations will be concerned with development of  
              externally generated carriers.  Two of the methods to be explored for   this
              purpose are the pyrolysis of benzene to form carbon particles, and   the
              reaction of gaseous titanium tetrachloride with water vapor to form   titanium
              dioxide particles.  An entirely different approach will involve   the use of
              desolvated nebulizer-generated aerosols produced from   aspiration of selected
              salts.  Another method to generate carbon   particles will involve oxygen
              ashing in the presence of palladium.    Finally, to correct for space charge
              effects on analyte transport,   automatic lens correction procedures will be
              explored to provide a   dynamic correction technique for the transient signal
              produced by   ETV-ICP-MS.  Instruments for chemical analysis necessarily must
              have a means of   introducing the sample to be analyzed into the instrument. 
              In some   cases, this requires a change in the physical state of the species of
                interest, for example, from a liquid to a gas.  Often, not all of the  
              sample enters the measurement zone of the instrument and therefore the  
              efficiency of transport of sample is of great interest.  This project is  
              concerned with this problem as it is encountered with  the inductively  
              coupled plasma-mass spectrometer.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
