Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on Advanced Oxides and Related
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9632667

Award Number: 9632667
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4540000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan J. Jacobson ajjacob@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9177,AMPP,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632667  Chu  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at 
              the University of Houston  supports research on the synthesis and 
              characterization of oxide materials that have technologically  important
              applications in ionic devices in one interdisciplinary  research group. The
              devices include membrane and electrocatalytic  reactors, solid oxide fuel
              cells, and chemical sensors.  The  devices promise major advances in industrial
              chemical processes  by improving product selectivity, process efficiency and 
              environmental compatibility.  Special emphasis is on complex  oxides that are
              active catalysts for hydrocarbon oxidation and  oxygen reduction and have the
              high ionic conductivity and  electronic conductivity required for ionic
              devices.  The MRSEC  supports the development, operation and maintenance of
              shared  experimental facilities for materials research.  It provides seed 
              funding for exploratory research, fosters research participation  by
              undergraduates and pre-college students, and is developing  strong industrial
              relationships.  The Center currently  supports  11 senior investigators, 3
              postdoctoral research associates, 10  graduate students, and 6 undergraduates.
              The MRSEC is directed by  Professor Paul C.W. Chu.  %%%  Changing needs in
              transportation fuels, increasing availability  of natural gas, and the emphasis
              on energy efficient,  environmentally benign processes are driving new demands
              for  advanced catalytic and ceramic materials.  These trends suggest  new
              opportunities for improved catalytic and separation processes  that apply novel
              oxide materials in new energy production  approaches. The Materials Research
              Science and Engineering Center  (MRSEC) at the University of Houston  supports
              research on the  synthesis and characterization of oxide materials that have 
              technologically important applications. The MRSEC supports the  development,
              operation and maintenance of shared experimental  facilities for materials
              research.  It provides seed funding for  explora tory research, fosters
              research participation by  undergraduates and pre-college students, and is
              developing strong  industrial relationships.  The Center currently  supports 11
               senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates, 10  graduate
              students, and 6 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by  Professor Paul C.W.
              Chu.  ***
