Title       : Developing New Molecular Architectures for Devices for Photoinitiated Electron
               Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9632713

Award Number: 9632713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen J. Brewer Kbrewer@chemserver.chem.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research on development of supramolecular inorganic  
              complexes by Dr. Karen J. Brewer of the Chemistry Department, Virginia  
              Polytechnic University.  Transition metal systems containing extended  
              light-absorbing organic moieties will be synthesized and tested for their  
              ability to facilitate photoinitiated multielectron transfer.  The basic  
              molecular design will involve the coupling of two light absorbers to a  
              central, catalytically active metal center that will serve as the site of  
              collection of the electrons.  The light absorber systems will be  
              multimetallic and designed to have metal-based highest occupied molecular  
              orbitals that are localized on the periphery of the molecules, well   separated
              from the central site of localization of the lowest unoccupied   molecular
              orbital.  The remote metal centers will then function as   electron donors for
              the central electron collecting core.  Details of the   spectroscopic and
              electrochemical properties of these systems will be   determined and used to
              optimize the design.  Materials that convert light energy to chemical energy
              are necessary for   development of solar energy devices.  Storage and delivery
              of many   electrons under desired conditions is an important goal.  Many
              natural   processes such as the reduction of carbon dioxide and nitrogen
              fixation   require many electrons.  In this fundamental research project, some
              new   multi-metal compounds will be synthesized and tested for their efficiency
                in absorbing light energy and in releasing many electrons for use in  
              chemical reactions.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
