Title       : Integrative Studies of a Model Learning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9632193

Award Number: 9632193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2009        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Beecher beecher@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT    PI:  Beecher  Proposal Numbers:  9632193  
                                                 Bird song is widely recognized as a model
              system for  nvestigations into the biological basis of learning.  It  provides
              the best example to date of natural learning in a  vertebrate, with many
              striking parallels to human language  learning.  Moreover, in recent years many
              discoveries  concerning the brain mechanisms underlying song learning  have
              suggested that this model system may reveal much about  the general processes
              of learning in the brain.  We propose  to use both field and laboratory studies
              to examine song  learning.  We believe that the field perspective is crucial 
              for understanding the song learning process, because the   rules  of song
              learning we have discovered in the field  turn out to be quite different  from
              the rules that had been  inferred from laboratory studies.  The first important
              goal  of the proposed studies is to resolve and understand the  discrepancies
              between the field and laboratory findings to  date, because the utility of this
              model system for study of  neurobiological correlates will be undermined if the
               laboratory studies are unduly artificial and produce  artifactual results.  A
              second goal of the work is to  compare individuals from sedentary populations
              (resident in  the same area throughout the year) and migratory populations 
              (breeding and wintering grounds widely separated) of a  species.  There are a
              variety of reasons for predicting that  animals from these populations will be
              very different with  respect to both song learning and song usage in 
              communication.  These studies will allow us to assess the  relative
              contributions of proximate ecological differences  aad population genetic
              differences in producing song  learning differences between sedentary and
              migratory  populations.  A third goal is to evaluate the role of  females in
              the development of male song.  In most North  American species of songbirds,
              females do not sing, but  t here is considerable evidence that they can
              strongly  influence both the development and phylogeny of male song  traits.  A
              fourth goal of the work is to examine individuals  use of their vocal
              repertoire for communication in natural  ontexts, and effects of vocal 
              repertoire for communication  in natural contexts, and the effects of vocal
              repertoire  differences among individuals on their survival and lifetime 
              reproductive success.
