Title       : Starter Grant: A Survey of Nuclear - and Plastid - Encoded Thylakoid Genes in
               the Scrophulariaceae/Orobanchaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9632675

Award Number: 9632675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea D. Wolfe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9632675  Wolfe   A detailed and strongly supported phylogeny of a group of
              organisms provides a framework or road map for critical studies of growth,
              development, and life history. Dr. Andrea Wolfe at Ohio State University is
              taking advantage of just such phylogenetic knowledge to explore molecular
              evolutionary changes in photosynthesis in plants that have become parasitic.
              The Scrophulariaceae/Orobanchaceae group of plants includes autotrophic, fully
              photosynthetic species (the snapdragons for example), so-called hemiparasites
              that form root attachments to other plants, and heterotrophic,
              non-photosynthetic parasites like beechdrops (genus Epifagus) and others. The
              parasites must attach themselves to host plants to absorb carbon nutrients for
              survival; the phylogenetic tree for this group demonstrates that parasites have
              evolved from photosynthetic forms in several lineages. Dr. Wolfe is analyzing
              genes for the light-harvesting thylakoid apparatus of the chloroplast, to
              determine changes in nuclear and plastid genes involved in photosynthetic
              energy transfer. Questions she is addressing include: are there "key
              innovations" at the molecular level that channel a plant toward parasitism;
              what are the patterns and sequence of mutations in nuclear and plastid genes as
              photosynthetic function is lost; are there backup or complementary gene systems
              to chloroplast activities, as mutations damage or destroy critical enzymes of
              photosynthesis?   Modern tools of molecular biology make possible the
              fine-scale genetic dissection of enzymatic processes of light-harvesting and
              energy-capture during photosynthesis in plants. Taking advantage of
              phylogenetic knowledge of plant groups that include parasitic species, Dr.
              Wolfe has designed an imaginative program of study that looks closely at the
              decay of photosynthetic function in a series of plant species that have evolved
              an increasingly parasitic mode of life. In so doing, she is analyzing critical
              stages in the evolution of biochemical pathways and also help ing to understand
              shifts in life history in plant evolution.
