Title       : Collabortive Research: Understanding, Improving and Combining Subjective
               Judgements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9632448

Award Number: 9632448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203811             (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Budescu dbudescu@psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632448  BUDESCU    Many decisions under uncertainty depend on expert judgments,
               because suitable statistical information is lacking.  Examples  include
              military and international policy contexts, business  forecasting, medical
              diagnosis, and earthquake prediction.   Experts do not always agree with each
              other, nor do they always   express themselves in ways that best reflect their
              underlying  opinions.  This research will develop new and improved procedures 
              for eliciting and combining their judgments to yield the most  accurate and
              diagnostic conclusions.     The project will investigate factors that affect
              human judgment  under conditions of incomplete knowledge.  The research also
              will  develop new analytic procedures for such judgments, which take  into
              account the sources and nature of the random error  components that are
              normally present.     One line of the project will ask why, if people are
              generally  truly overconfident, they appear systematically underconfident 
              given specific procedures and methods of analysis.  A second line  will explore
              why, at least for some judgment tasks, the way in  which people think about
              uncertain information depends on the  type of response they are required to
              give.  A third line will  investigate how people learn to make probability
              estimates and  how feedback affects those estimates.  The goal of all three 
              lines of research is to develop a cognitive model of human  information
              processing under uncertainty that applies to a broad  range of situations, and
              can be expressed mathematically.     One application of the mathematical model
              to be developed is to  serve as a basis for combining multiple subjective
              estimates.  A  fourth line of work will pursue this goal.  This approach is 
              novel, as no other approach to the issue of combining judgments  has depended
              on a model of the individual judge.    ***
