Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on Oxide Thin Films, Probes
               and Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9632521

Award Number: 9632521
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7027400            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen D. Williams edw@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9177,AMPP,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632521  Williams  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
              at  the University of Maryland supports interactive research in two 
              interdisciplinary groups focusing on oxides, thin films, and  novel surface
              spectroscopic probes.  One of the research groups  emphasizes fundamental
              materials issues in ferroelectric thin  film heterostructures , related device
              problems of technological  relevance, and fundamental materials physics of
              perovskite  materials that exhibit unusually large ("colossal") magneto- 
              resistance.  The second group investigates the structure of  surfaces on length
              scales from nanometers to microns, with the  goal of developing a predictive
              understanding of surface  morphology.  The work may ultimately find practical
              application  in micro-electronics, thin film growth, lubrication, catalysis, 
              and other areas.  A common theme for both groups is the  development,
              optimization and utilization of novel surface  sensitive tools to measure
              structural, magnetic, and electrical  properties at microscopic length scales. 
              The MRSEC supports the  development, operation and maintenance of shared
              experimental  facilities for materials research.  It provides seed funding for 
              exploratory research and fosters research participation by  undergraduates. 
              The Center is associated with an educational  outreach program designed to
              enlighten pre-college and  undergraduate students about science and the role of
              the center's  research program in the modern world.  The MRSEC also supports 
              enhanced collaboration with industry, shared experimental  facilities that also
              support research not directly funded by the  MRSEC, and seed funding for
              exploratory  research.  The Center  currently supports about 15 senior
              investigators, 7 postdoctoral  research associates, 1 technician or other
              professional, 12  graduate students, and 8 undergraduates.  The MRSEC is
              directed  by Professor Ellen D. Williams.  %%%  The Materials Research Science
              and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at  the University of  Maryland supports
              interactive research in two  interdisciplinary groups focusing on oxides, thin
              films, and  novel surface spectroscopic probes.  One of the research groups 
              emphasizes fundamental materials issues in ferroelectric thin  film
              heterostructures , related device problems of technological  relevance, and
              fundamental materials physics of perovskite  materials that exhibit unusually
              large ("colossal") magneto-  resistance.  The second group investigates the
              structure of  surfaces on length scales from nanometers to microns, with the 
              goal of developing a predictive understanding of surface  morphology.  The work
              may ultimately find practical application  in micro-electronics, thin film
              growth, lubrication, catalysis,  and other areas.  A common theme for both
              groups is the  development, optimization and utilization of novel surface 
              sensitive tools to measure structural, magnetic, and electrical  properties at
              microscopic length scales.  The MRSEC supports the  development, operation and
              maintenance of shared experimental  facilities for materials research.  It
              provides seed funding for  exploratory research and fosters research
              participation by  undergraduates.  The Center is associated with an educational
               outreach program designed to enlighten pre-college and  undergraduate students
              about science and the role of the center's  research program in the modern
              world.  The MRSEC also supports  enhanced collaboration with industry, shared
              experimental  facilities that also support research not directly funded by the 
              MRSEC, and seed funding for exploratory  research.  The Center  currently
              supports about 15 senior investigators, 7 postdoctoral  research associates, 1
              technician or other professional, 12  graduate students, and 8 undergraduates. 
              The MRSEC is directed  by Professor Ellen D. Williams.  ***
