Title       : Novel Tunable Light Source Based On A Laser Ionized Capacitor Array -- An
               Electromagnetic Accordion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9632735

Award Number: 9632735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Katsouleas katsoule@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: ECS-9632735  Principal Investigator:  Thomas Katsouleas   
              Title:  Novel Tunable Light Source Based on a Laser Ionized Capacitor Array- An
              Electromagnetic Accordion    The fundamental principles of a new radiation
              source capable of high power, variable pulse length and broad tunability over
              orders of magnitude will be investigated.  The approach may be characterized as
              an "electromagnetic accordion", in which a short laser pulse is used to ionize
              a low pressure working gas between an array of alternately charged capacitor
              plates.  The moving ionization front produced by the laser creates a time
              varying dielectric function that converts the static electric field of the
              capacitors into electromagnetic radiation.  In essence, the laser sweeps up the
              static waveform and squeezes it like an accordion into a similar but shortened
              propagating electromagnetic wavetrain.  The frequency of the output radiation
              is controlled by changing the gas pressures and/or the capacitor plate spacing;
              in principle, the frequency output could be varied over three decades. 
              Moreover, since the input waveform can be arbitrarily shaped by varying the
              bias and size of the capacitor plates, the output radiation can be designed to
              have arbitrary frequency chirp, amplitude modulation, or number of cycles.  The
              research will lead to the development of a single compact device that would
              produce MW pulses of coherent radiation spanning the spectrum from microwaves
              to visible light, with arbitrarily shaped and chirped or encoded wavetrains. 
              Such a device could economically provide many of the light source requirements
              for research, industry and medicine.
