Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9632570

Award Number: 9632570
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3141350            (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Herman hherman@ms.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9178,9251,AMPP,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632570  Herman  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
              at the  University of New York at Stony Brook supports research in the area of 
              thermal spray processing and associated materials. Thermal spray coatings  are
              crucial to the economic, safe, and efficient operation of a wide  variety of
              engineering components. The Center has a focus on key scientific  issues which
              are likely to play a role in thermal spray processing.  The  research is
              carried out in two interdisciplinary research groups.  One  group integrates
              diagnostics and modeling of the plasma spray process in  order to develop tools
              for generating process designs and intelligent  control strategies.  A second
              group concentrates on basic understanding of  the relationship between
              processing, microstructure, and properties of the  thermal spray product.
              Details of the microstructures will be linked  through modeling to activities
              in the first group.  Special emphasis is  placed on measurement of mechanical
              properties and on application of a  variety of sophisticated characterization
              tools.  The MRSEC supports the  development, operation and maintenance of
              shared experimental facilities  for materials research.  It provides seed
              funding for exploratory research  and emerging areas, and fosters research
              participation by undergraduates.  The MRSEC has strong industrial links and an
              educational outreach program  from the pre-college to the graduate level.  The
              Center currently supports  13 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research
              associates, 1 technician,  8 graduate students, and 4 undergraduates.  The
              MRSEC is directed by  Professor Herbert Herman.  %%%  The Materials Research
              Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the  University of New York at Stony
              Brook supports research in the area of  thermal spray processing and associated
              materials. Thermal spray coatings  are crucial to the economic, safe, and
              efficient operation of a wide  variety of engineering components. The Center
              has a focus on key scientific   issues which are likely to play a role in
              thermal spray processing.  The  research is carried out in two
              interdisciplinary research groups.  One  group integrates diagnostics and
              modeling of the plasma spray process in  order to develop tools for generating
              process designs and intelligent  control strategies.  A second group
              concentrates on basic understanding of  the relationship between processing,
              microstructure, and properties of the  thermal spray product. Details of the
              microstructures will be linked  through modeling to activities in the first
              group.  Special emphasis is  placed on measurement of mechanical properties and
              on application of a  variety of sophisticated characterization tools.  The
              MRSEC supports the  development, operation and maintenance of shared
              experimental facilities  for materials research.  It provides seed funding for
              exploratory research  and emerging areas, and fosters research participation by
              undergraduates.  The MRSEC has strong industrial links and an educational
              outreach program  from the pre-college to the graduate level.  The Center
              currently  supports  13 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research
              associates, 1 technician,  8 graduate students, and 4 undergraduates.  The
              MRSEC is directed by  Professor Herbert Herman.  ***
