Title       : Highly Reduced Complexes: C-C Bond Forming Reactions of Arenes Coordinated to
               Manganese (-I)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9632202

Award Number: 9632202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. John Cooper cooperJ+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. N. John Cooper, Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division for studies of highly reduced complexes of   manganese.  The
              primary objective of this project is to use the unusual   reactivity of a
              tetrahapto Mn(-I) benzene complex to develop new   reactions of arenes
              coordinated to transition metals.  The   electrophilicity of cationic reagents,
              such as the hexahapto Mn(I)   complex, iminium salts, and cationic
              cycloheptatrienyl complexes, will be   used to drive additions to the Mn(-I)
              complex.   These additions are   expected to produce new biaryl ligands, amino
              alkyl substituted ligands,   and 6:4:7 fused ring systems.  Fundamental studies
              of the mechanism and   the scope of these additions will be explored using
              ketenes, and   reactions with keteniminium salts will be tested to force entry
              into   (2+2) additions which lead to fusion of a 4-membered carbon ring on to  
              the benzene nucleus.  Strategies for the removal of the diene ligands   from
              the metal center will also be investigated.   The reactions proposed   share
              several characeristics which are likely to make them of strategic   value in
              organic synthesis; all involve formation of new C-C bonds to the   benzene
              nucleus, many introduce useful functional groups for synthesis,   all are
              likely to be stereospecific, and most should be accessible with   other
              substituents on the arene nucleus.   Benzene is one of the most central
              molecules in chemistry, and the   broader significance of the proposed ressarch
              is that it will lead to new   reactions of benzene which cannot be achieved
              through traditional organic   methods. These studies will shed new light on
              carbon-carbon bond forming   reactions to benzene, and the results are expected
              to be of general   utility to the field of organic synthesis.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
