Title       : Studies on the Physiological Ecology of Hydrothermal Vent Chemoautotrophic
               Symbioses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9632861

Award Number: 9632861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399999             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Childress childres@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1319,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632861  CHILDRESS  The vent fauna is an ancient fauna of global distribution in
              the  deep-sea. It has limited taxonomic affinities to other deep sea 
              communities, and yet it has affinities to the faunas of deep-sea  hydrocarbon
              seeps and other seep environments. This deep-sea vent  environment may have
              been a refuge protecting vent taxa from the  extinction events which had great
              impacts on other communities.  Thus, deep-sea hydrothermal vents are one of the
              major ecosystem  types on the earth, but probably the least known. The
              existence  of these communities depends upon the ability of a few 
              invertebrate/ bacteria symbioses to oxidize reduced chemical  species (sulfide
              or methane) from the vents using oxidants  (oxygen or nitrate) from the
              surrounding deep-sea water to power  primary production. Thus the capacities
              for interaction of the  symbioses with the chemical properties of vent
              environments is  fundamental to the primary production which supports these 
              ecosystems. The central objective of this project is to describe  and quantify
              the chemical interactions of the tubeworm Riftia  pachyptila with the vent
              fluids which flow over it so that these  interactions can be modeled for entire
              assemblages of animals.  This project includes development of indices of growth
              rate,  primary production, condition, and environmental conditions based  on
              measurements made on freshly collected worms. The project has  3 components: 1)
              Survey of diverse vent and seep environments to  determine the responses of
              chemoautotrophic symbioses to widely  differing conditions. The objective is to
              quantify a broad range  of parameters on samples from freshly captured worms
              and to  correlate these with environmental characteristics so that the in  situ
              interactions of the worms with the vent fluids can be  estimated. 2) Shipboard
              studies of the physiology supporting  autotrophy in symbiotic vent animals. The
              objective of these  studies is to measure the interactions of Riftia with the
              various  chemical parameters, a s well as the effects of temperature on  these
              interactions, to develop an understanding of the  functioning of the worms.
              Long term maintenance of worms in  pressure aquaria for growth studies is part
              of these projected  studies. 3) The observation and measurement of temporal
              changes  at 13 N. This includes deployment of temperature recorders to  measure
              the variation in conditions and selected observations of  the biota to describe
              the changes over time. The objective is to  describe the niche of the tubeworm
              on longer time scales so that  primary production and interactions with vent
              fluids can be  estimated over longer time periods. This project will greatly 
              increase our understanding of the nature of the interactions  between the vent
              animals and their chemical environments,  contributing to our understanding of
              the functioning of the vent  and other chemoautotrophically supported
              ecosystems.
