Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Statistical Methods for Summarizing and Combining Gene
               Maps"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9632117

Award Number: 9632117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shili Lin shili@stat.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The past few years have seen rapid advancements in developing and 
              constructing gene maps for humans. Because these maps are  constructed from
              different sources of data and methods,  a search of the genome databases may
              result in several different  maps on the same group of markers.  Therefore, it
              is important to  combine (integrate) them to form consensus maps so that they
              can  then be used for mapping new genes.    The long-term objective of this
              project is to develop sound  statistically-based procedures for integrating
              human gene maps.  This includes integrating genetic maps from several studies,
              and  integrating genetic maps with a variety of other maps, including  physical
              maps and radiation hybrid maps.  As a first step, the  focus is to develop a
              workable statistical procedure for  summarizing genetic maps, including summary
              statements of  uncertainty about the order of loci and genetic distances from 
              each study; and to develop statistical procedure for integrating  genetic maps
              from different independent studies.  The specific  aim of the current proposal
              is to carry out a preliminary  study to determine whether Markov chain Monte
              Carlo (MCMC)  methods are feasible in addressing these issues.  We plan to 
              first explore various possibilities of constructing an efficient  MCMC scheme
              for sampling from the distribution of interest.  This  includes studying
              sensitivities of prior distributions,  efficiencies of proposal distributions,
              and feasibility of  existing methods for ensuring irreducibility in the current
               application.  We will then consider what summaries should be  retained from
              MCMC outputs, and what statistical procedures  should be employed to combine
              the summaries from separate MCMC  runs.
