Title       : Advancing the Manufacturing of High Precision Optics by Replication in Different
               Substrate Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9632929

Award Number: 9632929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sing H. Lee lee@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632929  Lee  Two new replication techniques will be developed to reduce the
              costs of manufacturing precision diffractive gratings and optics, binary
              optics, micro-optics and computer generated holograms. These replication
              techniques will show their advantages specially when they are non
              centro-symmetric, their aperture areas are not circular (e.g. square or
              hexagonal), and/or they are in an array format with precise center-to center
              spacings. The first technique can be applied to replicate infrared as well as
              visible-uv precision optics on environmentally durable substrates. It requires
              first generating a gray level mask with only one writing step of an electron
              beam by controlling the electron dosage spatially. Then, using this gray level
              mask, it requires for each copy only one iteration of exposing the analog
              photoresist and transferring the analog photoresist pattern into the substrate
              by chemically assisted ion beam etching (CAIBE). Since multiple substrates can
              be etched simultaneously, the CAIBE is a batch process and the etching cost for
              each copy is reduced. Moreover, since the same gray level mask can be used over
              and over again for making many copies with a projection aligner, the cost of
              generating the gray level mask will be spread over the number of copies. The
              copies of diffractive optics can be in different (infrared-uv) substrate
              materials. The second replication technique starts with a master on quartz or
              glass. Replica are made from liquid photopolymer by molding. Diffractive optics
              on curved surfaces or with integrated receptacles can be replicated with liquid
              photopolymer to work in the visible range. Being able to put diffractive optics
              on curved surfaces allows the optical designers additional degrees of freedom
              for aberration removal; being able to replicate diffractive optics with
              integrated receptacles reduces the assembly costs. In other words, our overall
              technical objectives will be demonstrating the feasibility of these two
              replication techniques in different mater ials as well as studying the
              manufacturing issues. Several industrial collaborators have shown strong
              interests in the proposed investigations. The overall effort will be divided
              approximately as follows: 70% to the first replication technique and 30% to the
              second.
