Title       : MPWG: Girls in Engineering: Hands-On Museum Exhibit Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9632175

Award Number: 9632175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis N. Miaoulis imiaouli@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Y. Wong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The eighth grade is an important point in a girl's education,  particularly in
              deciding whether or not to follow a science and  mathematics track.  In order
              to promote interest and aptitude in  science and engineering, we propose an
              innovated program that  involves eighth grade girls with their mentors
              (preferable the  mother or a female teacher from their school).  They will be
              part  of an engineering team that includes a Tufts faculty member, a  Tufts
              undergraduate, a Tufts staff member, and a staff member from  the Acton
              Discovery Museum.  Five teams will work on developing  actual hands-on
              science-museum exhibits.  Each exhibit will focus  on a specific
              science/engineering principle that will be explored  during the initial phase
              of the project in a supportive and fun  learning environment.  The exhibits
              will link together with other  exhibits following a thematic approach, and will
              use discovery  learning activity-based learning to teach people about science
              and  engineering principles.  These exhibits will be displayed at the  Acton
              Discovery Museum and classes will be especially invited.  The  students will be
              the facilitators of the activities around the  exhibits during these events. 
              The fact that these museum exhibits  were developed by girls and women of the
              surrounding communities  will be emphasized in the displays.  Successful
              completion of this  project may provide a model for collaboration among
              schools,  universities, and museums nationwide in enhancing learning 
              experiences of girls and young women.
