Title       : New Theoretical Approaches to Electron-Electron Interactionsin Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9632706

Award Number: 9632706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerzy Cioslowski JERZY@KYOKO.CHEM.FSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Cioslowski of Florida State University is being supported by   the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program.  During the next   three years
              his group will cary out a comprehensive research program that   aims at gaining
              theoretical knowledge of the electron-electron   interactions in molecules will
              be carried out. The program will involve a   suite of five innovative
              approaches to efficient computation, accurate   approximation, and detailed
              analysis of the electron pair density and   related two-electron quantities.  
              High-performancealgorithms for the   evaluation of the electron intracule and
              extracule densities on arbitrary   grids of points will be developed.  New
              applications of the   Hiller-Sucher-Feinberg identity will afford accurate
              electron intracule   densities that possess proper coalescence cusps at the
              origin, opening an   avenue to fully non-empirical correlation energy
              functionals of the   one-electron density matrix. Topological analysis of
              various components   of the intracule and extracule densities will provide
              intriguing insights   into electron correlation in molecules, whereas
              partitioning of   two-electron properties will elucidate the relative
              importance of intra   and interatomic correlation effects.  A new approach to
              assembling the   correlation holes from approximately transferable
              contributions will   yield highly accurate density functionals for the
              correlation energy.     The planned research will result in new approaches to
              computing   properties of large molecules that are of importance to diverse
              branches   of chemistry.  The introduction of new correlation energy
              functionals   will allow such computations to be carried out more rapidly and  
              accurately, making it possible to study electronic structures of an  
              ever-increasing number of chemical species.  Consequently,   first-principle
              modeling of biochemical systems, new pharmaceuticals, and   advanced materials
              will become more feasible than ever before.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
