Title       : MRSEC: Materials Science and Engineering Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9632275

Award Number: 9632275
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14008661           (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil W. Ashcroft nwa@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9177,9178,9251,AMPP,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632275  Silcox  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
              at  Cornell University supports interactive research in four  interdisciplinary
              groups.  The theme of the MRSEC is the  understanding and control of materials
              at the nanostructural  level.  The Center supports an extensive program of
              research  experience for undergraduates and a new program of outreach to 
              pre-college students in upstate New York, including collaborative  efforts with
              a local science museum.  The Center will also  support seed funding for
              exploratory research and emerging areas  of materials science.  The MRSEC
              supports enhanced collaboration  with industry and extensive shared
              experimental facilities that  also support research not directly funded by the
              MRSEC.  As part  of the Center's search for new materials, the molecular
              inorganic-  organic composites group will focus on innovative approaches for 
              preparing and characterizing novel nanoscale inorganic-organic  molecular
              composites.  The group studying thin films on glass  proposes systematic
              studies of disordered surfaces and thin film  deposition on glass.  The
              research addresses a rich array of  phenomena that are not currently
              understood, and has potential  application for large area electronics, a
              growing segment of the  communications and display industry.  Thin film
              deposition by  energetic ion and atom beams can alter thin film growth 
              substantially, leading to new structures, new compositions, and  smooth
              ultra-thin films with improved properties.  This group  seeks to understand the
              microscopic processes underlying these  effects.  Uniquely structured nanoscale
              materials that isolate a  few defects (or even a single one) will be used by
              the metallic  nanostructure group to elucidate fundamental issues arising from 
              defects and impurities.  Magnetic interactions, defects and  impurities can
              produce dramatic effects in quantum systems.  The  Center currently supports
              about 35 senior investigators, 8  postdoctoral research associates, 12 t
              echnicians or other  professionals, 36 graduate students, and 25
              undergraduates.  The  MRSEC is directed by Professor John Silcox.  %%%  The
              Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at  Cornell
              University supports interactive research in four  interdisciplinary groups. 
              The theme of the MRSEC is the  understanding and control of materials at the
              nanostructural  level.  The Center supports an extensive program of research 
              experience for undergraduates and a new program of outreach to  pre-college
              students in upstate New York, including collaborative  efforts with a local
              science museum.  The Center will also  support seed funding for exploratory
              research and emerging areas  of materials science.  The MRSEC supports enhanced
              collaboration  with industry and extensive shared experimental facilities that 
              also support research not directly funded by the MRSEC.  As part  of the
              Center's search for new materials, the molecular inorganic-  organic composites
              group will focus on innovative approaches for  preparing and characterizing
              novel nanoscale inorganic-organic  molecular composites.  The group studying
              thin films on glass  proposes systematic studies of disordered surfaces and
              thin film  deposition on glass.  The research addresses a rich array of 
              phenomena that are not currently understood, and has potential  application for
              large area electronics, a growing segment of the  communications and display
              industry.  Thin film deposition by  energetic ion and atom beams can alter thin
              film growth  substantially, leading to new structures, new compositions, and 
              smooth ultra-thin films with improved properties.  This group  seeks to
              understand the microscopic processes underlying these  effects.  Uniquely
              structured nanoscale materials that isolate a  few defects (or even a single
              one) will be used by the metallic  nanostructure group to elucidate fundamental
              issues arising from  defects and impurities.  Magnetic interactions, defects
              and  impurities can produce dramatic effects in q uantum systems.  The  Center
              currently supports about 35 senior investigators, 8  postdoctoral research
              associates, 12 technicians or other  professionals, 36 graduate students, and
              25 undergraduates.  The  MRSEC is directed by Professor John Silcox.  ***
