Title       : Simulation of New Solid State Cold Cathode Emitters Using Current Carrying Thin
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9632511

Award Number: 9632511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64441              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc M. Cahay mcahay@ucunix.san.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632511  Cahay  We analyze two new types of cold cathode emitters which consist
              of a thin wide bandgap semiconductor material sandwiched between a heavily
              doped semiconductor (or metallic material) and a low work function semimetallic
              thin film.    First, we develop an Ensemble Monte Carlo (EMC) simulator to
              study electron transport in a Aluminum Gallium Nitride (AlGaN) / Gallium
              Nitride (GaN)/ Lanthanum Hexaboride (LaB6) cold cathode emitter recently
              proposed by Akinwande and coworkers.  Our simulations focus on the calculation
              of the energy spectrum of electrons emitted into vacuum and the quantum
              efficiency of the new cold cathode.    Then, using an analytical treatment, we
              show that under forward bias operation the electrons captured in the low work
              function material of a typical cold cathode are responsible for an effective
              reduction of the semimetallic film work function, leading to a substantial
              increase of the cathode emitted current.  Since the investigation of this
              Dynamic Work Function Shift would be quite cumbersome using EMC simulations, we
              investigate it here using a semi-analytical treatment.  Even though the dynamic
              work function shift could be observed in Akinwande's cold cathode emitter, we
              illustrate it here for a new type of cold cathode emitter using Cadmium Sulfide
              (CdS) as a wide bandgap semiconductor and Lanthanum Sulfide (LaS) as the
              semimetallic thin film.    We will analyze the importance of current crowding
              in the proposed cold cathodes and will determine the range of dc bias over
              which cold cathodes of different width must be operated to minimize current
              crowding and self-heating effects.  We will also study the possibility of
              current self-quenching in the new cold cathode as a function of the applied
              gate bias.  This self-quenching will be examined in terms of the dynamics of
              the spacecharge effects in the region between the gate and the anode.  These
              space-charge effects are expected to lead to the onset of current mscillations
              in the anode current.  The period of  these current oscillations will be
              calculated as a function of the applied gate bias.    The simulation tools to
              be developed in this program can be easily modified to model a wide variety of
              other devices including: efficient blue and ultraviolet light-emitting devices,
              high-energy photodetection systems, flat panel displays, and microwave vacuum
              transistors, among others.  ***
