Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9632524

Award Number: 9632524
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4686500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Clyde L. Briant Clyde_Briant@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1037,9161,9178,9251,AMPP,CVIS,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632524  Clifton  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
              at  the Brown University supports interactive research in one 
              interdisciplinary group focusing on advanced materials for  structural and
              electronic applications.  The research group  emphasizes the development of a
              new generation of capabilities  for measuring and modeling mechanical response
              at the microscopic  level.  Advanced measurement and modeling techniques will
              be  used.  The goal will be to develop methodologies to realize  predictive
              capabilities and to understand the performance and  limitation of particular
              microstructures at micron and atomic  length scales.  The MRSEC supports the
              development, operation and  maintenance of shared experimental facilities for
              materials  research.  It provides seed funding for exploratory research and 
              fosters research participation by undergraduates.  The Center  develops
              educational modules consisting of interactive  demonstrations and laboratory
              projects to be used by mathematics  and science teachers.  The MRSEC also
              supports enhanced  collaboration with industry, shared experimental facilities
              that  also support research not directly funded by the MRSEC, and seed  funding
              for exploratory research.  The Center currently  supports  about 12 senior
              investigators, 2 postdoctoral research  associates, 3 technician or other
              professional, 12 graduate  students, and 4 undergraduates.  The MRSEC is
              directed by  Professor Rodney Clifton.  %%%  The Materials Research Science and
              Engineering Center (MRSEC) at  the Brown University supports interactive
              research in one  interdisciplinary group focusing on advanced materials for 
              structural and electronic applications.  The research group  emphasizes the
              development of a new generation of capabilities  for measuring and modeling
              mechanical response at the microscopic  level.  Advanced measurement and
              modeling techniques will be  used.  The goal will be to develop methodologies
              to realize  predictive  capabilities and to understand  the performance and 
              limitation of particular microstructures at micron and atomic  length scales. 
              The MRSEC supports the development, operation and  maintenance of shared
              experimental facilities for materials  research.  It provides seed funding for
              exploratory research and  fosters research participation by undergraduates. 
              The Center  develops educational modules consisting of interactive 
              demonstrations and laboratory projects to be used by mathematics  and science
              teachers.  The MRSEC also supports enhanced  collaboration with industry,
              shared experimental facilities that  also support research not directly funded
              by the MRSEC, and seed  funding for exploratory research.  The Center currently
               supports  about 12 senior investigators, 2 postdoctoral research  associates,
              3 technician or other professional, 12 graduate  students, and 4
              undergraduates.  The MRSEC is directed by  Professor Rodney Clifton.  ***
