Title       : The Genus Penicillium in Soil: Systematics and Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9632880

Award Number: 9632880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha Christensen mchris@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9632880  Christensen   In comparison with plants and animals, fungi are poorly
              known and little studied. Taxonomic or systematic organization of our knowledge
              of fungal diversity is still rudimentary for many groups, one of the more
              conspicuous being the genus Penicillium, the source from some of its species of
              the first penicillin antibiotics. Recent taxonomic monographs have varied
              greatly in recognizing from 97 to 227 species of Penicillium in the world, most
              of which inhabit soil or plant and animal debris. This taxonomic disarray
              impedes other important studies in ecology, molecular biology, and evolution of
              these fungi. Dr. Martha Christensen of the University of Wyoming, in
              collaboration with Dr. Jens Frisvad in Denmark, is studying the morphology,
              secondary metabolite chemistry, and growth features of several hundred
              laboratory-grown isolates of Penicillium, collected from throughout the world.
              Morphological studies of hyphae, spores, and spore-bearing (conidial)
              structures, of numerous isolates, will assess the variability and reliability
              of key diagnostic features used to identify Penicillium to species.
              Chromatographic analyses for secondary metabolites will yield new characters to
              supplement traditional morphological features in constructing coherent
              assemblages of similar forms, that operationally qualify as species in these
              asexually reproducing organisms. Species-level descriptions with notes on
              habitat and geographical distribution, keys for identification, and
              illustrations of micromorphological features will be brought together in
              taxonomic monographs as part of the research.   The biodiversity of soil
              organisms remains poorly studied, yet ecological and taxonomic investigations
              affirm the high numbers of species and their importance in nutrient cycling and
              other functions. Focusing on one major fungal genus of soil organisms,
              Penicillium, this work will lead to improved taxonomic recognition of species
              and thus facilitate ecological and evolutionary studies as well as pharmace
              utical bioprospecting.
