Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on Nanostructured Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9632526

Award Number: 9632526
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2995000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Chia-Ling Chien clc@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9177,9178,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9632526  Chien  The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
               Johns Hopkins University supports research on nanostructured  materials, with
              a focus on the development of novel low  dimensional nanostructures with unique
              physical properties and  diverse technological applications.  The research
              combines  experimental and theoretical studies to develop an understanding  of
              the interrelationship between the properties of nanostructures  and the degrees
              of freedom available for their design and  fabrication.  Materials to be
              studied include multilayers of  functionally dissimilar materials, e.g. metals
              and insulators,  arrays of nanowires, and ultrafine granular materials.  The
              MRSEC  also supports shared experimental facilities for materials  research,
              exploratory research through seed funding, and  collaborations with industry
              and other academic institutions.  The Center's educational outreach program
              includes summer  internships for talented high school students in collaboration
               with the Johns Hopkins Institute for the Advancement of Youth.  The Center
              supports 7 senior investigators, 3 post-doctoral  research associates, 5
              graduate students, 1 administrative  assistant, and 4 undergraduate students. 
              The MRSEC is directed  by Professor C-L. Chien.  %%%  The Materials Research
              Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at  Johns Hopkins University supports
              interdisciplinary research on  materials whose structure is modulated on a
              nanometer scale.  As  a result of the microstructure, these materials display
              unique  physical properties which have potential technological  applications. 
              The research combines experimental and theoretical  studies to develop an
              understanding of the interrelationship  between the properties of
              nanostructures and the degrees of  freedom available for their design and
              fabrication.  Materials to  be studied include multilayers of functionally
              dissimilar  materials, e.g. metals and insulators, arrays of nanowires, and 
              ultrafine granular materials.  The MR SEC also supports shared  experimental
              facilities for materials research, exploratory  research through seed funding,
              and collaborations with industry  and other academic institutions.  The
              Center's educational  outreach program includes summer internships for talented
              high  school students in collaboration with the Johns Hopkins Institute  for
              the Advancement of Youth.  The Center supports 7 senior  investigators, 3
              post-doctoral research associates, 5 graduate  students, 1 administrative
              assistant, and 4 undergraduate  students.  The MRSEC is directed by Professor
              C-L. Chien.  ***
