Title       : Domain Walls and Phase Boundaries in Ferroelectric Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9632989

Award Number: 9632989
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145094             (Estimated)
Investigator: I-Wei Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9632989  Chen    The proposed research will study the dynamics of  ferroelectric
              domain walls and phase boundaries, which, in  perovskites, are nearly
              atomically sharp with a thickness of  the order of one to two atomic layer
              spacings. For such  sharp interfaces, the mechanism of interfacial steps (in 
              analogy to dislocation jogs and kinks) along with  interactions of interfaces
              and obstacles (in analogy to  dislocation pinning and bow-out) is central to
              the  understanding of interfacial dynamics.  These  characteristics will be
              directly probed by measuring the  migration energy, formation energy, and
              activation volume of  the interfacial steps in expressly designed experiments 
              under a stress field or an electrical field and will be  complemented by
              additional structural and simulation studies  that focus on the atomistics of
              the step mechanism for  domain walls and phase boundaries. Three families of 
              prototypical ferroelectrics with a perovskite structure,  BaTiO3,
              Pb(Zr1-xTix)O3 (PZT) and Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3 (PMN),  along with their various
              compositional and microstructural  modifications, will be investigated. For
              BaTiO3 and PZT type  of ceramics, which have a sharp transition at the Curie 
              temperature, Tc, the interest is primarily on the dynamics  of domain walls
              below Tc. For PMN type of ceramics, which  have a broader permittivity peak
              with the actual transition  diffuse and well below the temperature of maximum 
              permittivity (Tmax), the studies will be directed to the  dynamics of phase
              boundaries below Tmax.  Relaxation  spectroscopy  will be used to measure
              activation energy and  activation volumes of mobile interfaces, which can be 
              conveniently performed using polarization relaxation at  small field and stress
              relaxation at large field.  To lend  further insight into the atomistic
              mechanisms that affect  polarization reversal and interface mobility,
              synchrotron x-  ray absorption spectroscopy (EXAFS) studies and Monte-Carlo 
              lattice simulations will be conducted. These investigations   will be carried
              out for both model ferroelectrics and their  modifications to delineate the
              broader effects of chemistry,  defect, and nanostructure that can influence
              interfacial  dynamics by either providing obstacles to interface motion  or by
              altering the mobility of the interface itself. The  goal of the research is to
              provide a unified and detailed  understanding, from the viewpoint of interface
              dynamics, of  various interface-controlled ferroelectric, ferroelastic and 
              piezoelectric phenomena that have broad implications to the  performance and
              long-term reliability of ferroelectric  ceramics as devices.  %%%  The goal of
              the research is to provide a unified and  detailed understanding, from the
              viewpoint of interface  dynamics, of various interface-controlled
              ferroelectric,  ferroelastic and piezoelectric phenomena that have broad 
              implications to the performance and long-term reliability of  ferroelectric
              ceramics as devices. Three families of  prototypical ferroelectrics with a
              perovskite structure,  barium titantate, lead zirconium titanate, and lead 
              magnesium niobate, long with their various compositional and  microstructural
              modifications, will be investigated.  These  materials are used in many types
              of sensors, actuators, and  electronic devices.  ***
