Title       : Dissertation Research: Noncompliance Among Hmong Immigrants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9632204

Award Number: 9632204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11087              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin J. Konner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project involves the dissertation research of a cultural anthropology
              student from Emory University.  The student will study noncompliance with
              medical advice and therapy among Hmong immigrants in Fresno, California.  The
              hypotheses that perceptions involved in the medical encounter differ between
              medical professionals and patients, and that perceptual differences and the
              structure of medical practice affect outcomes of the medical interaction and
              patient's health will be investigated.  The project will focus on surgeons as
              representative of medical professionals, and the Hmong as representative of a
              non-western population.  In addition to general participant observation in the
              hospital and the community, a total of 50 medical encounters will be videotaped
              and 150 interviews will be conducted , 50 each with surgeons, Hmong patients in
              a Fresno hospital, and Hmong persons in the community.  Initially diagnoses of
              appendicitis and bone fracture will be selected as a sample.  Measures will be
              recorded of Hmong patient medical decision-making and socio-economic background
              as well as physician time and quality of interaction with patients.  The
              patient compliance as well as the health outcome will be recorded, and the
              student will look for patterns of variation according to age, gender,
              education, past experience, acculturation, physician's age, gender, training
              and past experience.  This research is important because medical practice is
              becoming more dependent on high technology which is more difficult for patients
              to understand without more extensive preparation and interpretation.  Advances
              in our understanding of misunderstandings between patients and physicians in
              this extreme case of surgeons and immigrants is likely to provide good ideas
              for investigating the more general situation of doctor-patient communication.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
