Title       : Collaborative Research Specifying the Dimensions of Bias in Media Coverage of
               Washington, D.C., 1993-1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9632641

Award Number: 9632641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark McPhail cmcphail@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of media bias in reporting of collective action events.  Media
              traces, such as newspaper stories and television news broadcasts, have become a
              common source of information for researchers who seek to understand the forms,
              intensity, duration and other attributes of public protest.  But the wide
              suspicion that such media traces provide a non-random selection of the
              population of those events as well as a distorted description of their features
              has led to caution in exploiting the rich potential of these data sources.
              Understanding how media institutions select from the vast range of collective
              action events that are available to be covered and how they describe them
              requires independent sources of evidence about the population from which such
              events are selected.  Knowledge of the characteristics of the population of
              events and the media samples of them enable the researcher to investigate the
              causal structure of both selection and description bias.  Such knowledge can
              provide the evidence to model the bias in a way that can help collective action
              scholars dependent upon media traces to interpret their findings more
              appropriately than is currently possible.  Generating such knowledge is the
              goal of this ongoing project.     In this phase of the research, the
              investigators will: 1) expand the years of the selection bias analyses by
              gathering, in electronic form, National Park Service permit records for
              1993-95; 2) code National Park Police demonstration after-reports for the same
              1992-95 period in order to provide a parallel test of the selection bias
              analyses; 3) systematically observe two additional Washington, D.C.
              demonstrations; 4) electronically search media records for coverage of these
              and two earlier observed demonstrations, as well as all 1993-95 Washington
              demonstrations; 5) employ a systematic schema to code television network news
              coverage of the annual March for Life, 1973-95; 6) systematically analyze all
              crowd size controversies in Washington, D.C. for the last sev eral decades; and
              7) coordinate comparative analyses across several collateral selection bias
              projects.     The chief aim of this project is to evaluate the quality of media
              data and thus guide social scientists in their appropriate use, but it also
              will contribute to sociological theory about the sources of media bias.  A
              wider practical benefit will be knowledge that can be used to evaluate the
              validity of information provided to policy makers and the general public
              through the mass media and some government agencies.
