Title       : GOALI: An Improved Method for Computing Zero-Sequence Impedance of An
               Underground Pipe-Type Cable
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9632118

Award Number: 9632118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93588              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Bang Xu ecexu@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9632118  Xu       Underground pipe-type cables in power transmission systems are
               widely used in urban areas.  To protect such systems, it is  necessary for the
              utilities to be able to accurately calculate  fault currents in the system.  An
              accurate calculation of fault  currents requires precise knowledge of the
              impedance of the  underground cables.  The objective of the proposed research
              project  is to develop an improved method for computing zero-sequence 
              impedance of underground pipe-type cables.  The pipe of the cable  is grounded
              at both ends and the phase currents may be unbalanced.   Since the pipe is
              normally made of steel which is a nonlinear  magnetic material, special
              attention will be paid to its nonlinear  B-H characteristic and an iterative
              procedure will be employed to  determine the varying permeability in the steel
              pipe.  The zero-  sequence impedance can be computed based on information of
              the  nonuniform current distribution in the phase conductors as well as  the
              electric field intensity and the total current in the steel  pipe.  Therefore,
              it is proposed that the major effort be devoted  to obtaining the necessary
              information in these two respects.  In  the determination of the nonuniform
              current distribution in the  phase conductors, a Fourier series technique
              developed in the  proposer's previous research project will be employed, taking
              into  account the skin effect, the proximity effect and the influence of  the
              steel pipe.  To compute the electric field intensity and the  total current in
              the steel pipe, including the circulating current  and the returning
              zero-sequence current, a set of equations are  formulated based on Faraday's
              law.  The equations formulated will  be solved by an iterative procedure.  To
              validate the numerical  techniques developed, it is proposed that measurement
              of zero-  sequence impedance be performed. The computational results will be 
              compared with the measurement data.  ***
