Title       : STTR PHASE I: A Fiber-Optic Probe for In-Situ Measurement of Thin Film
               Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9632155

Award Number: 9632155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Johnson ejohnson@ion-optics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore F. Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ion Optics, Inc.
	      411 Waverly Oaks Road, Suite 144
	      Waltham, MA  02154    617/788-8777

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9632155  Johnson     This Phase I STTR project will combine laser and white
              light sources in a single diagnostic instrument compatible with high
              temperature processes, immune to electromagnetic noise (a byproduct of rf wafer
              heating), and free of the requirement for precise optical alignment. The basic
              concept of the fiber-optic monitor has been demonstrated I in rudimentary
              pulsed laser experiments on a silicon nitride reactor at Brown University; Ion
              Optics Inc. has successfully extracted real-time layer composition from
              white-light reflectance spectra. Phase I will extend this earlier work to a
              practical dual-source configuration that is fast and accurate enough to track
              thin-film growth at rates typical of advanced devices. The performance of
              virtually all modem opto-electronic devices depends critically upon the ability
              to grow  multi-layered, thin-film structures whose composition and thickness is
              precisely controlled. In production-scale deposition processes, monitoring and
              adjustment cannot be done in real time. Ion Optics Inc. will overcome the
              problem with a dual-light-source, fiber-optic, thickness and composition
              monitor operating simultaneously as an interferometer (measuring growth rate)
              and as a reflectometer (measuring composition and total  thickness). A major
              advantage of such an instrument is its ability to provide the data needed to
              make instantaneous composition changes during growth to compensate for the
              effects of diffusion. Diffusion is an important factor when very thin adjacent
              layers of dissimilar composition must be deposited at relatively high
              temperature, as is the case for multiple quantum well devices.   This project
              will result in reasonably priced, easy to use thickness and composition
              monitors. Another version of these optoelectronic devices would compete with
              quartz deposition gauges.    ***
