Title       : Physiological and Psychophysical Studies of Spatial Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9409310

Award Number: 9409310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell L. De Valois   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen K. De Valois  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In the visual cortex of the brain, areas V1 and V2 are known to be involved in
              the processing of signals for spatial aspects of vision, including such
              features as texture discrimination and motion.  Texture segregation is the
              process of distinguishing an object in the visual scene not by a local analysis
              of its shape and structure (called form perception), but by a more global
              analysis of its internal patterning.  The spatial aspects of position and
              motion also can involve such global analysis in addition to local analysis. 
              This project extends work on the nature of such spatial processing, and its
              relation to our perception of texture and movement, using a combination of
              physiological and psychophysical experiments.  The use of identical stimuli for
              the physiology and the perception experiments allows correlation and
              interpretation of measures of detectability and discriminability for the
              individual cortical nerve cells and for conscious perception.  A novel method
              of producing quantifiably variable patterned stimuli allows a separation of
              features related to the overall stimulus from features related to fine
              structure.  Results will lead to a better understanding of the combinatorial
              rules for how the visual system integrates information about what an object is
              and where it is in the environment, which are two fundamental tasks for
              visually guided behavior.  This study will have an impact beyond just visual
              science, to neuroscience and computational work, and will be of interest for
              work on artificial visual systems.
