Title       : RIA: Trading Packet Headers for Packet Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9409977

Award Number: 9409977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Varghese   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Washington University at St. Louis  George Varghese  RIA: Trading Packets
              Headers for Packet Processing    In high speed networks, packet processing is
              relatively expensive  while bandwidth is cheap.  The central thesis here is
              that if  suitable header fields can be added to packets, then mechanisms to 
              speed up packet processing can be devised.  Several ideas are  advanced to
              support the above thesis.  First, data manipulation  (e.g. data copying,
              checksumming) is a major bottleneck of end  system packet processing.  The
              approach taken here suggests adding  a data manipulation header to an easily
              accessible portion of each  packet.  This header contains pointers to fields
              (in various  layers) required for data manipulation.  This information (e.g. a 
              pointer to data to be encrypted) allows implementations to  efficiently combine
              data manipulation steps (e.g. encryption and  copying).  Prior work has shown
              that combining data manipulation  steps can yield order-of-magnitude
              performance improvement.  The  present approach can yield similar improvements
              in a more uniform  and structured fashion.  Second the work studys adding index
              fields  to protocol identifiers at all layers (e.g. connection identifiers, 
              network addresses) to reduce lookup costs and generic protocol  processing. 
              Several new ides to utilize these index fields  (threaded indexing, index
              passing, and source hashing) are studied.  It is known that the use of Virtual
              Circuit Identifiers (VCIs) on  virtual circuit packets simplifies lookup and
              packet processing.   In source hashing and threaded indexing, the added indices
               essentially serve as VCIs, but for flows in a datagram network.  In  source
              hashing, for example, the "VCI" is a consistent random label  chosen by the
              source.  OUr new methods provide the benefits of  normal VCis without requiring
              a round trip delay for set up.  The  methods can lower uorst case datagram
              lookup times form O(log(n) to  O(1), which may be important for gigabit
              routers.  IN this project  we design,  analyze, and implement these new ideas
              and search for  other techniques that arise from the basis thesis.  The current
               climate of transition (in which transport, routing, and data link  protocols
              are changing) provides an opportunity to apply these  techniques to influence
              real protocols.
