Title       : Behavioral Determinants of Household Financial Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9409043

Award Number: 9409043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74988              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Douglas Bernheim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The existing evidence on economic literacy among the general population casts
              serious doubt on the proposition that personal financial planning is the
              consequence of highly sophisticated deliberation, as envisioned in modern
              economic theory. Much of the population is ill-equipped to make even the most
              basic economic calculations, and few have mastered more advanced concepts such
              as compound interest, risk-return tradeoffs, inflation adjustments, or the
              difference between actual and actuarially fair insurance premiums, that govern
              the tradeoffs at the heart of the life cycle allocation problem. Although it is
              conceivable that unsophisticated individuals could act as if they make
              reasonably well-informed decisions, this is unlikely in the context of personal
              financial planning.  Thus, the study of economic literacy, relevant
              developmental experiences, and sources of financial information and advice
              should shed considerable light on household financial decision making, and
              should aid in the design of public policies that are designed to influence
              these decisions.    This research consists of three parts.  Part 1 involves an
              analysis of data from a new and unique household survey on demographics,
              developmental experiences, sources of financial information/advice, economic
              knowledge, and current financial behavior.  Data are analyzed to identify and
              quantify the determinants of developmental experiences, information sources,
              knowledge, and financial decisions. Part 2 involves the design and preliminary
              analysis of a follow-on survey.  Part 3, which is joint with Jonathan Skinner
              of the University of Virginia, involves an empirical analysis of economic
              vulnerabilities, using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. In particular, the
              study examines the relationship between consumption trajectories, before and
              after retirement, and accumulated wealth, in order to test the hypothesis that
              the observed decline in consumption after retirement reflects farsighted
              planning, against the view that this decline res ults from inadequate saving.
