Title       : Fundamental Limits and Practical of Integrated All-Optical Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1994 
File        : a9409486

Award Number: 9409486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Barry ribarry@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The George Washington University  Richard A. Barry  RIA: Fundamental Limits
              and Practical Designs of Integrated  All-Optical Networks    In an All-Optical
              Network (AON), the signals remain in the optical  domain from the origin to the
              destination.  Since electronic packet  or circuit switched routing cannot be
              implemented in an AON, other  routing methods are required.  Wavelength Routing
              is an attractive  option where the path of a signal through the network is
              determined  by the wavelength of the signal, the state of the network switches 
              and wavelength changing devices. The focus here is on Wavelength  Routing AONs
              which support multiple point and multiple rate  sessions.  So far only single
              rate point to point networks have  been investigated.  In the point to point
              case, many switching  topologies can be implemented all-optically in a
              straightforward  manner.  This is not the case in the multi-point environment
              and  new design methodologies are required.  AONs supporting  heterogeneous
              users with widely varying bandwidth requirements pose  interesting questions
              requiring innovative engineering solutions.   This research considers two
              network models: 1) passive networks  which do not contain any switches or
              configurable devices, and 2)  configurable networks which use switches and/or
              configurable  wavelength changing devices to alter the paths of wavelengths 
              through the network.  Passive AONs are suitable for Local and  Metropolitan
              Area Networks, while configurable AONs will find  applications in Wide Area
              Networks.  Recently it has been shown  that wavelength routing can
              significantly increase the capacity of  a passive AON over a broadcast star in
              the point-to-point single  rate environment.  It is likely that this conclusion
              will hold in  an integrated environment, and how to achieve this performance 
              advantage is a question which will be addressed.   Configurable  AONs are
              scalable and therefore appropriate for a Wide Area  Network.  Previous studies
              have shown that for "irregular"   topologies, wavelength changing devices can
              dramatically increase  throughput.  What is not understood is what topological
              properties  make wavelength changers useful.  The fundamental issues in the 
              design of networks with and without wavelength changers and the  practical
              trade-offs will be investigated.
