Title       : Political Accountability and International Crisis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9409225

Award Number: 9409225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph Siverson rmsiverson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409225  Siverson    Do the domestic political processes and institutions of
              states  influence their choice of foreign policies?  The answer to this 
              question is almost certainly in the affirmative, but balance of  power accounts
              of international politics have emphasized the  effects of the structure of
              international power on the strategies  pursued by states and have deemphasized
              the effects of domestic  variables.  Some extreme accounts have even gone so
              far as to  deny entirely the relevance of domestic political factors in 
              accounting for, to take one example, international war.  Yet  clear cut
              evidence indicates that democracies have not fought  each other in a serious
              war, a fact that is clearly not in accord  with balance of power theories.   
              Contrary to structural theories, this research begins with the  hypothesis that
              domestic politics do in fact have an important  effect on the foreign policy of
              a state.  The main element of  this can be substantiated by showing that
              political leaders are  held accountable for their failures in foreign policy. 
              Of  course, considerable evidence tells us that United States  presidents
              benefit or suffer politically because of the success  or failure, respectively,
              of their policies, but evidence for  such an effect in other political systems
              is either fragmentary  or anecdotal.    To address this question, the
              researchers will identify all state  political leaders in the twentieth century
              and collect data on  the extent to which their state participated in
              international  crises during their tenure, what the outcome of the crisis was, 
              and what the costs of the crisis were.  The investigators will  also collect
              data on the basic characteristics of the political  system, recording for
              example, whether there was a legislative  body that served as a check on the
              executive, how competitive  elections (if any) were, how the leader came to
              power and how  long they had been in power.    The application of several
              powerful statistical methods will  enable the r esearchers to assess the extent
              to which political  leaders are held accountable for their foreign policy
              actions  across time, societies and political systems.  Evidence of such 
              accountability, particularly in non-democratic systems, will not  only inform
              the theoretical investigation of international  politics, but can provide
              important evidence to United States  policy makers about the possible
              constraints under which the  leaders of other states operate.  The researchers
              also hope to be  able to shed light on the likely expansion of the "democratic 
              peace".
