Title       : Concepts, Perceptions and Their Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9409232

Award Number: 9409232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95559              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Goldstone rgoldsto@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed experiments and model explore how people learn new concepts. The
              central thesis is that concept learning often changes how objects are
              perceived. That is, concepts and categories may be constructed on the basis of
              the perceptual features of objects, but these concepts may in turn influence
              what we see as the perceptual features. The aim of the proposed work is to
              specify and provide a formal account of such interactions between concept
              learning and perception.  The influences of concept learning on subsequent
              perceptual judgments are investigated in a first series of experiments.  The
              possibility that concept learning causes new object descriptions (based on
              perceptual features) to be created is considered in the second series of
              experiments. A neutral network computer model of concept learning is proposed.
              In this model, the concepts to be acquired alter the perceptual features used
              for categorization.  Rather than assuming that fixed perceptual features are
              combined to determine categorization rules, this model allows for a mutual and
              simultaneous influence between concepts and perceptions.    The research will
              have two tangible benefits. The first benefit will be to further our
              understanding of how people naturally learn.  Unlike most laboratory studies,
              concept learning in the real world does typically involve alterations in what
              is perceived.  For example, specialized experts learn to improve their
              perception and come to be able to classify better, for example, to classify
              some patients as suffering from cancer, some tumors as malignant, or some oil
              fields as promising.  If we can understand how experts learn to improve their
              perception with experience, we will better be able to effectively train new
              personnel. The second tangible benefit will be to aid the construction of
              automatic devices for human-like categorization.  By understanding the
              mechanisms that people use to create new categories, we will be in a better
              position to develop procedures that also can categorize objec ts in the world
              in an intelligent manner.
