Title       : Informational Lobbying, Legislative Institutions and Campaign Contributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1994      
File        : a9409153

Award Number: 9409153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34837              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Austen-Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409153  Austen-Smith    This research is to continue the investigation on the 
              informational role of interest groups and its connection to the  giving of
              campaign contributions on the policy process.    During the initial stages of
              the research, the investigator  developed a framework that explicitly
              integrates both campaign  contributions and lobbying, considered in
              informational terms.   The key idea is that lobbying is predominantly an
              informational  activity.  Legislators have to make decisions (set agendas,
              vote,  and so forth) on issues about which they often know relatively  little. 
              Interest groups, however, are frequently well-informed  about the consequences
              of particular legislation for their  particular interests; consequently,
              legislators would like to  become informed by listening to lobbyists.  A
              principal  implication of the framework was that campaign contributions per  se
              do not constitute sufficient incentives for a legislator to  grant access to a
              group that wishes to influence the legislator's  decision by providing salient
              information.  The reason is that  the legislator has an incentive to listen to
              those groups who  share his or her policy preferences, irrespective of any
              monies  they may have given.    This finding suggests the correlation between
              money and access is  indirect.  Rather than "buy" access, groups give money to 
              candidates whose policy preferences reflect their own so that the  resulting
              legislature will consist of legislators who will seek  them out on
              informational grounds, irrespective of any campaign  contributions.  From this
              perspective, the issues then concern  how groups decide to whom to contribute
              and how campaign  expenditures influence voting behavior within the electorate.
                The research to be undertaken addresses both of these concerns,  focusing on
              the (indirect) access motivation for contributing and  on the advertising role
              of campaign expenditures.
