Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Temporal and Spatial Coherence of Primary
               Productivity and Nutrient Cycling across Lake Districts of Northern Wisconsin
               and NE Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9409364

Award Number: 9409364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Adams msadams@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,5936,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9409364  Adams  This award supports Professor Michael Adams and two  graduate
              students of the University of Wisconsin at  Madison to collaborate with Rainer
              Koschel and others of  the Neuglobsow field laboratory of the Institute for 
              Inland Freshwater Ecology, at the northern edge of  Brandenberg State, Germany.
               This laboratory was once  part of the East German Academy of Sciences, and was
              not  easily accessible to Western limnologists.  Together the  two research
              groups will study coherence and other  parameters of primary production
              patterns in U.S. and  German lakes of similar biogeographical settings.  In a 
              related study, they will examine the effect of re-  unification on water
              quality in the eastern states of  Germany.  Specifically they will collect and
              compare  primary productivity and other limnological data from the  North
              Temperate Lakes Long Term Ecological Research  (LTER) Program site in northern
              Wisconsin and the  Mecklenburg-Brandenburg lake district of northeastern 
              Germany.  The history of the land use pattern at each  location, the relative
              location in the respective  landscape in reference to the groundwater system,
              the  regional climate, and information on nutrient loading and  nutrient
              recycling will be incorporated into the  analysis.      This project is the
              first significant freshwater ecology  collaboration on waters of the former
              East Germany.  The  region being studied is an extensive, important, post- 
              glacial lake district, with more than 10,000 lakes  greater than one hectare in
              surface area.  Collaboration  with local limnologists will be an interesting
              and  valuable opportunity for participants in the Northern  Temperate Lakes
              LTER site, and should be mutually  beneficial to both research groups. 
              Observed patterns in  lake primary production may be associated with global 
              change in climate.  This is because lake systems can  serve as integrators of
              environmental information, such  as the effects of global solar radiation and
              thermal  regimes on inorganic carbo n fixation through  photosynthesis of lake
              phytoplankton.  This research may  be useful in contrasting such patterns
              between continents  and at different latitudes, using otherwise similar 
              biogeographic units.  ***
