Title       : Collaborative Research: Evolution of Genetic Covariances in Stalk-Eyed Flies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9409369

Award Number: 9409369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald S. Wilkinson gw10@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9409369  Wilkinson   A fundamental question of population biology is how does
              selection alter suites of multiple traits.  It has long been know that
              selection on one trait can cause correlated changes in traits not under
              selection.  These correlated changes can be predicted over the short term from
              the among trait genetic variances and covariances statistics estimated from a
              breeding selection study.  However, to make predictions beyond a few
              generations ones has to determine how the genetic covariances themselves
              change.  In this study the investigators propose to investigate the influences
              of selection on the genetic covariances among a suite of 11 morphological and
              life history traits in eight species and eight selected lines of stalk-eyed
              flies.  These flies provide a model system for studying this problem because
              eye span dimorphism has arisen independently in at least four genera.  In
              monomorphic species males and females of equivalent body size have similar eye
              spans while in dimorphic species male eye span exceeds body length.  By
              estimating genetic covariances from breeding studies and comparing they with
              respect to phylogenetic relationships obtained from DNA sequencing information
              that will be able to determine the rate of direction of genetic covariance
              change when a trait is under strong directional selection.  These correlational
              studies will be corroborated by comparing genetic covariances among lines that
              have experienced directional selection for over 20 generations in a lab.   This
              work will produce three major results: 1) an improved understanding of the
              phylogenetic relationships among intriguing group of flies from Africa and
              south-east Asia, some of which are agricultural pests; 2) new statistical
              methods for comparing covariance matrices which are more robust, make fewer
              assumptions and are less computationally demanding than the current methods; 3)
              the most comprehensive analysis yet performed relating to whether or not
              genetic correlations act as a constraint on or a con sequence of natural
              selection.
