Title       : RIA: Channel codes for digital communications and storage systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9409688

Award Number: 9409688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Vardy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana  Alexander Vardy  RIA:  Channel Codes
              for Digital Communications and Storage Systems    Reliable transmission and
              storage of information requires the use  of error correcting channel codes to
              protect the data against  errors introduced by the channel noise or
              imperfections of the  recording medium.  Error correcting codes are implemented
              in most  of the modern communications and storage systems ranging from 
              household compact-disc players through telephone line modems,  computer
              memories, and mobile radio networks to satellite and deep  space
              communications.  In this project we investigate two general  types of error
              correcting codes, known as block and lattice codes,  using a novel dynamical
              approach.  Since a block code is  essentially subset of finite field, while a
              lattice is a discrete  collection of dimensional real points with certain
              prescribed  distance properties, they have been conventionally treated as 
              geometric or algebraic entities.  However, as is just now being  realized,
              block and lattice codes may as well be regarded as  dynamical systems.  The
              latter approach has several profound  advantages over the conventional
              practice.  One of the objectives  is to exploit these advantages in an attempt
              to find new codes,  better than presently known.  Another objective is to
              provide  bounds on the decoding complexity and develop more efficient 
              maximum-likelihood decoders, which substantially advance the  current
              performance achievable for a given decoder complexity.   Furthermore, we study
              the precise trade-off between complexity and  performance in block and lattice
              error correcting codes, from both  theoretical and practical standpoints. 
              Progress along these lines  would enable the designer of a communication system
              to obtain  larger coding gains for the same bandwidth, power,  and complexity 
              constraints.  Also treated are modulation codes for input  constrained channels
              used to encode  information into a particular  set of sequences admitted  by
              the channel.  These codes have  widespread use in a variety of information
              storage applications,  such as magnetic or magneto-optic recording systems. 
              New  multi-dimensional modulation codes are currently being developed  for the
              emerging technology of holographic storage.  Most of the  modulation codes in
              use today are constructed using tools from  symbolic dynamics.  Taking the
              point of view of block codes as  dynamical systems makes it natural to consider
              applying results  from algebraic coding theory for the design of modulation
              codes.   We will use this approach to develop more efficient encoders for  high
              order spectral null codes and multidimensional modulation  codes for
              holographic recording.  The possibility of integrating a  prescribed error
              correcting capability within such modulation  encoders will also be studied.
