Title       : Partial Support of the Core Activities of the Committee on National Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9409570

Award Number: 9409570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2666483            (Estimated)
Investigator: Miron L. Straf   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award continues NSF support for the core activities of the Committee on
              National Statistics (CNSTAT), a National Science Foundation standing committee
              at the National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council (NAS-NRC). 
              CNSTAT was established in 1972 at the recommendation of the President's
              Commission on Federal Statistics to fill a major gap in a highly decentralized
              federal statistical system.  The Committee focuses on improving the statistical
              methods and information on which public policy decisions are based.  The
              Committee strengthens the development of data for social science research,
              makes such data more accessible for research, and furthers the development of
              measurement and analytic methods for analysis and research.  The Committee
              identifies problem areas in which statistical questions are important to public
              policy and carries out studies within these areas by itself or by convening
              panels of other experts.  Distinguished statisticians and other scientists, who
              volunteer their services, are selected and appointed to the Committee by the
              NAS-NRC.    The Committee directly benefits the social sciences by (1)
              improving national statistics and furthering the development and application of
              statistical methods for social science research, (2) linking the federal
              statistical system and the social science research community, (3) involving
              academic scientists in research to improve national statistics, (4) providing
              forums for the exchange of information and ideas, and (5) advancing the social
              and economic sciences within the NAS-NRC and through the Committee's
              relationship with the Congress, OMB, and many research and program agencies.   
              With support for core activities, the Committee identifies important problem
              areas and establishes priorities, develops panel or workshop studies, selects
              participants, reviews study activities and reports, disseminates widely study
              results, and serves as an integrative force for the highly decentralized
              federal statistical system.  The NSF suppor t allows the Committee to identify
              and develop scientific studies for which federal agencies do not provide the
              leadership.  In addition, the NSF investment supports a unique process of
              intellectual development that is critical in a decentralized statistical
              system.  The Committee provides leadership over interdisciplinary areas by
              bringing together methodologically oriented statisticians along with federal
              agency staff and quantitatively oriented social scientists to work on real
              problems.  The Committee's reputation, credibility, and influence are widely
              known throughout the federal government and are the reasons why Congress, OMB,
              NSF, and other federal agencies turn to the Committee for advice.
