Title       : Parental Coaching and Children's Reports of Nonexperienced Events: The
               Contributions of Forgetting, Source Monitoring, and Acquiesence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1994  
File        : a9409231

Award Number: 9409231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra A. Poole debra.a.poole@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. Stephen Lindsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409231  POOLE  This project will use a powerful new suggestibility manipulation
              to  examine several important issues concerning the strengths and  weaknesses
              of children as witnesses.  The technique, an analog of  parental involvement in
              false allegations of abuse, is fully  piloted and involves no deception.  In
              Phase 1, children between  the ages of 3 and 8 years will participate in a
              series of events  and will be interviewed to determine what they can report
              about  those events.  Three months later, parents will read the children  a
              story that includes descriptions of events the children had  experienced and
              events they had not experienced.  The children will  then be reinterviewed on
              two occasions with a stepwise procedure in  which nonsuggestive questions are
              followed by leading questions and  a series of questions that specifically ask
              the children to  distinguish between events they experienced and events they
              only  heard described.  Because the interview procedures yield  information
              about individual differences in recall, forgetting,  acquiescence (i.e., saying
              "yes" to a suggestion), and source  monitoring (i.e., distinguishing between
              memories from several  sources), these data will be a first step in
              constructing a  systematic theory of the factors responsible for developmental 
              changes in suggestibility.    This project will accomplish the following goals:
              (a) trace  developmental trends in susceptibility to false information 
              provided by parents; (b) evaluate the types of false reports that  are elicited
              by interview procedures with varying degrees of  prompting; (c) evaluate
              developmental changes in recall,  acquiescence, and memory source monitoring;
              and (d) test the  adequacy of various causal models that specify the
              contributions of  these processes to children's suggestibility.  The resulting
              data  will have important implications for how investigations of child  abuse
              allegations are conducted, and will contribute to the  development of interview
              procedures that more adequat ely test  alternative hypotheses about the sources
              of children's reports.  ***
