Title       : Characterizing and Testing the Implications of Dynamic Models in Economics and
               Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9409501

Award Number: 9409501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars P. Hansen l-hansen@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409501  Hansen    This project develops and implements econometric methods for 
              assessing dynamic economic models.  The research covers four  different areas. 
              First, the project works on specification and  estimation of continuous time
              stochastic process models.  Such  models occur frequently in economics, but
              there remains many open  questions about how to estimate and test them using
              discrete time  data.  The project examines alternative econometric methods that
               could answer the most important of these questions.  Second, the  project
              develops methods for estimating linear and loglinear  rational expectations
              models.  The models for which these methods  will be applicable include both
              ones for which the allocations  are solutions to optimal resource allocation
              problems as well as  other ones for which there are market or tax distortions. 
              The  estimation methods studied include semiparametric procedures  whereby the
              exogenous forcing processes are modeled in a flexible  way.  Along a similar
              vein, the project reinvestigates the issue  of using filtering methods to
              eliminate low frequency components  of the data.  The motivation for such
              methods is that the dynamic  stochastic model under investigation abstracts
              from the low  frequency movements in the time series.  The aim of the proposed 
              research is to devise estimation methods that are on the one  hand, robust to
              this misspecification, but on the other hand,  have nice statistical properties
              and are computationally  tractable.  Third, the project continues work
              developing and  adapting risk-sensitive control theory to models of dynamic 
              economies.  This control theory permits risk-adjustments to be  incorporated
              into models in simple ways so that linear decision  rules are sensitive to the
              amount of uncertainty in the economy.   Hence they capture a precautionary
              savings motive.  In addition  to testing such models empirically, the project
              investigates the  ramifications of introducing heterogeneity among consumers in
               their risk prefere nces.  Finally, the project studies a long  historical data
              set on British stock prices and dividends and  investigates the link between
              the British stock market and  macroeconomic events.
