Title       : Air-Sea Gas Transfer in Coastal Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9409222

Award Number: 9409222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tetsu Hara thara@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 9409222  Hara    Research will be undertaken in response to a one-time
              Program  Announcement (NSF 93-101) for the Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) 
              Coastal Air-Sea Chemical Fluxes pilot study.  The NSF/CoOP Study  will augment
              and collaborate with the ONR-sponsored Marine Boundary  Layer (MBL) Advanced
              Research Initiative (ARI) project scheduled  for 1995 off the coast of
              Monterey, California.  The overall  scientific project is interdisciplinary,
              with the NSF/CoOP efforts  addressing chemical and biological parameters, while
              the ONR study  focuses on physical oceanographic and meteorological parameters.
                  This is a collaborative project between investigators from the  Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution and from Scripps Institution  of Oceanography.  The
              research will improve our understanding of  air-sea gas transfer under
              different environmental conditions at  the air-sea interface.  A new in situ
              instrument will be developed  to measure the gas transfer velocity (k) on time
              scales of minutes  to hours that are much shorter than conventional tracer
              techniques  (days or longer).   The instrument will be integrated into a small 
              research catamaran called LADAS which is towed behind a research  vessel. 
              LADAS carries a scanning laser slope gauge, to measure the  three-dimensional
              capillary-gravity wave spectrum, meteorological  instruments, and a long-wave
              monitoring capability.  Additionally  a surface microlayer sampler will be
              installed on the catamaran to  enable coincident measurements of the gas
              transfer velocity, small  scale roughness, wind stress, and surface chemical
              parameters.   LADAS will be deployed in several field experiments to determine 
              air-sea gas transfer rates under realistic ocean conditions and  especially to
              relate these observations over different spatial and  temporal scales in
              coastal environments.  Such analyses will not  only provide a more accurate
              parameterization of gas transfer  velocity by avoiding biases caused by long
              time averaging, but will  also provid e insights as to the transient nature of
              gas flux.  The  correlation of surface roughness and gas flux will benefit
              future  global remote sensing of air-sea gas exchange since surface  roughness
              is one of sea surface parameters than can be remotely  measured from aircraft
              and satellites.
