Title       : An Analysis of the Rise in Illegitimacy and Single Parenthood in the United
               States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9409426

Award Number: 9409426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215880             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Akerlof akerlof@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Yellen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                          Abstract        Within the last twenty years the
              percentage of children born out  of wedlock and raised in single parent
              households has increased  dramatically.  While the existing literature has
              documented the  adverse effects of such living arrangements on child
              development,  the causes of these phenomena are not yet well understood.  The 
              purpose of this project is to develop and test empirically a  theoretical
              construct to disentangle the causes of illegitamcy.   In particular, the roles
              of changing male and female employment  opportunities, AFDC benefits,
              improvements in contraception, and  legalization of abortion will be analyzed. 
                There is substantial evidence that an important cause of  increasing
              illegitimacy is a break down of the custom governing  the social norm that men
              should marry women who bear children as  an unintended consequence of
              premarital sexual activity.  These  observations motivate the theoretical work,
              which focuses on the  incidence of, and the response to, unplanned pregnancy.  
              Illegitimacy will be explicitly modeled as the consequences of a  sequence of
              decisions--about premarital sexual activity, the use  of contraception,
              abortion in the event of pregnancy, and  marriage, and the use of AFDC in the
              event of birth.  In each of  these decisions, welfare and the availability of
              jobs for men and  women play a role, but so too do the costs and availability
              of  contraception.  The prediction of the theoretical model will be  tested
              using data from a variety of national surveys including  the National Survey on
              Family Growth, the CPS Fertility  Supplements, and the NSLY.  This model can
              used to reassess the  roles of AFDC and male joblessness in promoting
              illegitimacy.
