Title       : Dissertation Research: Imperial Conquest and Consolidation and Forced Migration
               in the Saraguro Region, Ecuador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9409586

Award Number: 9409586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharina J. Schreiber schreibk@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409586  Schreiber    Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. Dennis
              Ogburn  will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct 
              archaeological fieldwork in the Saraguro region of highland  Ecuador. Centering
              the study on the known Inca sites of Ingapirca  and Tambo Blanco, Mr Ogburn and
              colleagues will conduct a survey  of a 150 - 300 square km area. Prehistoric
              sites will be  recorded, photographed and mapped. Architectural data will be 
              noted and all ceramics and artifacts will be collected. If  necessary, limited
              excavation will also be conducted. Available  museum collections will be
              examined. Mr Ogburn will attempt to  determine the changes which occurred when
              Incan peoples conquered  the region. To accomplish this, he will reconstruct
              both pre-Inca  and Incan settlement and subsistence systems and compare the
              two.  Through study of ceramics he will gain insight into the extent of 
              population continuity or change.    The goal of this research is to understand
              how, at a simple  technological level, empires are established and maintained. 
              Historic and ethnohistoric evidence demonstrate that within a  relatively short
              period of time Incan peoples from highland Peru  expanded their area of control
              to include most of the Andes. It  appears that they employed a number of
              methods to incorporate  conquered territories into their empire and to control
              them. One  of these included wholesale movement of peoples. Mr. Ogburn  wishes
              to gain insight into such strategies through the intensive  study of one such
              area.    This research is important for several reasons. It will provide  data
              of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed light on  mechanisms of social
              control and organization, and will assist in  the training of a promising young
              scientist.  ***
