Title       : Structure and Function of Prolactin Releasing Factor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9409133

Award Number: 9409133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nira Ben-Jonathan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cong Yan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Prolactin  is  a pituitary hormone that is involved  in  multiple 
              functions, including reproduction, immune regulation, and  growth  and the
              development of the young. The synthesis and secretion  of  prolactin   are 
              regulated  by  a  complex  interaction   between  releasing  and  inhibiting
              factors and gonadal steroid  hormones.  These  investigators  have discovered
              the presence  of  prolactin  releasing  factors  (PRFs) in the posterior 
              pituitaries  of  all  species  that they have examined, including humans. PRF
              increases  the  expression  of  the  prolactin  gene  and  is  critical  for 
              stimulating  prolactin  release during lactation,  the  ovulatory  cycle  and 
              in  response to estradiol. To  further  evaluate  the  physiological 
              importance, tissue distribution and mechanisms  of  action  of  PRFs,  it  is 
              critical  to  determine  its  chemical  structure  and generate a synthetic
              peptide. The research  to  be  done  is  to purify PRF from pituitary tumors of
              transgenic  mice  and  to determine its primary structure. Following that PRF 
              will  be  synthesized  and its biological activity will  be  determined  using
              both cultured cells and in vivo assays. The results of this  investigation 
              will extend our understanding  of  the  mechanisms  which  govern  the 
              synthesis and release of  a  major  pituitary  hormone   that  participates  in
               a  broad  range  of   important  functions.
