Title       : Nonparametric Identification, Estimation, and Testing of Auction Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9409569

Award Number: 9409569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Quang H. Vuong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409569  Vuong    Auctions are the mechanisms by which many prices in real world
               markets are formed.  Further understanding of auctions can help  design more
              efficient pricing mechanisms and thereby improve  society's allocation of
              resources.  In the public policy arena  today, auction design questions are of
              real importance in  financial securities markets (auctions of U.S. Treasury
              bills),  the environment (auctions of emission's allowances), and 
              telecommunications (auctions for radio/personal communications  spectrum). 
              Despite the importance of auctions and the huge body  of theoretical research
              on auctions, there has been little  rigorous empirical research on the
              economics of auctions because  of severe computational difficulties with the
              structural  estimation of auction models.  This project builds on recent 
              breakthroughs by the investigator in obtaining computationally  tractable
              methods of identifying, estimating, and testing  theoretical auction models
              within a structural approach.    More specifically, the objective of this
              project is to address  the following challenges to structural estimation of
              auction  models on real data:  (1)  Previous structural analyses have
              exclusively relied upon       some parametric specification of the structural
              elements of       the theoretical auction model.  This project develops      
              structural methods that do not require such parametric       information; and 
              (2)  It is known that economic policy conclusions based on       parametric
              analyses may not be robust to misspecification of       the structural
              elements.  The project develops a two-step       nonparametric procedure that
              is not subject to this problem,       is quite simple computationally and
              behaves satisfactorily       for sample sizes typically found in auction data
              sets.
