Title       : Pattern Processing and Control with a Virtual NeuromolecularComputer
               Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9409780

Award Number: 9409780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290122             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Conrad conrad@cs.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409780  Conrad  A multilevel neuromolecular computing architecture has been
              developed that provides a rich platform for evolutionary learning.  The
              architecture comprises a network of neuron-like modules with internal dynamics
              modeled by cellular automata.  The dynamics reflect molecular processes
              believed to be operative in real neurons, in particular processes connected
              with second messenger signals and cytoskeleton-membrane interactions.  The
              objective is to create a repertoire of special purpose dynamic pattern
              processors through and evolutionary search algorithm and then to use memory
              manipulation algorithms to select combinations of processors from the
              repertoire that are capable of performing coherent pattern
              recognition/neurocontrol tasks.  The system, as presently implemented, consists
              of two layers of cytoskeletal neurons and two layers of memory access neurons
              (called reference neurons) divided into a collection of functionally comparable
              sublets.  Evolutionary learning can occur at the intraneuronal level through
              variations in the cytoskeletal structures responsible for the integration of
              signals in space and time or through variations in the location of elements
              that represent readin or readout proteins.  The memory manipulation algorithms
              that orchestrate the repertoire of neuronal processors also use evolutionary
              search procedures, and are well suited for operating in an associative mode as
              well.  The integrated system effectively employs synergies among the different
              levels of processing and learning to acquire pathfinding capabilities in a
              maze-like environment.  Immediate objectives of the research include full
              experimental characterization of the performance capabilities of the system,
              widening the dynamic capabilities of neurons, studying the relation between the
              structure of the system and the "evolution friendliness" of the adaptive
              surface, utilization of the associative memory capability in combination with
              evolutionary learning, and study of the system in a variety of a pplication
              domains.  Long term goals include the achievement of open ended evolutionary
              learning, porting evolved neurons with useful pattern processing capabilities
              to special silicon hardware, use of the system as an architectural paradigm for
              emerging molecular electronic technologies, and use of the system as a vehicle
              for obtaining a clearer understanding of the role of intraneuronal mechanisms
              in brain function.  ***
