Title       : Feasibility in Chemical Process Design and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9409158

Award Number: 9409158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelo Lucia   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Lucia - 9409158      Limits of feasibility for mathematical models of
              many problems in science and engineering are characterized by smooth turning or
              bifurcation points, which are the singular points of some associated Jacobian
              matrix.  These turning and bifurcation points, as well as the solutions
              themselves, can be real or complex-valued and many numerical methods for
              obtaining them can experience periodic, aperiodic or divergent behavior. 
              Accordingly, the PI plans to build a better understanding of the role and
              utility of singularity in defining and determining limits of feasibility in
              chemical process design and simulation by:      1.  Conducting numerical
              studies that revolve around the use of (a) nonsingular implicit composite
              equation systems to define turning and bifurcation points, (b) trust region
              methods in the complex domain to compute these turning and bifurcation points,
              and (c) hybrid methods consisting of approximating some of the first partial
              derivatives of the implicit equations.      2. Developing the necessary
              mathematical framework for understanding the convergence and rate of
              convergence of complex domain or extended trust region methods for calculating
              limits of feasibility.    Problem specifications in science and engineering
              applications always give rise to either feasible or infeasible sets of model
              equations.  Feasible specifications always give rise to zero-valued minima in
              the two-norm, while infeasible ones correspond to nonzero-valued minima and
              singular points in the norm.  Information regarding feasibility or
              infeasiblity, whether a priori or concomitant, is important to equation-solving
              tasks in design and simulation.  The PI plans to:      1. Conduct numerical
              investigations on the use of (a) extended trust region methods for identifying
              and calculating conditions of feasibility or infeasibility and (b) accelerating
              convergence to singular points using complex domain quasi-Newton updates to
              build a quadratic model in the null space.      2. Study t he convergence and
              rates of convergence of the methods developed above.
