Title       : RIA: Coherent Control of Engineered Semiconductor Heterostructures Using
               Ultrafast Optical and Electrical Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1994      
File        : a9409297

Award Number: 9409297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87960              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Reitze reitze@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409297  Reitze  A three year project is proposed to experimentally and
              theoretically investigate the applicability of using phase and amplitude,
              tailored, ultrafast(<10 ps) optical and electrical fields to selectively
              manipulate electronic states in engineering semiconductor heterostructures. 
              Precise control of electronic and optoelectronic devices, including terahertz
              sources, and terahertz speed modulators and electronic switches. Directing the
              evolution of electron and hole distributions in these systems requires
              synthesis of the appropriate fields to interact coherently with the electronic
              wavepacket over time periods longer than characteristic dephasing times.  One
              of the key issues which must be addressed is the extent to which dephasing via
              phonon and other scattering mechanisms limits the time period in which the
              wavepacket coherence can be maintained.  In order to carry out these
              challenges, An innovative approach is proposed which uses ultrafast shaped
              optical and electrical waveforms to manipulate electronic states in an
              asymmetric coupled quantum well structure.  Initial efforts will first be
              directed at generating and characterizing  tailored electrical pulses by
              combining well established stripline propagation techniques with femtosecond
              and picosecond pulse shaping.  Later in the project, the methods of quantum
              optimal control theory will be applied to guide the design of fields which
              minimize the influence of dephasing effects and maximize wavepacket coherence. 
              The proposed research will identify the potential physical controlling
              mechanisms, determine the extent to which dissipation can be controlled and
              minimized, and asses the feasibility of applying optimal control methods to
              these systems.  ***
