Title       : Refinements for Generalized Method of Moments Estimation and Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9409707

Award Number: 9409707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Whitney K. Newey wnewey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9216,9278,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9409707  Newey    This project develops improved inference procedures for some 
              frequently used econometric methods.  The goal is to find  approximations that
              improve on the usual large sample approach,  and that are easy to implement. 
              The proposal includes two  specific projects and extensions.  The projects are:
               bootstrapping for generalized methods of moments estimation and  selecting the
              number of instrumental variables.         Generalized method of moments
              estimation is widely applied  in econometrics, so that reliable inference
              methods are needed.   It is known that the usual large sample inferences do not
              work  well in some cases.  This project develops an improvement using 
              bootstrap methods.  The improvement will require a modification  of well known
              bootstrap methods.  It is based on sampling from a  distribution that imposes
              the same moment restrictions as the  estimator, which is different than the
              usual bootstrap.  The  usefulness of the proposed methods will be illustrated
              by  empirical and simulation examples.  The proposed research will  also
              consider extensions of the approach to other models such as  those where
              conditional moment restrictions are imposed.         The project also considers
              inference with instrumental  variables.  Instrumental variables estimators are
              one of the most  widely applied types of generalized method of moments
              estimators.   An important practical problem is the choice of the number of 
              instrumental variables to use in particular applications.  The  problem is of
              particular interest in the recent literature on  estimation of "program
              evaluation" models, where instrumental  variables are used to approximate the
              conditional probability of  being treated.  This research will use an
              asymptotic mean-square  error criteria to derive some simple rules for choosing
              the  number of instrumental variables.  The efficacy of the selection  rule
              will be considered in empirical and simulation examples.   Also this research
              will be extended to consider rules for   choosing the number of variables in
              other models, such as the  sample selection model that has been widely used in
              econometrics.
