Title       : Behavioral and Morphological Variation in Garter Snakes: The Role of Genes and
               Hormones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9409464

Award Number: 9409464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. King t80rbk1@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              King   9409464   Genes and hormones strongly influence animal behavior and
              morphology.  As a consequence both are likely to be important in producing
              differences in behavior and morphology among individuals, among populations,
              and among species.  Unfortunately, information on the interplay between genes
              and hormones in generally lacking.  This study addresses this need by focusing
              on the effects of genes and hormones on the behavior on the behavior of the
              garter snake, Thamnophis sirtalis.  The research combines methods from
              quantitative genetics and endocrinology by coupling hormone manipulations with
              analyses of behavioral, morphological, and hormonal variation within and among
              families of laboratory-reared garter snakes.  Because hormonal influences on
              behavior and morphology may occur before birth, data on the in utero hormonal
              environment of developing offspring will be included in these analyses.  To
              determine whether patterns observed in the laboratory parallel those seen in
              nature, a comparable analysis of  wild-caught garter snakes will conducted.  
              Understanding the mechanisms by which variation in behavior and morphology
              arise is of basic significance in biology.  This research will contribute to
              such an understanding by answering questions such as: (1) Is genetic variation
              in behavior and morphology mediated through hormonal mechanisms?  (2) Do
              hormones affect multiple traits simultaneously, thus generating correlations
              among traits?  (3) Are the processes giving rise to variation among individuals
              the same as those giving rise to differences between genders?  The results from
              this research are likely to be broadly applicable to a wide variety of
              organisms.  The genetic principles underlying this research hold for all
              organisms and the hormonal processes under investigation are similar for all
              vertebrates.  With further study, this research may have applications ranging
              from assessment of the effects of  hormone-mimicking chemicals released into
              the environment to treatment of geneti c disorders affecting hormonal pathways.
