Title       : Generation of Mutants Lacking the Dopamine D3-receptor Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9409772

Award Number: 9409772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia Schmauss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick R. Hof  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin A. Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dopamine is an important neurotransmitter in the central  nervous system and its
              various actions are mediated by  several dopamine receptor subtypes.  One of
              these subtypes,  designated as the D3 receptor, is expressed in 
              phylogenetically older regions of the brain, including the  limbic system. 
              This suggest that D3 receptors play a role  in cognition and in the expression
              of emotive behavioural  phenotypes.  However, conventional animal studies on
              the  particular function of D3 receptors proved to be difficult  because of the
              high homology and the similar pharmacological  characteristics of this receptor
              subtype with other brain  dopamine receptors.  To circumvent these
              difficulties, this  proposal lays the groundwork for studies on the specific 
              function of D3 receptors in the whole animal by generating  mutant mice that
              lack functional D3 receptors.  This will be  achieved by introducing a mutant
              (non-functional) D3 gene  into embryonic stem (ES) cells of mice.  Such ES
              cells are  then used to generate chimeric mice that have the ability to 
              transmit the mutant D3 gene to their offspring.  Mutant  offspring will have a
              decreased (heterozygous mutants)  expression of the D3-receptor protein and
              such mice can be  interbred to generate homozygous mutant mice in which the D3 
              receptor expression is abolished.  Initial studies on such  mutant animals aim
              at testing whether a decreased or  abolished D3-receptor protein expression
              affects the  development of brain regions in which D3 receptors are  normally
              expressed.  At present, nothing is known about the  importance of D3 receptor
              expression for the normal  development of the brain.  Thus, comparative
              anatomical  studies of such brain sections obtained at defined  developmental
              stages from mutant and normal (wildtype) mice  are proposed.  Furthermore,
              because of the significant  anatomical overlap in the expression of D3
              receptors and  another (very similar) dopamine receptor subtype (named D2), 
              and the potential functional complementarity bet ween these  two receptor
              subtypes, one might expect changes in the  expression of D2 receptors to occur
              in response to a  decreased or abolished expression of D3 receptors.  Such 
              changes could mask the functional consequences of a "loss of  D3 receptor
              expression" in our mutant animals.  Therefore,  experiments are proposed that
              will test whether the  expression of D2 receptors differs in wildtype and D3- 
              receptor-mutant animals.  The work proposed here will  provide a powerful mouse
              model for future studies on the  importance of D3 receptor expression for the
              expression of  certain behavioural phenotypes.
