Title       : Preconscious Determinants of Social Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9409448

Award Number: 9409448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339178             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Bargh bargh@psych.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409448  Bargh                              ABSTRACT         Recent research has
              demonstrated the automaticity of much of  social perception.  Stereotypes have
              been found to become active  automatically upon the presence of the group
              features (e.g., skin  color, gender), and behaviors have been found to be
              automatically  categorized in trait terms.  The current research project
              expands  on these findings to investigate other direct and preconscious 
              effects that the social environment has on psychological  phenomena. 
              Specifically, we examine preconscious evaluation of  people, objects, and
              events, building on encouraging recent  findings of an immediate and reflexive
              classification of stimuli  as either good or bad.  Another preconscious effect
              is the  activation of one's chronic goals and motives by features of the 
              social situation in which they have been chosen frequently and  consistently in
              the past.  Thus, goals to achieve or to be  patient, and so forth may become
              automatically tied to certain  kinds of social situations, so that those
              behaviors are triggered  subsequently without conscious choice.  Finally, the
              special role  that power features of a situation play in automatically 
              triggering one's goals is examined, especially in the context of  examining the
              role of power-goal links in the misuse of power for  private ends.    This
              program of research considers the extent to which our  emotions, judgments, and
              even behavior may be outside of our  conscious control.  A considerable amount
              of thought processes  occur prior to one's conscious awareness of what is
              happening in  one's environment.  We know a chair is a chair without having to 
              think about it, but this "given" of our conscious experience  represents a good
              deal of very fast mental work.   This research  examines the influence of fast,
              "preconscious" thought processes  on emotional feelings, motivations, and
              behavior.  For example,  we may have immediate bad feelings just from seeing
              the name of a  country where we didn't ha ve a good experience, without any 
              intention of remembering that bad experience.  And if one always  pursues the
              same purpose within a type of situation, such as at a  party or a meeting with
              the boss, over time this goal can be  triggered just by being in that
              situation, without one needing to  consciously decide to pursue it.  Using an
              experimental technique  called "priming", this research investigates the
              influence of  preconscious thought processes, such as those triggered by 
              particular situations and racial groups, on behaviors, such as  task
              persistence and hostility, which occur without the person's  awareness of why
              they are behaving that way.  As such, this  research is studying the mechanism
              of unconscious motivations.   Among the implications of this work will be
              insights into the  pervasiveness of discrimination against certain groups and
              the  prospects for change.
