Title       : Research Initiation Award: Single Particle Studies of Particle Morphology
               Evolution During Spray Processing of Inorganic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1994      
File        : a9409394

Award Number: 9409394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Ward tlward@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,9197,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Timothy Ward  CTS-9509394    The objectives of this research are:  (1)
              to advance the understanding of the physical and chemical processes which
              govern the particle morphology (e.g. dense, hollow particles or porous) and
              microstructure (e.g. find-grained or single crystal) of  inorganic (ceramic or
              metal) powders produced by spray processes, and (2) to utilize that
              understanding to develop and test strategies for producing desired, or avoiding
              undesired, morphologies for several representative materials and precursor
              types.  The basic experimental approach will be to utilize an electrodynamic
              balance to levitate individual solution precursor particles, and then observe
              the morphology evolution of the individual particle as the temperature and/or
              humidity are changed in a controlled fashion.  As the temperature is changed
              (up to 800{SYMBOL 176 \f "Symbol"}C or higher in some cases), solvent
              evaporation, precursor decomposition, gas evolution, melting, sintering,
              evaporation/condensation and other processes contribute to the final morphology
              and microstructure.  Morphology evolution will be followed visually using a
              video camera and light scattering, and mass changes will be monitored using a
              video camera and light scattering, and mass  changes will be monitored using
              the particle levitation voltage.  Both single-phase and
              multicomponent/multiphase particles will be investigated utilizing precursors
              which have been reported to yield different particle morphologies in powder
              synthesis by spray pyrolysis.  Specifically, metallic Ag and zirconia will be
              studied using nitrate, chloride, organometallic and colloidal precursors. 
              Metal/ceramic composite particles (zirconia/silver) and multicomponent mixtures
              containing a volatile component (PbO) will be investigated.    The results of
              this project will enable better control over particle characteristics in
              materials produced by spray processes.  Inorganic materials which might be good
              candidates for production by spray processes include:  elec tronic ceramics
              such as superconductors and ferroelectrics, fullerenes, nanophase materials and
              composites, and metal powders.  ***
