Title       : Evolutionary Consequences of Restricted Gene Flow in a Marine Copepod
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1998   
File        : a9409066

Award Number: 9409066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald S. Burton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Burton  9409066   The processes by which populations of organisms differentiate
              genetically and physiologically, achieve reproduction isolation,and ultimately
              undergo speciation are poorly understood.  Using the intertidal copepod
              Tigriopus californicus as model system, levels of genetic differentialtion and
              reproductive isolation will be determined for populations in two geographic
              locations of specific interest: (1) the region around Point Conception (west of
              Santa Barbara, California) and (2) the north central coast of Baja California. 
              The former region spans a geographic discontinuity in the historic distribution
              of the species.  The latter region extends across the central coast of Baja,
              where a reproductively isolated population of  Tigriopus has recently been
              found.  Analysis of a series of  populations in this region will span what
              appears to be a case of  incipient speciation.  Comparisons will be made of
              levels of allozyme differentiation and DNA sequence divergence across the two
              study regions- one that is marked by reproductive isolation and one that is not
              so marked - to gain insight into the consequence of restricted gene flow in
              Tigriopus.  In addition to these descriptive studies, analysis of the function
              of  cytochrome c  oxidase (CO, EC 1.9.3.1) activity in interpopulation hybrids
              will be initiated.  Because CO is composed of multiple nuclear and
              mitochondrially- encoded    subunits, CO activity may be particularly sensitive
              to intergenomic functional integration (coadaptation).  Analysis of CO
              enzymatic activity in control and back-crossed lines will be used to test
              whether normal patterns of inheritance of CO activity are perturbed by
              cytonuclear interaction in interpopulation in crosses.   Several basic and
              applied issues concerning analysis of population structure will be addressed by
              the data.  (1)  What are the relationships among mtDNA sequence variation,
              nucDNA sequence variation, allozyme variation and reproductive compatibility
              highly subdivided populations?  (2)  Wh at are the relative sensitivities of
              DNA sequencing and allozyme studies for detecting population structure?  (3) 
              Are mtDNA haplotypes within a species functionally equivalent as is commonly
              assumed  in phylogeographic studies, or have specific cytonuclear coadapted
              complexes evolved within geographically separated populations?  (4)  To what
              extent are biogeographic boundaries reflected in the genetic structure of
              species that span the boundaries?  Issues (1-3) are important in developing
              methodologies for analysis of biodiversity in marine and terrestrial systems,
              while (4) is particularly relevant to assessing the biological impact of global
              climatic change.
