Title       : Wave Interactions with Random Inhomogeneous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1994   
File        : a9107846

Award Number: 9107846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229661             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akira Ishimaru ishimaru@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chi H. Chan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Many natural and man-made media vary randomly                                  
              in space and time, and therefore electromagnetic,                              
              optical, and acoustic waves propagating in these                               
              random media experience random fluctuations in                                 
              space and time.  Examples are microwave, optical,                              
              and acoustic wave scattering by ocean waves,                                   
              atmospheric turbulence, solar wind, rain, fog, snow,                           
              terrain, vegetation, biological media, composite and                           
              disordered materials, and rough  surfaces.  These                              
              interactions between the wave and the random                                   
              media affect a broad range of practical problems                               
              such as communications, identifications and remote                             
              sensing of these media, inverse scattering, and                                
              imaging of objects in the medium.  For almost 20                               
              years, we have been conducting extensive basic                                 
              research on waves in random media, and we have                                 
              been successful in making substantial contributions                            
              in this field.  On the basis of our background and                             
              experience, we propose to conduct extensive                                    
              theoretical investigations, numerical studies, and                             
              controlled laboratory experiments on multiple                                  
              scattering.  Our objectives are the understanding of                           
              the physical processes of these multiple scattering                            
              phenomena and the development of mathematical                                  
              models useful for practical applications.                                      
              Our proposed work will be centered on several                                  
              specific topics including the backscattering                                   
              enhancement from scatterers and rough surfaces,                                
              pulse scattering in particles and rough surfaces,                              
              lateral and range resolutions, depolarization and                              
              degree of polarization of scattered waves, higher                              
              order moments of the scattered wave, vector                                    
              radiative transfer for dense spherical and                                     
              nonspherical particles, imaging of objects in random                           
              media, and application of neural network technique                             
              to inverse scattering problems.  We propose to                                 
              conduct carefully controlled optical, millimeter                               
              wave, and acoustic experiments in order to guide                               
              the development of the theories.  We also propose                              
              to conduct extensive numerical Monte Carlo                                     
              simulations to help construct theoretical models.                              
              This combination of theoretical, numerical, and                                
              experimental studies has proved to be most                                     
              effective in our research.  These studies encompass                            
              fundamental research as well as practical                                      
              applications and should lead to improved or new                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              statistical wave theories which will be useful in                              
              applications such as atmospheric optics, ocean                                 
              acoustics, geophysical remote-sensing, radars,lidars,                          
              ultrasound imaging, optical diffusion in tissues,                              
              inverse scattering of random media, and disordered                             
              and composite materials.
