Title       : Acquisition of a Laser Flash Photolysis System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1991     
File        : a9107706

Award Number: 9107706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Stevenson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Linn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent M. Maloney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9141,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program                 
              will help the Department of Chemistry at Indiana - Purdue                      
              University at Ft. Wayne purchase laser equipment.  This                        
              equipment will be used in the following research activities:                   
              photochemistry and photophysics of copper (I) complexes in                     
              solution, photophysical studies of polynuclear ruthenium (II)                  
              complexes, catalysis of the autoxidation of sulfur dioxide                     
              using ?Ni(III) (cyclam)!:  elucidation of a novel mechanism,                   
              and generation and observation of heteroacenaphthene ylides via                
              8-substituted 1-naphthyl carbenes:  halonium ylides.                           
                                                                                             
              Lasers emit a narrow beam of coherent, powerful and nearly                     
              monochromatic electromagnetic radiation.  This radiation will                  
              allow the researchers to generate short-lived chemical                         
              intermediates in photoactive systems in the ultraviolet,                       
              visible, and near-infrared regions.  The kinetic spectrometer                  
              part of the system will permit the operators to measure the                    
              optical emission or absorbance of these intermediates, as a                    
              function of time.  Lasers are used in chemistry to study a                     
              broad range of subjects, from the dynamics of proteins and                     
              nucleic acids to photoelectron transfer processes, and from                    
              interfacial chemistry to picosecond pulse shaping.  Lasers are                 
              also useful in optics, communications, and engineering.
