Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Bolometric Imager for Solar Irradiance Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9560456

Award Number: 9560456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter V. Foukal pfoukal@world.std.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Res & Instrumen
	      21 Erie Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021394260    617/491-2627

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,1523,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project has as its main
              objective the development of a solar telescope and detector capable of imaging
              heat flow inhomogeneities at the sun's photosphere, with uniform photometric
              response over all wavelengths between the ultraviolet and infrared.   Such a
              Solar Bolometric Imager (SBI) would provide an innovative new tool for
              identifying mechanisms of long-term solar luminosity variation.  These
              variations are of great interest in studies of climate fluctuation, an issue of
              central importance in Global Change studies. The opportunity for innovation
              arises from recent advances in uncooled, relatively high-definition (80,000
              element) thermal arrays. The main aim in Phase I is to determine whether the
              spectral absorptance of these arrays can be modified by careful deposition of
              gold blacks, to provide uniform response over the wavelength range between
              0.33( and about 2( containing most of the solar radiation that reaches the
              Earth's surface.   If this can be achieved while retaining the detectivity and
              time constant of the array, an all-reflecting telescope to complete the design
              of the SBI will be designed in Phase I.  The SBI will be constructed and
              operated for one year in Phase II, during the period of increasing solar
              activity in the forthcoming sunspot cycle 23.  A successful ground-based SBI
              would form the basis for a space-borne SBI as an imaging complement to absolute
              radiometers used for measuring fluctuations in the total irradiance.      
              Commercial applications of bolometric imaging with relatively high angular
              definition include remote sensing and industrial metrology (calibration of
              thermographic cameras, lighting design, combustion research and monitoring).  A
              high definition, uncooled array with good response in the near-IR could also
              provide the focal plane for a convenient and inexpensive false color spectral
              imaging camera with many niche applications in biomedical imaging, process
              control and non-destructive testing.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
