Title       : SBIR Phase I: Novel Solar Photocatalysts for Air Pollution Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9560558

Award Number: 9560558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74992              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Kittrell kseinc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KSE Inc
	      P O Box 368
	      Amherst, MA  010040368    413/549-5506

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1440,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9560558  Kittrell   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              exploits novel photocatalysts for air pollution control.  Technological
              innovation is required to effectively manage dilute sources of air pollution
              from industrial operations and remediation of contaminated groundwater and
              soils.  Emissions controls are needed which are cost effective, use energy
              efficiently, are suitable for remote locations, and produce no hazardous
              by-products.  Photocatalysis potentially has these characteristics, employing
              ultraviolet (UV) light to destroy chemical compounds at ambient temperatures
              and pressures.  Photocatalysis would be particularly attractive if an efficient
              solar technology were available, exploiting inexpensive and abundant UV
              radiation from the sun.  To date, solar photocatalysis has not been
              sufficiently efficient or effective for large scale adoption. KSE, Inc., the
              proposing firm, has developed novel photocatalyst formulations which are about
              50 times as active as conventional titania photocatalysts.  The efficiency of
              use of solar radiation in the W spectrum should be greatly increased by such
              photocatalysts.  The objective of the Phase I research is to establish the
              technical feasibility of exploiting these unique photocatalyst formulations to
              capture the potential of solar radiation for the destruction of environmentally
              hazardous gaseous emissions in air.  The performance of the photocatalysts to
              be developed will enable effective utilization of solar UV radiation and
              efficient scale-up to capacities of relevance to practical applications.  Phase
              I will focus on chlorinated volatile compounds (CVOC's) and toluene as model
              compounds, with extension in Phase II to the full spectrum of industrial
              hazardous emissions.   The environmental control equipment market in the United
              States is forecast to grow to sales of $1.6 billion by the year 2000.  The
              solar photocatalytic air pollution control products to be developed will find
              broad application in that marketplace.  Initiall y, solar photocatalytic units
              will be installed to control air emissions from soil and groundwater
              remediation due to the superior economics and ready adaptability to remote
              locations.  Future products will address industrial tailpipe emissions control
              and indoor air quality maintenance.
