Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Diatom Transformation for Product Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9560125

Award Number: 9560125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. C. Thomas Allnutt 74242.2565@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Martek Biosciences Corp
	      6480 Dobbin Road
	      Columbia, MD  210455825    410/740-0081

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop
              tools necessary for the molecular manipulation of diatoms and, potentially,
              other marine algae (e.g., green algae, brown algae and chrysophytes) that have
              commercial potential. The molecular biological manipulation of algal systems
              has seriously lagged behind other systems. Many of the techniques that have
              been developed for the introduction of DNA into bacterial, yeast, insect and
              animal cells have not been transferred to algal systems. Much of the reason for
              this has been a lack of sufficient funds for the study of algal systems. As
              diatoms (and other algae) that synthesize valuable molecules are discovered, it
              is crucial to establish sophisticated methods for their genetic manipulation,
              which in turn, will enable the development of economical production methods. In
              Phase I, the potential of each of the diatom target organisms chosen for this
              study will be evaluated by examining their susceptibility to antibiotics and
              herbicides. Potential marker and reporter genes (some of which will be isolated
              directly from diatoms) in diatom transformation will also be constructed and
              evaluated. Transformation protocols that have shown promise in other systems
              will be tested in transient expression systems and the best methods for
              transformation identified.  An attempt will also be made to use various marker
              genes for the stable transformation of economically promising diatoms. Phase I
              research should demonstrate if transformation is possible and set the stage for
              the use of molecular technology in the development of commercially important
              products from marine algae.       This research should lead to the
              establishment of methods for enhancing the production of specific products in
              marine algae. Martek is currently marketing two oils, one from an alga and the
              other from a fungus and has identified diatoms that produce oils of
              considerable value; markets for these oils would be in the fields of
              nutritional supplements and pharmaceuticals. However, the existing production
              costs for these oils are prohibitive. This study is to decrease the costs
              associated with their production.  Martek has also been trying to develop
              diatom cultures as inexpensive aquaculture feeds. The genetic manipulation of
              these algae to provide a better product (e.g., higher oil content, more
              balanced protein composition, antibiotic production) and/or to develop a less
              expensive method of production would lead to significant advances in the
              manufacture of higher quality and more cost-effective aquacultural feeds.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
