Title       : SBIR Phase I: In-Situ Resistivity Measurement of Molecular Beam Epitaxy
               (MBE)-Grown Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9560259

Award Number: 9560259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Sokolov vsokolov@tlcprecision.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TLC Precision Wafer Tech.
	      661 5th Avenue North
	      Minneapolis, MN  55405    612/341-2795

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1750,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will produce a MM-wave
              sensor that remotely measures sheet resistivity in real time of Molecular Beam
              Epitaxy (MBE) grown wafers. Manufacturing high performance semiconductor
              epitaxial wafers by MBE requires precision doping and layer thickness control
              to obtain optimum device and circuit performance. High reproducibility requires
              the precise doping and layer thickness to be the same every time. The u wafer
              sheet resistivity is a key calibration parameter that indicates these variables
              are correct in the final wafer structure. The current approach used for
              monitoring this parameter is to measure the sheet resistivity on special
              calibration wafers outside the ultra high vacuum (UHV) chamber of the MBE
              machine. If the sheet resistivity is out of specification a new calibration run
              with adjusted growth conditions must be performed before the actual product
              wafers may be further processed. This entails extra loading and unloading of
              wafers through the load locks and generally results in production delays and
              lower MBE throughput. This innovative wave sensor approach eliminates all of
              this waste.   The overall objective for the Phase I effort is to demonstrate
              the feasibility of in situ monitoring of sheet resistivity of GaAs or InP
              epitaxial wafers (typically used for MMICs) inside an MBE machine with an
              instrument located completely outside the UHV chamber. This capability will
              streamline the production process while providing superior performance and
              precise reproducibility of the epi-wafers at a reduced cost and higher
              throughput. This will allow consistent and reliable optimum devices and
              circuits (e.g. microwave and mm-wave integrated circuits) for various military
              and commercial system applications.   The development of a sheet resistivity
              sensor for in situ MBE measurements will result in product improvement and
              reduction of manufacturing costs for high volume production of GaAs and InP
              epitaxial wafers. The instrument's application, however, is not restricted to
              any one semiconductor material. It has potential use for any moderately to
              highly conducting epitaxial material grown on a host substrate including
              silicon.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
