Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Low-Cost Silicon Carbide Fiber Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1996  
File        : a9560279

Award Number: 9560279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Makuteswara Srinivasan matsol@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Material Solutions Intl In
	      227 Deerwood Lane
	      Grand Island, NY  14072    716/773-6016

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will produce silicon
              carbide fibers that can be used as reinforcements to toughen ceramics for use
              at high temperatures.There are underlying sound technical and economic reasons
              why the presently available fibers have not made headway commercially. These
              fibers degrade both chemically and mechanically during manufacture of the
              ceramic matrix composite. The cost of these fibers can range from $500 to
              $1,000 per kg. depending upon the quality of the fiber and the quantity
              ordered. This high cost prohibits technical development of much needed ceramic
              matrix composites in a major way.   The requirements for low-cost silicon
              carbide fiber manufacture by the procedures disclosed are rather simple: 1)
              low-cost silicon and carbon containing raw materials, 2) simple furnacing
              technique that involves self-heating of the charge, and 3) complete avoidance
              of fiber spinning or drawing and sintering methodology or polymer chemical
              conversion technology and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods. The proposed
              process addresses all of the above aspects. They include: 1) Potentially
              low-cost production relative to existing technology due to the use of readily
              available, low-cost raw materials and novel furnacing technique involving
              relatively low technology that can be practiced world-wide, 2) potentially
              single-phase alpha or beta silicon carbide fiber that will withstand high
              temperature (> 1400 oC) use, and 3) relatively low risk in scale-up to large
              volume production methods.   The silicon carbide fibers resulting from this
              research can form ceramic composites used in heat exchangers and chemical
              reactors which are subject to high-temperature, high-pressure, and highly
              corrosive environments. These fibers can also be used in ceramic composites for
              waste heat recovery air pre-heaters in aluminum re-melt facilities, ceramic
              radiant tubes in aluminum melting furnaces, and applications in
              high-temperature incineration of municipal and industrial waste systems. Other
              applications include hazardous and toxic waste containment vessels made of
              ceramic composites and high temperature ceramic filters.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
