Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Novel Bridgman Growth of Tungsten Bronze Crystals for Emerging
               Nonlinear Optical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9560539

Award Number: 9560539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey P. Wilde   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : 3D Technology Labs
	      210 Kittoe Drive
	      Mountain View, CA  94043    415/962-8630

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses novel
              vertical Bridgman growth of ferro-electric tungsten bronze materials which are
              known to have large electro-optic and photorefractive effects. They comprise a
              class of optical materials that are very promising for applications such as
              tunable holographic wavelength filtering, holographic mass data storage,
              electro-optic modulation and beam steering, phase conjugation, and integrated
              optical switching. Most tungsten bronze crystals are currently grown by the
              Czochralski method where the main problems are refractive index striations,
              diameter instability, and susceptibility to volatilization loss of hazardous
              constituents. Striations can cause significant light scattering and degrade
              device performance. They arise from spurious growth rate fluctuations,
              principally due to temperature variations at the melt-solid interface. The
              dominant source of these variations is crystal rotation in a non-axisymmetric
              temperature profile.   We propose to develop a vertical Bridgman system for
              growing SBN and PBN because this method inherently avoids crystal rotation and
              minimizes buoyancy-driven melt convection, thereby minimizing striations.
              Furthermore, the crystal diameter is determined by the crucible walls so that
              diameter instability is not an issue, and volatilization can be eliminated by
              using a sealed-crucible technique.   Vertical Bridgman growth of SBN, PBN, and
              other tungsten bronze crystals will provide higher optical quality samples with
              larger sizes and significantly lower cost. This technology will help to further
              advance numerous electro-optic and photorefractive applications.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
