Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Basepair Mismatch Analysis Using Capillary Electrophoresis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9560447

Award Number: 9560447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: G Bruce Collier collier@his.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trevigen Inc
	      8405 Helgerman Court
	      Gaithersburg, MD  20877    301/216-2800

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9560447  Collier         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will combine, for the first time, the use of the highly specific mutY
              cleavage enzyme to the detection of A/G and A/C point mutations in DNA with the
              highly efficient separation technique of capillary electrophoresis (CE) by UV
              absorbance detection.  In biomedical research and genetic diagnostics, rapid,
              reliable detection of point mutations in limiting amounts of DNA, as well as,
              the identification of the location and nature of such point mutations is
              essential.  Automated, direct on-line detection with CE using three orders of
              magnitude lower quantities of sample, renders CE more appropriate for rapid
              genetic screening techniques.  The majority of previously investigated
              techniques to detect point mutations in DNA rely on conformational
              polymorphisms or require additional additives for separation in order to
              establish the presence of mutations, making them more dependent on DNA sequence
              and fragment size, as well as, electrophoretic experimental conditions.  The
              use of the highly specific mutY cleavage enzyme will provide more reliable and
              definitive evidence of point mutations, the presence or absence of cleavage
              fragments.  By conventional slab gel electrophoresis, the mutY enzyme also has
              higher sensitivity in a direct comparison with sequencing analysis, able to
              detect as little as 1% mutant in a normal DNA background, confirming the
              utility of this technique in early detection of disease, particularly, p53 for
              cancer diagnostics.  A newly developed and more advanced polysaccharide polymer
              solution, TreviSol(TM) CE will be applied as the separation matrix in Phase I,
              combining enhanced sensitivity of detection and separation selectivity relative
              to other commercially available polymer solutions.  A variety of DNA fragment
              sizes and sequences will be investigated with the use of mutY enzyme to
              establish a minimal dependence on these parameters.  Results of the new
              technology will be confirmed with slab gel  electrophoresis and sequencing
              analysis.       This new technique has the potential to become a more
              comprehensive genetic screening technique, since other members of a family of
              related, highly specific cleavage enzymes with complementary point mutation
              detection, may be incorporated, as well.  This project will provide feasibility
              testing for later development of a test system for point mutation detection of
              biological samples, which is faster, more sensitive with limiting amounts of
              DNA and more accurate for the position of the mutation.  This superior product
              system will have a market advantage in a market of over $800 million, which is
              a portion of the DNA testing market.  ***
