Title       : SBIR Phase I: Low-Cost Thermal Processing of Engineering Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9560463

Award Number: 9560463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rong Wang Wamax@mailcity.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wamax, Inc
	      4473 142nd Avenue, SE
	      Bellevue, WA  98006    425/643-4755

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1467,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              address in-situ forming of environmentally protective coatings over engineering
              material surfaces subject to degradation.  Most failures of large scale
              engineering systems result from the progressive environmental degradation of
              metallic components over time.  Due to operational and cost constraints, timely
              repair or restoration is not feasible, and premature failures of these systems
              result in loss of productivity and wasted materials.  Phase I will develop a
              low cost thermal process for engineering materials to combat corrosion-related
              problems.  Material designs and processing criteria will be examined in dry and
              wet conditions in order to evaluate resultant coatings for high-temperature
              oxidative and hydrogen environment applications.  Phase I will demonstrate
              basic concepts for material compatibility and key process parameters that could
              lead to desired coating quality and resistance to oxidation and corrosion.
              Phase II would proceed to process and material optimization.       If
              successful, this process will provide a significant cost reduction for
              restoration or modification of engineering material surfaces leading to an
              extension of the usefulness or life of manufactured systems.  The process is
              specifically adaptable to on-site surfaces that are inaccessible to
              conventional surface treatments, such as plating, laser cladding, or plasma
              spraying.  It would also be commercially useful in forming durable surface
              layers since a genuine alloying of the electrode material to substrate occurs. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
