Title       : SBIR PHASE I: A Probability Network Language for Machine Learning and Knowledge
               Discovery Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1996   
File        : a9560789

Award Number: 9560789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anthony A. Centodocati                  
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74687              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wray Buntine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Heuristic Research Inc
	      1678 Shattuck Avenue
	      Berkeley, CA  94709    510/845-5810

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6856,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9560789  Buntine         This Small Business Innovation research Phase I project
              is to develop efficient, effective applications of machine learning which is an
              expensive, error-prone process even for highly-trained experts. It has been
              previously shown that probability networks can represent a broad variety of
              learning and discovery problems, and manually transforming a network can yield
              algorithms for recovering or discovering model parameters from data.  This new
              approach has been demonstrated in basic research, but not yet generalized and
              automated in order to test applicability and feasibility. This effort will
              complete the research and development to turn these results into a commercial
              application: an automated CASE-tool for researchers and developers in machine
              learning and knowledge discovery.  The design goal is a Probability Network
              Language (PNL), a front-end graphical prototyping tool, and a PNL compiler that
              emits efficient C or C++ code for learning and discovery applications.  If the
              initial effort is successful, The follow on effort will produce end-to-end
              functionality in a complete prototype for PNL.  PNL is precisely what is needed
              to make machine learning and knowledge discovery a practical technology,
              accessible to a wide range of application programmers.  PNL promises
              significant benefits to engineers and scientists in the U.S., particularly
              those involved in data analysis, but also those faced with complex diagnostic
              problems, real-time control problems, and voluminous or heterogeneous data.    
                If it proves to be a viable and effective tool for rapid prototyping of
              learning and discovery applications, PNL will provide the missing tools needed
              for efficient development of state-of-the-art applications in diagnosis control
              and data analysis. It is intended to use and license PNL in commercial
              applications for scientific research, financial services and biotechnology.
