Title       : SBIR Phase I: Telling Mathematical Stories: A Combination of Research and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9560768

Award Number: 9560768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74890              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie J. Cappo Marge@learn.motion.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Learning in Motion
	      500 Seabright Avenue, Ste 105
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950623480    408/457-5600

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9560768  Cappo     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              focuses on the ability to conjoin current research with the latest technology
              into a multimedia environment that allows early learners to gain the conceptual
              understanding of number sense that will prepare them for more formal
              mathematics.  Current research has defined four foci which are at the center of
              this project:  realistic problems, models, own productions, and acoustics. 
              Realistic problems are those mathematical situations that actually occur in a
              child's daily experience and so hold meaning for him or her.  Models are any
              number of representations that allow children to apply their own understanding
              of mathematics.  These may include their own invented and informal strategies,
              use of the number line or blank number line, or other models such as the bead
              string, arithmetic rack, etc.  Own productions refers to children's
              constructions of mathematical situations or descriptions of them in their own
              terms.  Acoustics refers to studies of how children learn through sound,
              rhythm, and movement and how this affects their understanding of numbers as
              structural representations.  According to current research on early learning,
              all of these have an affect on the way in which children develop their
              understanding of mathematics.  In addition, it is known that this understanding
              progresses gradually through varying levels of abstraction, such as the
              following:  mathematizing concrete problems through the use of invented or
              normal strategies, to the use of models, and then to formal or abstract
              mathematics.  This project intends to study the feasibility of creating an
              active and realistic learning environment in which students are able to build
              upon the levels of understanding.  New advancements in technology, including
              the use of video (which students can manipulate and 'edit' to portray
              mathematics), graphics (to use as constructed models or representations of
              mathematical situations), sound (for vocal descriptions or as r einforcement of
              acoustic implications in learning), and text tools can all amplify the learning
              potential of primary grade students as defined through the research.  A major
              objective is to exploit these technologies to their fullest advantage while
              maintaining an interface that is friendly to the primary student.   A K-2 Math
              program which incorporates highly visual and realistic video and sound with
              intriguing mathematics problems is needed in the school market.  A program that
              goes beyond drill and practice and integrates new research on learning,
              especially those aspects identified above, could make a great impact on
              mathematics instruction and the development of number sense in the primary
              years.  Also, the proposed product could conceivably cross over to the Home
              Market.
