Title       : SBIR Phase I: Erythropoientin Cell Therapy in Chronic Renal Failure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9560695

Award Number: 9560695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Cieslinski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nephros Therapeutics Inc
	      1756 Plymouth Road Suite 1000
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481051890    313/973-0841

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1491,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95-60695  Cieslinski   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              provides a plan to develop early prototype devices to implant
              erythropoietin-producing cells in an animal to treat erythropoietin deficient
              anemias.  Erythropoietin is a hormone produced in specialized cells in the
              kidney and is released when oxygen delivery to these cells declines secondary
              to hypoxia or anemia. thereby stimulating red cell progenitor proliferation to
              increase red blood cell volume in the circulation.  This hormone is deficient
              in many chronic diseases, including chronic renal failure, AIDs and cancer. 
              This formulation will ultimately be cost effective (current annual cost is $1.5
              billion) as well as a more optimal treatment strategy for this disease process.
               Accordingly, the project aims to construct an early hollow fiber prototype to
              immunoisolate cells of an established human hepatoma cell line, HepG2, which
              produces erythropoietin in an oxygen sensitive manner for implantation into the
              systemic circulation of an animal.  The project has three specific aims: 1) To
              identify the best geometry of hollow fiber encapsulation of HepG2 cells to grow
              to maximum packed cell density without compromise of cell viability in vitro;
              and once optimum hollow fiber geometry is determined; 2) To demonstrate that
              erythropoietin gene expression and protein production by these encapsulated
              cells in a single hollow fiber bioreactor can be regulated by varying oxygen
              tension or oxygen carrying capacity in vitro; and 3) To scale up these studies
              to a cartridge of encapsulated cells in a hundred hollow fibers in order to
              test viability and oxygen responsivity ex vivo in preparation for cartridge
              implantation of encapsulated HepG2 cells into the systemic circulation of an
              animal in vivo during the phase II component of this program.  This Phase I
              project will, therefore, support the important transition phase from basic to
              applied research and the preliminary design of a testable device designed to
              provide cell therapy f or erythropoietin deficient anemias.   The ultimate goal
              of this research is to produce a cell therapeutic device to treat
              erythropoietin deficient anemia.  This technology may optimize the treatment of
              anemia of patients on dialysis in a cost effective manner, with a potential
              cost savings in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
