Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Lithium Ion Conductor Films for Electrochromic Windows by Spray
               Coating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1996  
File        : a9560747

Award Number: 9560747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Badding   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SAGE Electrochromics Inc
	      Brett and Bowser Roads
	      Piscataway, NJ  088540278    908/445-3300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1467,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This SBIR Phase I project is proposed by SAGE Electrochromics, Inc. to
              evaluate the feasibility of using spray coating technology to produce
              solution-derived, ceramic lithium-ion conductor (IC) films for electrochromic
              windows. The worldwide development of electrochromic (EC) glazing technology
              has been severely impeded by the inability to identify and develop an
              electrolyte that satisfies the performance, durability and cost requirements
              demanded for architectural glass applications. SAGE believes it has uniquely
              achieved the performance and stability objectives with a patented
              solution-derived IC.       Although used to some extent in commercial
              applications, dip coating is an expensive and impractical batch process when
              production throughput, handling and manufacturing costs are critical to the
              ultimate commercial potential. A technology well-developed by the automotive
              industry, spray coating has tremendous potential in the extremely demanding EC
              window application. A key challenge will be to adapt this continuous process
              technology to the difficult-to-process thin-film ceramic materials in a way
              that preserves the essential functionality and performance of SAGE's dip
              coating developed IC. Specific issues associated with this include
              microstructure, composition, thickness, ionic and electronic conductivity's and
              surface morphology.       During Phase I, SAGE's principal objective is to
              demonstrate the feasibility of spray coating for lithium ion-conductor films by
              successfully making a functional small-area EC device. To achieve this goal,
              SAGE will 1) spray coat lithium IC films on glass substrates to evaluate
              uniformity, thickness, and composition, 2) fabricate partial device structures
              to establish compositional uniformity, ion conductivity, electronic resistance
              and functionality of the relevant interfaces, and 3) incorporate the spray
              coated IC into a complete EC device to demonstrate the performance of the
              integrated system. If successful, this research will raise production rates,
              improve safety and process reliability, and reduce manufacturing costs -
              resolving the one major technological barrier to cost-effective electrochromic
              glazing. These results are estimated to represent a 25% cost savings based on
              costs at full market penetration.   Electrochromicglazing will have a large
              impact on the architectural glass industry since, for the first time, building
              occupants and owners will have the ability to electronically control the
              shading of their window glass - anywhere from clear to heavily darkened. EC
              glazing will find application in any window where solar control is an issue -
              benefiting the residential, commercial and government building sectors by
              providing substantial energy savings and enhanced comfort. In addition to
              architectural windows, EC glazing will be ideally suited for automobiles and
              other transportation vehicles, and also for numerous specialty applications -
              including large-area electronic displays, recreational products, and consumer
              appliances and gadgetry. Beyond its application in electrochromics, this
              proposed spray coating technology may find uses in other large-area thin-film
              applications that include rechargeable lithium batteries, sensors, and optical
              coatings.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
