Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Commercial High-Pressure Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Device for
               Biochemical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9560271

Award Number: 9560271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. David Doty david@doty.usa.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Doty Scientific Inc
	      600 Clemson Rd
	      Columbia, SC  292234300    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1938,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This SBIR Phase I project will develop robust, high-pressure 10-mm
              silicon-nitride sample cells suitable for high-sensitivity high-pressure (HP)
              high-resolution (HR) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) in protein structure
              determination, as well as numerous other applications in materials science,
              super-critical fluids, and process chemistry. While HP-HR-NMR has recently been
              shown to have enormous analytical potential, no commercial NMR apparatus
              currently exists for this research. The use of hot-isostatic pressed (HIP'd)
              silicon nitride (Si3N4) will result in a marketable product with an
              order-of-magnitude increase in sensitivity compared to conventional folded
              glass capillaries. Initial versions will be suitable for operating pressures up
              to 200 MPa (2000 bar) at temperatures up to 300+C. The large inner diameter
              (6.00mm) in the sample region account for the order-of-magnitude increase in
              sensitivity, and a maximum wall thickness variation of 4 microns over a length
              of 25-mm in the central rf region will permit state-of-the-art lineshape and
              resolution (3 Hz non-spin proton at 7T). Active metal braze alloys (Ag-CuTi)
              will be evaluated with precision tapered joints to attach BeCu threaded
              fittings to each end of the sample cell for convenient sample access,
              pressurization, and cleaning. Total volume of compressed liquids will be only
              several milliliters to minimize stored energy. Internal pressurization via
              heating of sealed liquids, the method of choice for many applications in
              super-critical fluids, will be utilized during Phase I. These sample cells will
              be fully compatible with virtually all modern 10-mm HR-NMR probes and
              techniques, including triple-resonance, multi-nuclear, 2-D, solvent
              suppression, PFG, and MRI.  Potential commercial applications exist in
              biochemistry (protein structure determination), and any other field utilizing
              NMR where high pressure is a valid concern or unexamined variable, including
              materials science areas like super-critical fluids process chemistry.
              Specifically, there are at least 3000 high-resolution spectroscopy laboratories
              that stand to benefit from the commercial availability of a high-pressure
              sample container. The compatibility of the proposed apparatus with existing HR
              probes will provide additional return on investment and experimental
              flexibility.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
