Title       : SBIR Phase I: Improved Accuracy for Student/Scientist Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9560621

Award Number: 9560621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72612              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Armstrong judy armstrong@adatech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ADA Technologies, Inc
	      304 Inverness Way South, Ste 365
	      Englewood, CO  80112    303/792-5615

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 5371,9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9560621  Armstrong     It is challenging to enable students to collect accurate,
              valid data without sacrificing the educational aspects of the program.  This
              Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project addresses this fundamental
              difficulty encountered by a number of groups that desire to have networked
              students collect data which are appropriate for use by scientists.  An example
              of such desired measurement capability by networked students is the pH,
              dissolved oxygen, and temperature in a river from its head waters to its outlet
              as an indication of the river's environmental condition.  ADA Technologies
              proposes to address this issue of data accuracy and validation by using a
              unique set of hardware currently under development by ADA along with unique
              software algorithms to be developed in this project.  The hardware includes a
              low-cost, hand-held, four-channel data logger with a set of self-identifying
              sensor modules.  The unique calibration and data tagging aspects of this system
              provide an opportunity for data tracking that does not exist for any other
              product.  All this information will be processed using innovative software
              algorithms which will perform a number of internal consistency tests to
              validate the data.  These checks will be part of an education organizational
              model that will help students learn critical thinking skills and can be
              replicated in all the network programs.  This model will link students with
              scientists and promote direct interaction focused around a specific scientific
              goal.  The aim of this program is to develop an organizational model combined
              with unique hardware and software that can aid networks in gathering
              scientifically valid data while insuring an educationally significant
              experience for the students.   This project offers an innovative approach for
              improving the scientific skills of students and for helping to promote the use
              of scientific tools in education.  It will enable students to gain critical
              thinking skills and to engage in active communicatio n with scientists.  .A
              market for innovative curricula and advanced educational materials will be
              created as a result of the research to be conducted during the proposed
              program.  The successful implementation of the described system will be of
              great benefit to a wide range of scientific programs in the United States and
              will supply innovative tools for conducting research
