Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Biosensors for Measuring Trichloroethylene (TCE) in Groundwater
               and Monitoring In Situ Bioremediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9560186

Award Number: 9560186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Steffan Steffan@Envirogen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9560186  Steffan         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project involves the development of biosensors for measuring trichloroethylene
              (TCE) and related chlorinated solvents in groundwater.  The project involves
              creating whole-cell biosensors by fusing reporter genes with chlorinated
              solvent-induced toluene oxidation genes from Pseudomonas mendocina KR1 and
              Pseudomonas sp. ENVPC5.  A variety of reporter genes will be evaluated, but the
              work will focus on the use of bioluminescence genes that have been widely used
              for the creation of biosensors.  Initial biosensor development will involve
              creating transcriptional fusions between the reporter genes and cloned toluene
              oxidation structural genes.  Once created, the fusions will be transferred back
              to the original host organism via marker exchange.  Additional biosensors will
              be created by cloning the entire regulons of the toluene oxidation pathways
              into E. coli and inserting the reporter genes so it is expressed in response to
              TCE.  This approach will allow an evaluation of the most appropriate host
              organisms for use as biosensors.  The biosensors will be tested for their
              sensitivity for measuring TCE in ground water, and the expression of the
              reporter genes will be compared to expression of the wild-type toluene
              oxidation genes in response to TCE.  The biosensors will ultimately be used for
              developing on-line sensors for monitoring TCE in groundwater, for developing
              TCE test kits, and for evaluating the in situ performance of TCE-degrading
              microorganisms.       This Phase I research will result in the development of
              living TCE biosensors that can be used to construct on-line monitoring devices
              and test kits.  They will also aid in evaluating, monitoring and modeling the
              performance of TCE-degrading bacteria in situ The development of an inexpensive
              biosensor system will reduce the cost of routine chemical monitoring, allow
              on-line monitoring, and increase the cost effectiveness of environmental
              remediation.  ***
