Title       : SBIR PHASE I: New Photogrammetry Data Acquisition and Processing Technology for
               Highway Design and Maintenance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9560344

Award Number: 9560344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daeyong Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CamSys Inc
	      1223 Peoples Ave
	      Troy, NY  121803511    518/276-4082

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1037,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9560344  Lee         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will examine the feasibility of developing an innovative motion video-based
              Photogrammetry Data Acquisition and Processing System for special areas of
              highway design and maintenance.  To design and maintain transportation systems,
              three-dimensional data on specific areas are collected usually by means of
              aerial photography, manual surveys, and labor intensive data processing.  The
              current aerial photography methods cannot effectively collect data on areas
              that may not be seen readily from an aerial position.  These areas include
              bridges, rock face slopes, river banks, and tunnels.  The goal of this project
              is to develop a portable, easy-to-use, motion video based system that uses
              close-range terrestrial photogrammetry techniques to accurately model areas not
              covered by aerial methods.  In addition to a motion video camera, the hardware
              of the data acquisition system will consist of a Global Positioning System
              (GPS), encoders, and a laptop computer.  A novel feature of the method is that
              the system will be tailored to the accuracy desired for different applications
              through the use of a mathematical model.  The main research objectives focus on
              developing  methods to obtain accurate camera position and orientation data,
              and to automatically identify and correspond 2D points between video images.   
                 The new system will offer significant labor and time savings in gathering
              photogrammetry, ground survey, and surface description data.  CamSys, Inc. has
              extensive experience in producing and marketing automated measurement equipment
              for acquiring photogrammetry data, and has distinct capabilities needed to
              develop the proposed new system.  Benefits of this new system will include
              innovative hardware-software methods to acquire and process video data to
              produce photogrammetry and surface description information for assessing the
              condition of bridges and tunnels, and modeling rock face slopes and river
              banks.  The system will  make the process of designing and maintaining
              transportation related systems more efficient and reliable.  Additional
              commercial applications exist in industries such as transportation,
              construction, architecture, education, and entertainment.
