Title       : SBIR Phase I: Novel Class of Ceramic Materials with Superior Resistance to
               Fracture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9560623

Award Number: 9560623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74137              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Q. Sheppard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ushers Inc
	      3127 Research Drive
	      State College, PA      814/234-7981

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will apply reinforcing
              agents in a robust structural composite. When fully developed, this concept
              will foster a new class of reinforced materials with superior resistance to
              fracture when compared to conventional materials reinforced with platelets,
              whiskers and continuous fibers. These conventional materials have failed to
              deliver the strength and toughness necessary to overcome market resistance to
              so-called `brittle` materials.   This project will deliver major increases in
              fracture resistance of matrix materials by close-packing these novel particles
              so that, unlike the 2-dimensional or planar toughness of conventional
              reinforcements, true 3-dimensional toughness may be obtained. Unlike platelets,
              whiskers and continuous fibers, these reinforcements are inherently sound
              architecturally, and nest, or pack together on a co-planar basis. The resulting
              crack path between these reinforcements is highly tortuous and 3-dimensional.  
              This proposed solution to the strength and toughness problems of conventional
              ceramics offers lower cost manufacturing possibilities as well an improved
              lifetime.   Potential uses of the results of this research include: 1)
              refractory composites for the heat treating industry for bricks, castables,
              gunnables, and monolithic linings, 2) cementitous matrix composites for
              radioactive or hazardous waste containment, 3) high strength-to-weight
              composites for critical load-bearing industrial construction applications, 4)
              road repair materials, 5) critical aircraft takeoff and landing area materials,
              and 6) in non-structural areas, catalytic support components and fluidized bed
              components will benefit from the superior surface-to-volume of these shapes.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
