Title       : SBIR Phase I: Membrane Surface Modification to Reduce Fouling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9560822

Award Number: 9560822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74740              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin J. Swanson mswanson@surmodics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SurModics, Inc.
	      9924 West Seventy Fourth Street
	      Eden Prairie, MN  55344    612/829-2707

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,9153,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9560822  Swanson    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
              develop reagents and methods for surface modifying membranes with hydrophilic
              photoactivatable polymers to reduce fouling. One of the greatest problems,
              particularly with ultrafiltration (UF) membranes, is fouling, which is largely
              caused by solute interactions with the membranes. Fouling reduces the flux and
              use life of membranes and increases the solute retention, thus changing the
              selectivity during use. The primary goal of this project is to achieve greatly
              reduced fouling with minimal or no reduction in flux. The polymers to be
              developed are expected to be useful for UF as well as for microfiltration (MF)
              and reverse osmosis (RO) membranes. The primary types of membranes to be used
              during the Phase I project will be polysulfone UF membranes; however, the
              method is expected to be useful for other types of membranes, including MF and
              RO membranes as well as membranes made from other materials (e.g.,
              polycarbonate and PVDF). The method for modifying the membranes involves
              synthesis of hydrophilic polymers containing photoactivatable moieties (e.g.,
              benzophenone derivatives) at one end and hydrophilic polymer chains at the
              other end.  These polymers are expected to have surfactant characteristics such
              that they will wet hydrophobic membrane surfaces from aqueous solutions and
              orient with the photogroups associated with the membrane surface and the
              hydrophilic ends oriented away from the membrane surface. They will then be
              covalently coupled to the membrane surfaces photochemically. The performance
              characteristics of the modified membranes will be compared with other
              commercially available similar membranes for fouling characteristics.       
              Membrane filtration is an important technique for many industrial processes.
              However, fouling limits the usefulness of ultrafiltration and other membrane
              separations, including reverse osmosis and microfiltration. Success of this
              project is expected to make an important contrib ution to improving
              efficiencies of membrane filtrations by reducing fouling of membranes made from
              hydrophobic materials such as polysulfone and polyvinylidene difluoride. This
              surface modification technology is expected to have significant commercial
              potential for improving membranes.
