Title       : SBIR Phase I: Interface Control in Vapor-Grown Carbon Fiber/Polymer Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1996   
File        : a9560642

Award Number: 9560642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jyh-Ming Ting jting@ApSci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Applied Sciences, Inc
	      P.O. Box 579
	      Cedarville, OH  453140579    513/766-2020

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                        This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at
              developing an understanding of and modifications to the surface state, surface
              chemistry, and development of sizings for vapor-grown carbon fibers for
              interface control in composites. In contrast to brittle matrix composites,
              polymer matrix composites generally require a high degree of fiber-matrix
              adhesion in order to provide good composite strength and toughness. The
              majority of commercial reinforcing fibers, both carbon and glass, are treated
              during or after manufacture with various surface treatments as well as a sizing
              to increase compatibility with and bonding to the matrix polymer.  A new class
              of carbon fiber has been developed and is being produced in pilot scale
              quantities. This vapor-grown carbon fiber (VGCF) holds the promise of a highly
              graphitic fiber reinforcement at costs significantly lower than other carbon
              fibers. However, due to the high graphitization of this fiber, the fiber
              surface is generally unreactive and will not bond with polymer matrices. Thus,
              various treatments will be evaluated for their effect in enabling fiber/matrix
              bonding in polymer matrix composites. Specifically, various degrees of surface
              oxidation will be effected onto the fibers followed by application of
              commercial sizings. The surface chemistry will be quantified and also verified
              from composite testing.  As a low cost fiber, VGCF can potentially be used as a
              composite reinforcement for many elastomeric and polymeric matrices. The
              solution of the problem of low fiber-matrix adhesion will allow for the
              development of, at least one, commercially viable material for use in
              automotive parts, materials requiring EMI shielding, and innovative composites
              requiring small diameter fibers.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
