Title       : SBIR Phase I: A High Pressure Polarized 3He Neutron Spin Filter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9560952

Award Number: 9560952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Richardson jonathan.richardson@srl.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Research Lab Inc
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/547-1122

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9134,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop an
              improved method for polarizing cold, thermal, and epithermal neutrons.  It has
              long been realized that neutrons can be polarized by passing them through a
              dense, spin-polarized, gaseous 3He target. Because the thermal
              neutron-absorption cross section of polarized 3He is  10,000 times larger for
              the anti-parallel spin case then for the parallel case, a sufficiently thick
              polarized 3He target efficiently transmits neutrons that are in one spin state
              and strongly attenuates the others.  This type of transmission polarizer has
              several advantages over currently available reflection polarizers
              (`supermirrors`).  Unlike supermirror polarizers, the 3He filter can be applied
              to epithermal neutrons and can be used as a polarization analyzer in a number
              of standard neutron-scattering instruments, including Small Angle Neutron
              Scattering (SANS) spectrometers, which presently have substantial private
              sector applications. Two methods have previously been used to spin-polarize
              3He. The first is spin exchange with an optically pumped alkali species
              (rubidium vapor) which is an extremely slow method, taking up to a day to
              achieve full polarization. The second is direct pumping of metastable 3He which
              has only been attempted at very low pressures (<2 torr) and thus must have an
              added capability to pressurize the polarized gas. The physics of the direct
              method bears great similarity to that of excimer lasers with which Science
              Research Laboratory has a long history.  This project will develop a high
              pressure ( 1 ATM) highly polarized (>75%) 3He neutron-spin filter that will
              find application in polarized neutron scattering and other areas.  The
              apparatus will employ a proprietary method for polarizing the 3He quickly and
              directly at high pressures, avoiding the problems faced by other methods, and
              making for a low cost, reliable device.  The feasibility of this concept will
              be investigated in detail in the proposed Phase I program.  Phase II will
              consist of a proof-of-principle demonstration of a neutron-spin filter.  It
              will be followed by a privately funded Phase III program in which a commercial
              prototype instrument will be developed.       If this research is carried over
              into Phase II and Phase III, the 3He Neutron Spin Filter will allow for
              efficient thermal and epithermal neutron polarization.  Such a polarizer will
              find applications at thermal and epithermal neutron facilities in the USA,
              Canada, Europe, and Asia as an upgrade to established neutron-scattering
              instruments. Other applications exist as well in nuclear physics and in MR
              imaging.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
