Title       : SBIR PHASE I: High Performance Nondestructive Evaluation System Using a Giant
               Magnetoresistance Sensor Array
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9560415

Award Number: 9560415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Tiernan ttiernan@tplinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TPL, Inc.
	      3921 Academy Parkway North, NE
	      Albuquerque, NM  871094416    505/342-4471

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1037,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9560415  Tiernan         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will develop a nondestructive evaluation  (NDE) method based on sensors
              containing elements of giant magnetoresistance (GMR) material.  New techniques
              are needed for the NDE of anomalies and stresses in metal structures used in
              buildings, bridges, and aircraft components.  Current techniques based on
              visual inspections, eddy current, X-ray radiography, and acoustic emissions
              suffer from limitations in inspection capability, speed of inspection, and cost
              of inspection.  The GMR effect has resulted in the development of magnetic
              field sensors with extremely high signal-to-noise levels capable of detecting
              extremely weak magnetic fields under ambient conditions.  The microfabrication
              techniques used to form these sensors are well suited to the construction of
              low cost sensor arrays with a wide range of geometries.  Magnetic methods have
              been shown to be capable of detecting anomalies such as cracks and for
              estimating the stresses in and around welds in steel components.  With proper
              sensor design it is possible to use magnetometry to obtain high resolution,
              three-dimensional information concerning the internal structure and stress of a
              component. This project will develop a sensor array based on GMR material and
              combine it with instrumentation and analytical concepts that will permit the
              3-D imaging of metal components.  A predictive capability will be developed to
              assess the mechanical integrity of components analyzed with the NDE system.    
                  A simple-to-use, field-portable NDE technique for metallic structures would
              find many applications including the inspection of bridges, buildings, and
              aircraft.  The flexible sensor would permit the inspection of a wide range of
              different sample shapes.  Rapid, high resolution images would permit practical
              cost effective inspections.  The ability to predict mechanical degradation
              would provide critical insight concerning which structures are severely damaged
              and which can rem ain in service.  The sensors will be simple and inexpensive
              to fabricate and the support electronics required is available so, in addition
              to high performance, it should be possible to manufacture the system at a
              reasonable cost.
