Title       : SBIR Phase I: Supercritical Water Oxidation Based Dissolved Organic Carbon
               Analyzer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9560420

Award Number: 9560420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Akse akse@urcmail.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Umpqua Research Co.
	      P O Box 609
	      Myrtle Creek, OR  974570102    503/863-7770

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1670,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
              development of a Supercritical Water Oxidation (SCWO) based Total Organic
              Carbon (TOC) analyzer is proposed for the determination of Dissolved Organic
              Carbon (DOC) in seawater. The proposed innovation takes advantage of the unique
              chemical properties of supercritical water to achieve an extremely rigorous and
              thorough oxidation of complex organic substances. It is anticipated that this
              new methodology will provide chemical oceanographers with a useful alternative
              to current instrumental techniques. On occasion there has been relatively poor
              agreement among the DOC results derived by different measurement techniques
              when applied to seawater samples. Current analytical instruments for the
              determination of DOC in seawater suffer from inconsistent carbon recoveries,
              degradation of performance with time, calibration difficulties, and deleterious
              matrix effects. The SCWO based DOC analyzer (SCWO-DOC) is intended to provide a
              means for the mitigation of these difficulties. In principal, the SCWO-DOC
              analyzer utilizes oxygen saturated water which has been heated and pressurized
              to values greater than the respective critical points for the complete 'deep
              oxidation' or mineralization of dissolved organic molecules, resulting in the
              formation of inorganic species including: CO2, H20, NO3-, SO4=, and PO4-3. The
              CO2 is then removed in the vapor phase and quantified very accurately using a
              non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) detector. The proposed analyzer embodies a
              simple, reliable, reagentless, rapid, one step method of DOC determination with
              strong potential for extremely rigorous oxidation of refractory dissolved
              organics and with minimal susceptibility to interferences. The Phase I effort
              will demonstrate the feasibility of the concept for the analysis of seawater
              samples. It is anticipated that follow-on work at the Phase II level will
              culminate in the development and testing of a prototype which can be evaluated
              by members of the chemical oceanographic community.       A more accurate and
              reliable instrumental means of determining total organic carbon (TOC) would
              find wide application throughout analytical chemistry. This new technology will
              be of particular interest in biotechnology, pharmaceutical, semiconductor, and
              oceanographic analytical applications which require quantitation of very low
              levels of un-characterized and often refractory dissolved organic substances.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
